BOULDER, MONTANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains 2025 S-3 Supplement, current through:
Ordinance 2025-02, passed May 19, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-03
 
AN ORDINANCE TO REPEAL AND REPLACE CHAPTER 153 OF THE CITY OF BOULDER ZONING
CODE AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
 
WHEREAS, Title 76, Chapter 2, Part 3, MCA, empowers the City to enact a zoning
ordinance and to provide for its administration, enforcement, and amendment,
and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council, pursuant to the provisions of Section 76-2-307, MCA,
has appointed the Planning Board/Zoning Commission to recommend the boundaries
of the various original districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced
therein, and
 
WHEREAS, The City of Boulder’s Planning Board/Zoning Commission has held public
hearings on the draft of the new Zoning Code and Map provided by Great West
Engineering, and
 
WHEREAS, The City of Boulder’s Planning Board/Zoning Commission has recommended
that the City Council adopt the new Zoning Code and Map, hereto referred to as
Exhibit A, and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council, pursuant to the provisions of Title 76, Chapter 1,
Part 6, MCA, has adopted a Growth Policy for the jurisdictional area and the
regulations have been prepared in accordance with the plan, and
 
WHEREAS, all requirements of Title 76, Chapter 2, Part 3, MCA, regarding the
preparation of a zoning ordinance and subsequent action of the City Council
have been met;
 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BOULDER,
MONTANA, AS FOLLOWS:
 
See Exhibit A, City of Boulder Zoning Code, Chapter 153.
 
All prior existing zoning ordinances of the City of Boulder shall be repealed
upon the adoption of this Ordinance. The new ordinance adopted herein shall
supersede all prior existing zoning ordinances.
 
This Ordinance shall be effective thirty (30) days after its approval and
passage.
 
1st Reading: August 18, 2025
 
2nd Reading: September 15, 2025
 
 
This Ordinance in its entirety is hereby passed and adopted by the City of
Boulder on this 15th day of September 2025.
 
 
FIRST PASSED AND APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL AND SIGNED BY THE MAYOR OF THE
CITY OF BOULDER, THIS 18th DAY OF AUGUST 2025.
 
 
 
                  __________________________________
                  Mayor
 
ATTEST:
 
___________________________________
City Clerk
 
 
 
 
PASSED AND APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL AND SIGNED BY THE MAYOR OF THE CITY OF
BOULDER, THIS 15 TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2025.
 
 
 
                  __________________________________
                  Mayor
 
ATTEST:
 
___________________________________
City Clerk
 
 
 
 
CITY OF BOULDER ZONING CODE
 
ORDINANCE 2025-03
 
 
“Exhibit A”
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
153.01 TITLE   1
153.02 PURPOSE   1
153.03 AUTHORITY   1
153.04 DEFINITIONS   1
153.05 CONFLICTING AND PRIOR REGULATIONS REPEALED   11
153.06 VESTING   11
153.07 PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS; MOST
RESTRICTIVE STANDARDS APPLY   12
153.08 INTERPRETATION   12
153.09 BURDEN OF PROOF   13
153.10 LIABILITY   13
ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS   13
153.11 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED   13
153.12 RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION ON ADJACENT LOTS IN SINGLE OWNERSHIP.    13
153.13 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES   13
153.14 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND PROHIBITED USES   14
153.15 R RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT   15
153.16 CB CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT   16
153.17 MU MIXED USE DISTRICT   18
153.18 GC GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT   21
153.19 PI -PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT   23
153.20 (PR-OL) PARKS, RECREATION AND OPEN LAND DISTRICT   25
153.21 PRE-EXISTING NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES AND STRUCTURES   26
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT   28
153.22 ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED   28
153.23 ZONING PERMIT FEE REQUIRED   28
153.24 APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMIT   28
153.25 SITE INSPECTIONS   28
153.26 LIMITATIONS OF ZONING PERMIT   29
153.27 EXPIRATION OF ZONING PERMITS; EXTENSION   29
153.28 REVOCATION OF ZONING PERMITS   29
153.29 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS   30
153.30 VARIANCES   31
153.31 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR   32
153.32 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (BOA)   33
153.33 ZONING COMMISSION   34
153.34 AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING CODE TEXT   34
153.35 AMENDMENTS TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP   35
153.36 CONDITIONAL USES   36
153.37 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR RESPONSIBLE FOR ENFORCEMENT   39
153.38 ENFORCEMENT PROCESS   39
153.39 APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE STAYS ALL ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS   41
153.40 APPEAL STAYS ALL ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS   41
153.41 IMMINENT THREAT TO LIFE OR PROPERTY   41
153.42 PENALTY   41
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS   42
153.43 PURPOSE   42
153.44 HOME OCCUPATIONS   42
153.45 FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS   43
153.46 STRUCTURAL HEIGHT MEASUREMENT   43
153.47 SETBACK MEASUREMENTS AND ALLOWABLE ENCROACHMENTS   43
153.48 OUTDOOR LIGHTING STANDARDS   44
153.49 OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS   44
153.50 FENCING STANDARDS   49
153.51 CORNER VISIBILITY   50
153.52 MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT   51
153.53 SIGNAGE   51
153.54 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)   53
 
 
 
 
 
 
153.01 TITLE.
 
The regulations, standards, and procedures contained herein shall be known as
the Zoning Code of the City of Boulder, Montana. They may be commonly referred
to as zoning regulations, Zoning Code or Code. These regulations constitute one
component of the city-wide land development regulations and policies which
include the official zoning map, subdivision regulations, floodplain
regulations, downtown master plan, adopted city building codes, and any future
adopted polices or regulations. 
153.02 PURPOSE.
 
(A)   The primary purpose of these regulations is to promote public health,
safety, and general welfare.
 
(B)   Other purposes of the Zoning Code are:
(1)   To promote orderly and efficient growth and development;
(2)   Provide for a strong and diversified economy;
(3)   Protect public and private investment and to provide a high degree of
predictability and assurance to those wishing to invest in the community;
(4)   To preserve and enhance community/neighborhood scale and character as
recommended in the growth policy;
(5)   Provide for efficient and cost-effective community services and
facilities; and
(6)   Establish fair, effective, and efficient development review and decision-
making processes and procedures that provide procedural due process for
applicants and the general public.
153.03 AUTHORITY.
 
In Montana, the statutory authority for incorporated cities and towns to enact
and administer zoning codes is set forth in MCA Title 76, Chapter 2, Part 3.
All regulations, standards, and procedures prescribed herein are found to be
consistent with the provisions of Montana Code Annotated (MCA) Title 76,
Chapter 2, Part 3.
153.04 DEFINITIONS.
 
(A)   Interpretation of commonly used terms and words.
(1)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
(2)   Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the
plural include the singular, unless the natural construction of the wording
indicates otherwise.
(3)   The words “used for” shall include the meaning and application of
“designed for.”
(4)   The word “shall” is always mandatory.
(5)   The word “encouraged” is directory, and is used to express an intent,
although not necessarily a requirement.
(6)   Where there appears to be a conflict between the content of the text of
these regulations and any definition provided in this chapter, the text shall
take precedent.
(7)   Should any question of definition arise for a term not listed in this
chapter or not defined elsewhere in these regulations or the Montana Code
Annotated, the Zoning Administrator may, at their discretion, research the term
and provide a definition for general use in administering and interpreting
these regulations. The hierarchy for sources used by the Administrator will
include the MCA, other City regulations and codes and Black’s Law Dictionary.  
Black's Law Dictionary is a primary source used to define legal terms,
especially those not commonly found in standard English dictionaries.
 
(B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. Any definitions which reference Montana Code Annotated definitions
will use the most updated code definition.
ABATEMENT.  The termination of a zoning violation by reasonable and lawful
means so that a building, structure, premises, land, or portion thereof shall
be made to comply with this code.  
ACCESS.  The legal means of approach to provide vehicular and/or pedestrian
physical entrance to a property.
ACCESSORY.  Customarily associated with and incidental and subordinate to.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU).  An independent and separate dwelling unit that
is subordinate to the primary residential use of a property. Includes the terms
“accessory apartment,” “garage apartment,” “granny flat”, and “mother-in-law
apartment”.
ACCESSORY USE AND STRUCTURES.  A structure or use of land, or of a
building or portion thereof, that is customarily incidental and subordinate in
area, extent, or purpose to the principal use or structure, and is located on
the same lot as the principal structure or use.
ADULT BOOKSTORE AND RETAIL.  An establishment having all or a portion of its
display area, stock in trade, or floor area used for the sale or rental of
books, magazines, publications, tapes, films, video disks, or other media that
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on sexually oriented and/or
sexually explicit material, describing, relating to, or depicting sexual
activities.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT.  An establishment, either with or without a liquor
license, offering sexually oriented live entertainment which may include, but
is not necessarily limited to, entertainers, male or female, performing
disrobed, partially disrobed, or in the act of disrobing, and/or touching
patrons in a sexually explicit or sexually suggestive manner.
AGRICULTURE.  The use of land for apiculture, farming, dairying, grazing, the
growing of crops, or the raising and/or breeding of animals for meat and fiber.
This definition excludes feed lots or slaughtering and/or packing facilities.
ANIMAL SHELTER.  A place that temporarily houses stray animals and may include
a crematorium.  
AUTO SALVAGE YARD.  Any space, either inside or outside of a building, greater
than 200 square feet in area, used for the storage, dismantling, disassembling,
or salvaging wrecked or otherwise immobilized motor vehicles, including
snowmobiles, motorcycles, trailers, and ATVs.
BED AND BREAKFAST.  A private owner or manager-occupied residence that rents
rooms therein by the night or week to transient guests for compensation, and in
which breakfast is provided only to room guests, the cost of which is included
in the price of the room. Terms of occupancy in a bed and breakfast shall be
not more than 30 consecutive days. For purposes of these regulations, no BED
AND BREAKFAST  shall have more than six rooms available for rent or serve more
than 18 daily guests (§ 50-51-102(1), MCA), and all rooms shall be contained
within the principal structure on the lot. All BED AND BREAKFAST must be
licensed by the State of Montana. 
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The Board of Adjustments (BOA) consists of five (5)
members appointed by the mayor for three (3) year terms, subject to
confirmation by the City Council. The BOA deliberates on requests for variances
from the City of Boulder Zoning Ordinance to address any undue hardship caused
by city zoning regulations on building a new structure(s), rehabilitating an
existing structure(s), or expanding the existing structure(s) on such property.
The BOA is a separate entity from the Zoning Commission and Planning Board.
BUILDING.  Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, and
intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, group of
individuals, animal, process, equipment, goods, or material of any kind.
BUILDING HEIGHT.  See  HEIGHT, STRUCTURAL. 
CASINO.  An establishment or any portion of an establishment that offers live
and/or machine gambling to patrons. Includes the term “gambling enterprise” as
defined in MCA § 23-5-112(16).
CHARACTER.  Special physical features, characteristics, or scale of a structure
or area that set it apart from its surroundings and contribute to its interest
and/or individuality.
CHILDREN.  Persons under 13 years of age or a person with special needs, as
defined by the Department of Public Health and Human Services, or who is under
18 years of age or is 18 years of age and a full-time student expected to
complete an educational program by 19 years of age.
CHILDCARE. See DAY CARE.
CHURCH.  See RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION.
COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL FACILITY.  This term is defined by MCA § 76-2411 and
includes:
(a)   A community group home for developmentally, mentally, or severely
disabled persons that does not provide skilled or intermediate nursing care;
(b)   A youth foster home, a kinship foster home, a youth shelter care
facility, a transitional living program, or youth group home as defined in MCA
§ 52-2-602;
(c)   A halfway house operated in accordance with regulations of the Department
of Public Health and Human Services for the rehabilitation of alcoholics or
drug dependent persons;
(d)   A licensed adult foster family care home; or
(e)   An assisted living facility licensed under MCA § 50-5-227.
CONDITIONAL USE.  A use of land or structures allowed within a zoning district
provided that the conditions specified in the district regulations for the use
are met. This includes any LAWFUL SIMILAR USE as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
CONDOMINIUM.  Is the ownership of single residential units with common elements
located on property submitted to the provisions of Title 70, Chapter 23. MCA.
The term does not include a townhome or a townhouse.
CREDIT UNION. See FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.
DAYCARE.  Care for children provided by an adult, other than a parent of the
children or other person living with the children as a parent, on a regular or
irregular basis, as applicable, for daily periods of less than 24 hours,
whether that care is for daytime or nighttime hours. Also includes the term
CHILDCARE.
DAYCARE HOME.  A home-based childcare facility licensed by the State Department
of Health and Human Services and providing daycare for not more than 12
children. This term includes “family daycare home” and “group daycare home” as
defined in MCA § 52- 2-703.
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS. Include building height, building setbacks from lot
line, other buildings, minimum lots sizes and parking space size.
DINING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT.  Includes any type of restaurant, café, or
coffee shop where patrons are served prepared food and/or beverages
(including alcoholic beverages), for consumption on premises, for compensation.
This term also includes the terms “bar,” “tavern,” “pub”, “public house”,
“brewpub”, “tap room” and “roadhouse”, and also includes “carry out” and
“delivery” services for off-premises consumption of prepared foods. This term
does not include “casinos.”
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES.  Site facilities and/or features that, by design,
provide access to the site for customers to order, shop, make purchases, and/or
generally conduct business while remaining in their motor vehicles. Includes
the terms “drive-up facilities” and “drive-in facilities.”
DUPLEX. A residential unit divided into two residential apartments, with a
separate entrance for each located on an individual parcel or lot.
DWELLING UNIT.  One or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary
facilities provided within the unit for the exclusive use of a single-family
maintaining a household.
DWELLING UNIT, MULTI-FAMILY.  A dwelling unit within a structure situated on a
single lot and designed for and containing three or more separate dwelling
units. This definition is inclusive of the term’s “apartment,” “multi-family
housing unit”, and “townhome unit” when the townhome structure contains three
or more separate units.
DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED.  A structure designed and
intended for residential use, that contains one dwelling unit and is not
attached or physically connected to any other dwelling by any means (except for
an accessory dwelling unit (ADU) which may be allowed by this chapter and per
statute) and is surrounded by open space or yards.
EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRIES.  The business of removing minerals and other material
from the ground; includes quarrying, the removal of sand, soil, stone, gravel,
or clay, and all mining operations.
FENCING-RETAINING WALL.  Any structural device forming a physical barrier
between two open areas.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.  An establishment duly licensed by the state and/or
federal government to provide banking, saving, brokerage, safe deposit, and
other types and combinations of consumer financial services. Does not include
offices whose sole function is brokerage and/or financial planning services.
FLOODPLAIN.  An area having special flood, mudflow or flood-related erosion
hazards and shown on the City’s Flood Hazard Boundary Maps (FHBM) or a Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM). In general terms, the Federal Emergency Management
Administration (FEMA) defines a floodplain as any land area susceptible to
being inundated by floodwaters from any source such as a river.
FLOOR AREA.  Means the total of the horizontal areas of a building, as
calculated by using the exterior dimensions.
GRADE.  Slope of the land, whether natural or human-made. Also, the percentage
or ratio of rise or descent of a sloping surface. (Example: The grade of a
street, or grade of a site or lot.) GRADE  is measured as vertical rise (or
descent) divided by a given horizontal distance. (Example: A lot on which the
elevation rises ten feet from front to rear, and is 100 feet in depth, has a
grade (or slope) of 10%; also expressed as a ratio of 1:10.)
GRADE, FINISHED.  The final elevation of the average ground level adjoining a
structure at all exterior walls after development.
Also refers to the state of the land after grading and/or filling is complete.
GRADE, NATURAL.  The elevation and/or slope of the land in its natural state,
prior to any excavation, filling, or construction.
GROCERY STORE.  Permanent business establishment selling prepared or unprepared
and packaged food items and miscellaneous household items at retail. Term
includes “food co-op,” but does not include temporary uses, such as farm
stands, produce stands, or mobile food vendors.
GROSS FLOOR AREA.  The total floor area of a structure, including all hallways,
stairs, restrooms, storage, lobbies, and other common areas. In residential
situations, GROSS FLOOR AREA  does not include basements that are completely
below ground level and that do not have egress windows.
HEIGHT, STRUCTURAL.  The mean linear distance from the ground level on finished
grade at the midpoint and immediately adjacent to each of the walls of a
structure to the highest point of the structure, not including antennas,
chimneys, steeples, or roof-top mechanical devices.
HOME OCCUPATION-BASED BUSINESS  A home occupation-based business
means an occupation, trade, profession or craft conducted entirely within a
residential building and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is
clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling, and
does not change the character thereof.
HOMELESS SHELTER OR WARMING SHELTER.  A facility providing temporary housing to
indigent, needy, or homeless persons.
HOTEL.  A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general
public, and which may include additional facilities and services, such as
restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, personal services, and fitness/
recreational facilities. It includes the term MOTEL but does not include the
terms BED AND BREAKFAST  or TOURIST HOME.
JUNK.  Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris, including vehicle
parts, whether or not stored, for sale, or in the process of being dismantled,
destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed of, or for other use or
disposition.
JUNK VEHICLE.  An inoperable motor vehicle, or component parts thereof, meeting
the definition set forth in MCA § 75-10-501.
KENNEL, BOARDING.  An establishment in which dogs or other domesticated animals
are housed, groomed, boarded, or trained, all for a fee for service.
KENNEL, BREEDING.  The keeping, breeding, raising, showing, or training of four
or more dogs over the age of six months, either for the personal enjoyment of
the owner or occupant, or for compensation.
LANDSCAPE-BUFFER PLAN.  A scale drawing of a lot or site that depicts areas to
be landscaped, and on which is shown some or all of the following:
(a)   Proposed tree and plant species;
(b)   Buffers and screening devices.
(c)   Maintenance Plan
LANDSCAPING.  For purposes of these regulations, trees, shrubs, grasses and
other ground covers, and other materials, such as rock, wood chips, decorative
features (birdbaths, sculpture, and the like), patterned walks, fountains,
pools, and similar naturalistic features for the primary purpose of
highlighting, complementing, or enhancing a structure(s) or any other
development on a site or lot.
LAWFUL SIMILAR USE.  A use that is not necessarily in the list of permitted or
conditional uses for a particular zoning district, but which in the judgment of
the Zoning Administrator, has similar characteristics, traffic generation,
intensity of use, and neighborhood and community impacts as uses that are so
listed.
LIGHTING - OUTDOOR means the nighttime illumination of an outside area or
object by any manmade device that produces light, including lights located
indoors which are directed for outdoor illumination.
LIVE WORK UNIT.  Structures that combine residential and non-residential uses.
These units require the owner of the business, or an employee, to also reside
in the property or vice versa.
LIVESTOCK. means cattle, horses, mules, asses, sheep, llamas, alpacas, bison,
swine, ostriches, rheas, emus, goats, alternative livestock as defined in 87-4-
406 MCA., and other animals for purposes of disease prevention, control, and
eradication.
LODGING USE.  The provision of temporary living quarters, with or without
meals, for transient guests for a fee, and for a period of less than 30
consecutive days.
LOT.  A unit of land described by letter or number in a legally recorded
subdivision. Also includes a parcel of land described by metes and bounds, the
description of which has been so recorded and appears on its deed. Term
includes “lot of record.”
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE.  A lot that fronts on one street with its side lot line
lying adjacent to an intersecting street; a corner lot.
LOT FRONTAGE.  The area of a lot adjacent to the street right-of-way from which
it gains access. Also refers to a measurement of the width of the lot at the
street right-of-way.
LOT LINE, FRONT.  The boundary segment of a lot that lies adjacent to the
street from which the lot gains access and/or is addressed.
LOT LINE, REAR.  The boundary segment of a lot that lies most opposite the
front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE.  Any boundary segment or segments connecting the front and rear
lot lines.
LOT, THROUGH.  A lot which fronts on one street and runs through to a parallel
street in the rear.
MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT.  Includes, but is not necessarily limited to,
snowmobiles and snowmobile trailers, livestock trailers, boats and boat
trailers, travel trailers (including pop-up campers), pickup camper tops when
not mounted on a vehicle, motor homes, tent trailers, as well as the cases,
boxes, or containers used for transporting or shipping recreational equipment,
whether or not occupied by such equipment.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A residential dwelling built in a factory in accordance with
Title 50, Chapter 60, Part 4 of the Montana Code Annotated. A manufactured home
does not include a mobile home, house trailer or any type of major recreational
equipment.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.  An area designed for and occupied by two or more
manufactured homes of any class where designated spaces are rented or leased to
persons having their own manufactured homes. Also includes similar areas in
which the manufactured home and the space are rented or leased to tenants.
MARIJUANA PRODUCT.  Means a product that contains marijuana and is intended for
use by a consumer. The term includes but is not limited to edible products,
ointments, tinctures, marijuana derivatives, and marijuana concentrates,
including concentrates intended for use by smoking or vaping.  
MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A retail food establishment that serves or sells
food from a motor vehicle, a nonmotorized cart, a boat, or other movable
vehicle that periodically or continuously changes location and requires a
servicing area to accommodate the unit for cleaning, inspection and
maintenance.
MOBILE HOME. A form of housing known as "trailers", "housetrailers", or
"trailer coaches" exceeding 8 feet in width or 45 feet in length, designed to
be moved from one place to another by an independent power connected to the
mobile home or any trailer, housetrailer, or trailer coach up to 8 feet in
width or 45 feet in length used as a principal residence. A mobile home does
not include a manufactured home, house trailer or any type of major
recreational equipment. MOTEL.  See HOTEL.
NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD (PRE-EXISTING).  Any legally created
lot of record that conformed to prior regulations but does not conform to the
standards set forth in these regulations for lot area, dimensions, or
configuration.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE (PRE-EXISTING).  A structure of any kind
that was legal under prior regulations but does not conform to these
regulations in terms of setbacks and height, on the subject lot.
NONCONFORMING USE (PRE-EXISTING).  A use of land that was allowed under prior
regulations, but which does not conform to these regulations.
NUISANCE.  Anything that is injurious to health, indecent or offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or that unlawfully obstructs the
free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, river,
bay, stream, canal, or basin or any public park, square, street, or highway is
a nuisance per 27-30-101, MCA. .
OCCUPANT.  An individual, individuals, or entity in actual possession of a
premises.
OFF-STREET PARKING.  Spaces for automobiles that are provided, or are required
to be provided under these regulations, on private property, usually on the
same lot or parcel as the business, residence, or other entity served by the
parking, and not located on a street or other public way.
PERSONAL SERVICES.  Establishments primarily engaged in providing services, for
compensation, involving the care of a person or his or her personal goods or
apparel.
PERMANENT FOUNDATION. Means permanent masonry, concrete, or footing or
foundation, to which a manufactured, mobile or conventionally built home may be
affixed.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). See MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION.  A church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or other facility
where prayer, worship, fellowship, and education are partaken in by persons of
similar beliefs. Also, a special purpose building or complex of buildings that
is architecturally designed or particularly adapted for the primary use of
conducting formal religious services on a regular basis.
RESIDENTIAL USE.  Use of land and/or buildings for sleeping, eating,
congregating, and general housekeeping by an individual, group of individuals,
or family.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A single home, apartment, residential condominium unit or
mobile home, serving as the principal place of residence.
RESTAURANT. See DINING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT.
RETAIL.  The business activity through which durable and non-durable goods of
all kinds, including food and specialty items and household furnishings, are
offered for sale to the general public. This term does not include sales of
motor vehicles, trailers, trucks, and RVs, nor does it include the sale of
medical marijuana.
RETAINING WALL.  A structure that is constructed between lands of different
elevations in order to stabilize the surfaces, prevent erosion, and/or
collapse, and protect other structures, such as homes and businesses.
RUBBISH.  Generic term for solid waste, excluding food waste and ashes, taken
from residences, commercial establishments, and institutions.
SCALE.  The proportioned relationship of the size of parts to one another, as
in the scale of buildings or of a neighborhood. Also, the relationship between
distances on a map and actual ground distances.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY.  A building or group of buildings containing separate,
individual, and private storage spaces or varying sizes available for lease or
rent for varying periods of time. Includes the terms “mini-storage” and “mini-
warehouses.”
SETBACK.  The distance between a structure and any given lot line (front, side,
or rear).
SHORT-TERM RENTAL/ VACATION RENTAL.  Means any individually or
collectively owned single-family house or dwelling unit or any unit or group of
units in a condominium, cooperative, timeshare, or owner-occupied residential
home that is offered for a fee for 30 consecutive days or less per MCA Title 15
Chapter 68 includes terms AIRBNB/VRBO. Must provide proof of licensing through
DPHSS for public accommodation.
SIGN.  An object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, that is intended and used to advertise, identify, display,
direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words,
letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illuminated, or projected
images.
SIGN, TEMPORARY.  A sign or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas,
fabric, plywood, or other light material, and designed or intended to be
displayed for a relatively short period of time; not permanent.
STRUCTURE.  A combination of materials that, when combined and assembled in the
process of construction, form a substantial object for use, occupancy, or
ornamentation, whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or
water; a combination of materials assembled and set upon the land for a
beneficial use.
SUBDIVISION.  The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more
lots, or other divisions of land for sale, development, or lease. A division of
land meeting the definition of subdivision set forth in MCA § 76-3-103.
SUBDIVISION EXEMPTION. The State of Montana provides that certain divisions of
land, which would otherwise constitute subdivisions, are exempt from local
subdivision review and approval, unless the development is an attempt to evade
the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act (MSPA), Section 76-3-101, et. seq.
TAVERN. See DINING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY.  A federal communications commission licensed
facility, including at least one tower and support functions, designed, and
used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving, and relaying voice and data
signals from various wireless communication devices and equipment. Does not
include broadcast antennas, amateur radio transmission facilities, or antennas
for public service communications, such as police, fire, and other emergency
services.
TEMPORARY USE. A land use that is not intended to be permanent.  
THEATER.  A building or part thereof used to show motion pictures or theatrical
productions including drama, dance, musical/concerts, or other live
performances.
TOWNHOME OR TOWNHOUSE. Property that is owned subject to an arrangement under
which persons own their own units and hold separate title to the land beneath
their units, but under which they may jointly own the common areas and
facilities submitted to the provisions of Title 70, Chapter 23. MCA.
TRAVEL TRAILER. See MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.  The Zoning Administrator is the City staff appointed by
the City Council and is charged with the administration, interpretation, and
enforcement of the Zoning Code.  
ZONING COMMISSION.  The Zoning Commission is established as authorized in MCA §
76-2-307 to undertake specific tasks on behalf of the City Council, including
but not limited to the review of zoning text and map amendments and
applications for conditional use permits. The City of Boulder Planning Board
also serves as the Zoning Commission, but the statutory duties of the Planning
Board are separate from those of the Zoning Commission.
ZONING DISTRICT.  As used in these regulations, this term refers to individual
zoning districts, such as a residential, highway business, general industrial,
and the like. The term does not refer to all zoned land within the city
collectively.
ZONING PERMIT.  A permit issued by the city that verifies that the development
described in the permit meets the applicable requirements of this chapter.
153.05 CONFLICTING AND PRIOR REGULATIONS REPEALED.
 
All prior ordinances and resolutions related to this chapter adopted by the
City Council or as amended, are hereby repealed.  
153.06 VESTING.
 
(A)   Vested rights to proceed with any development initiated prior to the
adoption and effective date of these regulations shall be established only by:
(1)   Having obtained a zoning permit issued by the city under prior
regulations; or
(2)   In the case of a subdivision, having been issued a finding of sufficiency
for a preliminary plat in compliance with the State Subdivision and Platting
Act and city subdivision regulations. Approval or conditional approval of a
preliminary plat establishes a right to proceed with a final plat under state
law and local subdivision regulations. Approval or conditional approval of a
preliminary plat, or recording of a final plat, does not establish a vested
right for any particular use or development standards that might have existed
under prior regulations.
(B)   Vested rights to proceed with development under the provisions of these
regulations shall be established only by:
(1)   In the case of a subdivision, recording a final plat in full compliance
with the State Subdivision and Platting Act, being MCA §§ 76-3-101 et seq., and
local regulations, or as applicable; and
(2)   Having a valid zoning permit in full compliance with these regulations.
Permits may expire pursuant to 153.27 of this chapter or be revoked pursuant to
153.28 of this chapter. Any vested rights to proceed with development expire,
or are revoked, with the zoning permit.
153.07 PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS; MOST
RESTRICTIVE STANDARDS APPLY.
 
(A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements to promote health, safety, and general
welfare.
(B)   When future city regulations, or state or federal law impose additional
standards on land use or development governed by these regulations, the most
restrictive standards shall apply.
(C)   These regulations do not nullify easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
or other similar private agreements, but where any such private agreement
imposes standards that are less restrictive than those adopted herein, these
regulations shall apply.
153.08 INTERPRETATION.
 
All provisions of these regulations shall be interpreted as the minimum
requirements necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare, and to implement the City’s Growth Policy. These regulations are
designed to be consistent with the Growth Policy, and shall be liberally
construed to achieve its purpose, intent, policies, and recommendations. The
actual interpretation of these regulations is the responsibility of the Zoning
Administrator as set forth in 153.31 of this chapter.
153.09 BURDEN OF PROOF.
 
In all proceedings, hearings, and in all application and submittal materials,
the burden of proof shall rest with the applicant or appellant, as applicable.
153.10 LIABILITY.
 
No individual, including members of the City Council, Board of Adjustment,
Zoning Commission or Zoning Administrator, or any other city employee, who acts
in good faith and without malice in the performance of duties assigned by these
regulations, shall be held liable for errors or omissions in their
administration.
ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS 
153.11 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
 
The following zoning districts a are hereby established and apply to lands
within the city limits as depicted on the official zoning map. For purposes of
applying the zoning districts and interpreting their regulations according to
the provisions of this chapter, these zoning districts have been formulated to
implement the growth policy for the city and to realize the general purposes of
the Zoning Code set forth herein. The districts shall be named and designated
as follows:
 
 
District                         Map
Name                             Designation
Residential                      R
Central Business                 CB
Mixed Use                        MU
General Commercial               GC
Parks, Recreation and Open Lands PRO
Public and Institutional         P-I
 
153.12 RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION ON ADJACENT LOTS IN SINGLE OWNERSHIP.
 
(A) If multiple lots located adjacent to one another within the City are held
under single ownership and are located within the same zoning district, the
construction of buildings or structures or use may be permitted on or over
interior lot lines as long as the exterior setbacks and building height
requirements are met.
153.13 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
 
(A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following streets, highways, or
alleys shall be construed to follow the centerlines of said features.
(B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following said lot lines.
(C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the city limits shall be
construed as following said city limits.
(D)   Boundaries indicated as following rivers, creeks, or perennial or
intermittent streams of any kind shall be construed to follow the thread of
said streams. In the event that the thread of a river, creek, or stream shifts,
the boundary shall be construed as moving with the thread, except when the
thread of the stream is also a property boundary. In such a situation, the
Zoning Administrator shall determine the zoning district boundary.
(E)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features listed in
divisions (A) through (D) above are so construed. Distances not specifically
indicated on the official zoning map, or on established boundaries such as lot
lines, are to be determined by the Zoning Administrator measuring the map
according to its scale.
(F)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the official zoning map or in other circumstances
not addressed by divisions (A) through (E) above, the Zoning Administrator
shall interpret the district boundaries.
153.14 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND PROHIBITED USES.
 
(A)   Permitted uses. All uses listed as “permitted uses” in each zoning
district are permitted outright, and require only a zoning permit, and/or city
business license as applicable. Only those uses listed explicitly as permitted
uses are so allowed in the applicable district unless, in the opinion of the
Zoning Administrator, a proposed use is of the same general character as those
listed or is permitted per state statute such as digital mining assets under
76-2-1003 MCA.
(B)   Conditional uses. All uses listed as “conditional uses” in each zoning
district are permitted provided that they are reviewed and approved following
the review provisions of Section 153.36. Like permitted uses, conditional uses
are subject to zoning permits, and/or city business license as may be
applicable to the particular use. Only those uses specifically listed as
conditional uses are so allowed in the applicable district unless in the
opinion of the Zoning Administrator, a proposed use is of the same general
character as those listed.
(C)   Prohibited uses. For some zoning districts, a list of uses that are
expressly prohibited is provided. This list is provided for clarification and
ease of interpretation only, and it is not in any way intended to be an
exhaustive list of all uses that are prohibited in the applicable district. In
general application of this Zoning Code, any use or uses not listed as
“permitted” or “conditional” uses are prohibited.  
153.15 R RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
 
Purpose. The R Residential Zoning District is intended to preserve, enhance,
and encourage compatible growth within residential neighborhoods that can
provide for a mix of housing types.
Principal permitted uses and structures. The following uses and structures are
permitted outright in the R Residential District, subject only to a zoning
permit:
(1)   Single-family detached dwelling units;
(2)   Condominiums and townhomes;
(3)   Manufactured homes and mobile homes situated on a permanent foundation;
(4)   In-Home Daycare providing care for 12 or fewer children;
(5)   Duplex (2 units)
(6)   Home occupations meeting the requirements of Section 153.44 of this code.
Accessory permitted uses and structures. The following uses and structures are
permitted as accessory uses in the R Residential District, subject only to a
zoning permit. Structures that are customary and incidental to the primary
residential use of the property including, but not necessarily limited to,
detached garages, storage/tool sheds, greenhouses, Accessory Dwelling Unit
(ADU’s), and workshops.
Conditional uses. The following uses and structures are permitted as
conditional uses in the R Residential District subject to review and approval
following the review provisions of Section 153.36 meeting the specific
conditions listed herein and the requirements of Sections 153.43 through 153.54
of the Supplementary Regulations as applicable and obtaining a zoning permit:
(1)   Multi-family dwelling units containing 3 or more units;
(2)   Churches and other religious institutions;
(3)   Community residential facilities.
(4)   Bed and Breakfast
(5)   Short-Term Rental licensed by the State Department of Public Health and
Human Services.
(6)   Libraries, museums and schools;
(7)   Mobile Home Parks
(8)   Youth foster or group homes
(9)   Parks and recreational facilities; 
(10)   Keeping of livestock except for verified 4-H projects per Title 9,
Chapter 90 of the City Code. 
 
(A) Prohibited uses.
(1)   Commercial and industrial uses. Any and all commercial and industrial
uses, except for home occupations within single-family dwellings.
(2)   Recreational Vehicle Park;
(3)   Sale of marijuana products.
(B) Dimensional standards.
(1)   Setbacks:
(a)   Front: Twenty (20) feet;
(b)   Exterior Side: Ten (10) feet; (c) Rear: Ten (10) feet.
(2)   Maximum structural height: 30 feet for single-family dwelling structures
and 45 feet for multi-family dwelling unit structures;
(3)   Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet for existing platted properties and
for replatting of platted properties.
(4)   Minimum street frontage: 50 feet;
(5)   Off-street parking.
(6)   Off-street parking for residential uses in the R Residential Zoning
District must be provided in accordance with Section 153.49 of this chapter.
(7)   Fencing. All fencing shall be constructed according to Section 153.50 of
this chapter.
 
153.16 CB CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
 
Purpose. The Central Business District is intended to be the central focus of
the city’s business, government, service and cultural activities. The uses in
this district should be those that are appropriate in a high density,
intensively developed commercial center. The area should be developed as an
attractive, functional and convenient commercial environment, and to provide
the mix of activities necessary to maintain the downtown character.
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within this district: 
(1)   Amusement centers, recreational facilities located in an enclosed
building;
(2)   Auditoriums, theaters;
(3)   Building materials and equipment sales conducted in an enclosed building;
(4)   Fraternal clubs and lodges;
(5)   Convenience stores;
(6)   Financial institutions;
(7)   Government, educational, and institutional uses;
(8)   Hotels, motels;
(9)   Laundry and dry cleaning establishments;
(10)   Medical and dentist offices, clinics and laboratories;
(11)   Museums and art galleries;
(12)   Nursing homes;
(13)   Offices: professional, business, administrative, services;
(14)   Law enforcement, fire stations and emergency services;
(15)   Libraries;
(16)   Restaurants;
(17)   Bars, taverns, lounges, nightclubs, casinos;
(18)   Retail businesses or services, whose activities primarily are conducted
within an enclosed building;
(19)   Senior citizen centers;
(20)   Residential units located on the second floor of a building;
(21)   Live work units and
(22)   Other uses commensurate with the above uses and compatible with the
purpose of this district.
Conditional uses. The following uses and structures are permitted as
conditional uses in the CB District subject to review and approval following
the review provisions of Section 153.36, obtaining a zoning permit and meeting
the specific conditions listed herein:
(1)   High density residential uses, such as apartments, building of two
stories or more; 
(2)   Single-family residential uses
(3)   Homeless Shelter or Warming Shelter
(4)   Mobile food establishment
(5)   Parking areas or parking lots
(6)   Sale of marijuana products
(7)   Cell towers and other telecommunications facilities. Cell towers and
other telecommunications facilities and apparatus are allowed as conditional
uses, subject to the following conditions.
(a)   All telecommunications facilities shall be attached to a building and no
towers are permitted.
(b)   All telecommunications facilities shall observe the setbacks set forth in
this section.
(c)   Collocation is the preferred method of providing a usable cellular signal
to potential telecommunications customers.
Prohibited uses. The following uses are expressly prohibited in the CB:
(1)   Adult bookstores, adult retail and adult entertainment;
(2)   Auto dealerships, auto, truck, and trailer sales of any kind;
(3)   Mobile home or manufactured home sales of any kind;
(4)   Tire and auto service of any kind, including quick lube; and,
(5)   Industrial uses.
Accessory uses. 
(1)   Buildings and uses incidental to the principal use;
(2)   Outdoor/sidewalk dining and drinking establishments (subject to separate
zoning permit if conducted on public right-of-way); and
(3)   Smoke shacks, provided they are located to the rear or non-street side of
the primary commercial structure.
     
Temporary uses. 
(1)   Sidewalk sales such as Christmas trees, baked goods, clothing with no
permanent structure erected; and
(2)   Street fairs and festivals.
(3)   Temporary buildings or structures used for and during construction or
grading; Dimensional standards.
(2)   Setbacks:
(a)   Front yard: Eight (8) feet from the curb or street pavement;
(b)   Side yard: No side yard is required; and (c) Rear yard: No rear yard.
(3)   Maximum structural height: 45 feet;
(4)   Minimum lot size: None;
(A)   Off-street parking. Parking in accordance with Section 153.49 of this
chapter.
(B)   Signs. On-site signage is allowed pursuant to Section 153.53 of this
chapter.
(C)   Fencing. All fencing shall be constructed according to Section 153.50 of
this chapter.
 
153.17 MU MIXED USE DISTRICT.
 
Purpose. The MU District is intended to provide a smooth transition between
commercial and residential areas, while at the same time providing
opportunities for low impact commercial and office uses away from the higher
intensity uses and higher traffic volumes of the Central Business and General
Commercial districts. A complete and visually appealing streetscape will also
be an objective of the MU District. The adaptive reuse of residential
structures for nonresidential or mixed use is encouraged.
Permitted uses.
(1)   Single-family detached dwelling units;
(2)   Condominiums and townhomes;
(3)   Manufactured homes and mobile homes on permanent foundations;
(4)   Daycare home providing care for 12 or fewer children;
(5)   Duplex (2 units);
(6)   Multi-family dwelling units containing 3 or more units;
(7)   Churches and other religious institutions;
(8)   Community residential facilities;
(9)   Bed and Breakfast;
(10)   Live-Work units;
(11)   Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) on individual lots containing an existing
single-family dwelling;
(12)   Libraries, museums, schools;
(13)   Government and institutional uses;
(14)   Clubs and lodges including senior centers;
(15)   Credit unions and other financial institutions;
(16)   Dining establishments such as coffee shops, ice cream, and cafes;
(17)   Family daycare and group daycare;
(18)   Multi-family dwelling units and residential apartments and lofts located
on second story above a nonresidential permitted use;
(19)   Personal services including barber/beauty/style shops, tanning salons,
tailoring, dry cleaning/laundry, and shoe/boot building and repair;
(20)   Professional and agency offices including medical, dental, legal, real
estate, mortgage lending, and insurance;
(21)   Restaurants; and,
(22)   Specialty retail shops and stores such as florists, antiques, fly and
tackle shops, camera and optic, clothing, and office supply and copy.
Conditional uses. The following uses and structures are permitted as
conditional uses in the MU District subject to review and approval following
the review provisions of Section 153.36, obtaining a zoning permit and meeting
the specific conditions listed herein:
(1)   Amusement centers, or recreational facilities located in an enclosed
building;
(2)   Auditoriums, theaters;
(3)   Drive-through facilities for any use;
(4)   Government, educational and institutional uses;
(5)   Law enforcement, fire stations and emergency services;
(6)   Mobile food establishment;
(7)   Short Term Rental licensed by the State Department of Public Health and
Human Services.
(8)   Cell towers and other telecommunications facilities. Cell towers and
other telecommunications facilities and apparatus are allowed as conditional
uses, subject to the following conditions.
(a)   All telecommunications facilities shall be attached to a building and no
towers are permitted.
(b)   All telecommunications facilities shall observe the setbacks set forth in
this section.
(c)   Collocation is the preferred method of providing a usable cellular signal
to potential telecommunications customers.
Prohibited uses. The following uses are expressly prohibited in the MU
District: (1)    Adult bookstores and adult retail;
(2)   Sale of marijuana products.
(3)   Boarding or breeding kennels for dogs or other pets;
(4)   Hotels and motels;
(5)   Bars, taverns, lounges, night club, casinos; and
(6)   Vehicle fuel dispensing and sales, with or without retail.
Accessory uses.
(1)    Enclosed storage buildings provided they are located behind (non-street
side) of principal building; and Temporary uses.
(1)   Outdoor/sidewalk dining and drinking establishments and
(2)   Sidewalk sales.
 
Dimensional standards.
    (1)    Setbacks:
(a)   Front: 10 feet minimum
(b)   Sides: 10 feet; and (c) Rear: 10 feet.
(2)   Maximum structural height: 30 feet for single-family dwelling structures,
45 feet for multi-family dwelling unit structures and 35 feet for commercial
structures;
(3)   Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet;
Specific District Standards
(1)    Off-street parking and loading. Lodging, residential uses and all
conditional uses must provide off-street parking in accordance with Section
153.49 of this chapter. All other uses shall provide employee and customer
parking to the rear of the principal structure. Off-street parking or loading
facilities shall be located to the side or in the rear of the principal
structure.
(B)   Signs. On-site signage is allowed pursuant to 153.53 of this chapter.
(C)   Fencing. All fencing shall be constructed according to Section 153.50 of
this chapter.
(D)   Conditional uses. In addition to specific standards outlined above,
churches and other religious institutions are allowed as conditional uses in
the MU District subject to the following conditions:
(1)   All dimensional standards of the MU District shall be met;
(2)   All parking shall be to the rear of the primary structure;
 
153.18 GC GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
 
Purpose. The purpose of the General Commercial District (GC) is to provide
commercial land for necessary community goods and services, as well as to serve
the needs of the traveling public and visitors. However, it is recognized that
these commercial areas should also be attractive components of the built
environment, and that uses in the GC District are located along the City’s
highway entryway corridors are compatible with land use patterns.
Permitted uses.
(1)   All non-residential uses permitted in the Central Business District (CB);
(2)   Mobile food establishment;
(3)   All uses pertaining to automobile and truck sales, service and repair
including service stations and car washes;
(4)   Building equipment and materials - wholesale and retail, including
storage yards;
(5)   Electronic equipment - assembly, repair and sales;
(6)   Fraternal Lodges, clubs;
(7)   Meeting halls, auditoriums, arenas, indoor theaters;
(8)   Motels, hotels, convention centers;
(9)   Retail and wholesale sales, service and repair - agricultural products,
products serving agriculture, farm implements, heavy machinery, mobile homes,
travel trailers, recreational vehicles;
(10)   Restaurants and drive-in eating establishments;
(11)   Bars, taverns, lounges, nightclubs;
(12)   Storage facilities;
(13)   Utilities, public and private;
(14)   Veterinary office, clinic, hospital;
(15)   Emergency services including fire protection and police; and,
(16)   Sale of marijuana products.
Conditional uses. The following uses and structures are permitted as
conditional uses in the GC District subject to review and approval following
the review provisions of Section 153.36, obtaining a zoning permit and meeting
the specific conditions listed herein:
(1)   Agricultural products processing, storage, loading and grain elevators;
(2)   Cement, concrete and paving products, including mixing plants;
(3)   Bottling, distribution, manufacturing, and processing centers;
(4)   Freight terminals- truck or rail;
(5)   Laboratories - including industrial;
(6)   Industrial Uses- Contractor yard, manufacturing, fabrication, welding
etc.;
(7)   Manufacturing or processing:(a) products from organic material, chemical,
glass, metal, minerals, stones or earth (b) foodstuffs, textiles, electrical
components, wood, leather, paper, or plastic;
(8)   Auto Salvage Yard;
(9)   Adult bookstores, adult retail and adult entertainment;
(10)   Telecommunications facilities. Cell towers and other telecommunications
facilities and apparatus are allowed as conditional uses, subject to the
following conditions.
i.   All telecommunications facilities shall observe the setbacks set forth in
this section.
ii.   Collocation is the preferred method of providing a usable cellular signal
to potential telecommunications customers. If a new cell tower is proposed, the
service provider shall demonstrate why collocation is not possible or
practicable.
iii.   No telecommunications facilities shall impede on-site vehicular or
pedestrian circulation or emergency access. iv. Maximum tower height shall not
exceed 50 feet. For each additional antennas (array) collocated on an existing
tower, the tower height may be increased by ten feet up to a maximum height of
70 feet.
v. Towers shall be sited to minimize visual impacts from nearby residential
areas.
(11)   Other uses commensurate with the above uses and compatible with the
purpose of this district
(A) Dimensional standards.
(1)    The setbacks listed below are minimums, but they may be increased
through approval from the Zoning Administrator on a case-by-case basis
depending on the need for emergency access:
(a)   Front: 15 feet;
(b)   Sides: 15 feet, except side can be zero (0) feet for interior side lot
lines where townhouse type platting is used to convey building footprints; and
(c) Rear: 15 feet.
(2) Maximum structural height: 45 feet;
(B)   Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking and loading facilities
are required as set forth in Section 153.49.
(C)   Signs. On-site signage is allowed pursuant to Section 153.53
(D)   Fencing. All fencing shall be constructed according to Section 153.50
153.19 PI -PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
 
Purpose. The purpose of the Public and Institutional District (PI) is to
recognize and designate land for governmental and other public and quasi-public
facilities and services.
Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the PI District include all governmental
functions and facilities, including, but not necessarily limited to, the
following:
(1)   Animal shelters;
(2)   Auditoriums and theaters;
(3)   Group homes serving disabled persons, half-way houses, adult foster
family day care facilities, group day care homes- licensed by MDHES;
(4)   Community residential facilities;
(5)   Churches and other religious institutions;
(6)   Community center/senior center;
(7)   Day care;
(8)   Emergency services including fire protection and police;
(9)   Offices: professional, medical, business administrative, services;
(10)   Federal, state, and local government buildings and offices;
(11)   Hospitals and publicly operated clinics;
(12)   Libraries;
(13)   Public recreational facilities, such as parks and golf courses;
(14)   Public and private schools;
(15)   Local government shop and maintenance yards, state highway maintenance
workstations, and material storage facilities; and
(16)   Utilities and public facilities such as water and wastewater treatment
plants.
Conditional uses. The following uses and structures are permitted as
conditional uses in the PI District subject to review and approval following
the review provisions of Section 153.36, obtaining a zoning permit and meeting
the specific conditions listed herein:
(1)   Golf course;
(2)   Hotel/ Motel/ Convention center;
(3)   Telecommunications facilities. Cell towers and other telecommunications
facilities and apparatus are allowed as conditional uses, subject to the
following conditions.
i.   All telecommunications facilities shall observe the setbacks set forth in
this section.
ii.   Collocation is the preferred method of providing a usable cellular signal
to potential telecommunications customers. If a new cell tower is proposed, the
service provider shall demonstrate why collocation is not possible or
practicable.
iii.   No telecommunications facilities shall impede on-site vehicular or
pedestrian circulation or emergency access.
iv.   Maximum tower height shall not exceed 50 feet.
v.   Towers shall be sited to minimize visual impacts from nearby residential
areas.
(A) Dimensional standards.
a.   The setbacks listed below are minimums, but they may be increased if
approved by the Zoning Administrator on a case by-case basis depending on the
need for emergency access and public health and safety issues:
i.   Front: 10 feet;
ii.   Sides: 10 feet; and
iii.   Rear: 5 feet.
b.   Maximum structural height: 45 feet;
c.   Minimum lot size: None;
 
153.20 (PR-OL) PARKS, RECREATION AND OPEN LAND DISTRICT
 
Purpose. The purpose of the Parks, Recreation and Open Land District (PR-OL) is
to recognize and designate land for parks and recreational purposes.
 
Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the PR-OL District include all parks and
recreational uses, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following:
(1)   Community Center;
(2)   Community Garden;
(3)   Parks, Playgrounds, Recreational Facilities; and,
(4)   Golf Course. 
 
Conditional uses. The following uses and structures are permitted as
conditional uses in the PR-OL District subject to review and approval following
the review provisions of Section 153.36, obtaining a zoning permit and meeting
the specific conditions listed herein: 
(1) Telecommunications facilities. Cell towers and other telecommunications
facilities and apparatus are allowed as conditional uses, subject to the
following conditions.
i.   All telecommunications facilities shall observe the setbacks set forth in
this section.
ii.   Collocation is the preferred method of providing a usable cellular signal
to potential telecommunications customers. If a new cell tower is proposed, the
service provider shall demonstrate why collocation is not possible or
practicable.
iii.   No telecommunications facilities shall impede on-site vehicular or
pedestrian circulation or emergency access.
iv.   Maximum tower height shall not exceed 35 feet.
v.   Towers shall be sited to minimize visual impacts from nearby residential
areas.
153.21 PRE-EXISTING NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES AND STRUCTURES.
 
(A)   Purpose.
 
(1)   Within the districts established by this chapter, lots, structures and
uses of land and structures may exist which were lawful at the time this
chapter was adopted or amended, but which would be prohibited or regulated
under the terms of this chapter or future amendment. The intent of this section
is to permit these (pre-existing) nonconformities to continue until they are
removed, but not to encourage their survival. This chapter further intends
that, unless for ADA retrofitting, nonconformities shall not be enlarged,
expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or
uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
(2)   Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with
permitted uses in the same district. However, to avoid undue hardship, nothing
in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction
or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully
begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and
which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Actual
construction is
hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent
position and fastened in a permanent manner.
 
(B)   Nonconforming lots of record.
 
(1)   In any district, notwithstanding other limitations imposed by this
chapter, structures permitted in a district may be established on any existing
nonconforming single lot of record on the effective date of this chapter, but
all structures must meet all bulk requirements (setbacks, building height etc.)
of the district.
 
(C)   Nonconforming uses of land and structures. Where, on the effective date
of this chapter, a lawful use of land or a structure exists which would not be
permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, the use may be continued
where it remains otherwise lawful, provided:
(1)   A nonconforming use may not be enlarged or increased, nor extended to
occupy a greater area of land or structure than was occupied on the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
(2)   No nonconforming use may be moved in whole or in part to any portion of
the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use on the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter;
(3)   Should any nonconforming use cease for any reason for a period of more
than two (2) years, any subsequent use of the land or structure shall conform
to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such
land is located; and
(4)   No additional nonconforming structure shall be erected in connection with
such nonconforming use of land or structures.
 
(D)   Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists on the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter but becomes
nonconforming under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on
area, lot coverage, height, yards, location on the lot, or other requirements
concerning the structure, such structure may be continued, provided it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
(1)   A nonconforming structure may not be enlarged or altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be
altered to decrease its nonconformity or to meet the requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(2)   Should a nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be
destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at
the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(3)   Should a nonconforming structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
(4)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the routine repair and
maintenance of a nonconforming structure.
(5)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any officials charged with protecting the public safety, upon order
of such official.
 
     
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
153.22 ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED.
 
A zoning permit shall be required for any construction, reconstruction,
addition, relocation of a structure, change of land use, and fences. Interior
modifications of structures, and any other renovations that do not increase the
floor area of a structure or cause expansion of the structure in any way, are
not subject to zoning permits. Agricultural buildings associated with bona fide
agricultural operations are not subject to zoning permits, but such structures
must meet any applicable requirements of this chapter. Zoning permits shall be
applied for on a form provided by the city and are reviewed according to
procedures established by the city.
153.23 ZONING PERMIT FEE REQUIRED.
 
Each application for a zoning permit shall include the applicable fee. Fees are
established by resolution of the City Council. No application for a zoning
permit is complete without the required fee.
153.24 APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMIT.
 
The purpose of the zoning permit is to ensure that all building construction
and development activity complies with these regulations, as well as
regulations promulgated by other agencies as applicable. An application for a
zoning permit may be filed either concurrently with a building permit
application or prior to applying for a building permit. A zoning permit
application may also be filed concurrently or prior to any application for a
city business license.
(A)   The applicant shall file a properly completed application form, including
a site plan, project description, and any other required supporting materials,
with the Zoning Administrator. Once all required materials and information are
submitted, the Zoning Administrator shall deem the application complete.
(B)   The Zoning Administrator or his or her designee shall review the
application to determine compliance with these regulations. Should the Zoning
Administrator find that the application complies with these regulations, the
application shall be approved. However, the Zoning Administrator may impose
reasonable conditions on the zoning permit to ensure compliance with these
regulations, as well as the regulations promulgated by other agencies as they
may apply.
(C)   The application shall be approved or denied within 20 business days of it
being deemed complete, and the applicant shall be notified in writing within
five business days of the decision.
     
153.25 SITE INSPECTIONS.
 
The filing of an application for a zoning permit constitutes consent of the
property owner and applicant for authorized city personnel to conduct
inspections of the subject property during the review process. Refusal of the
owner or applicant to allow authorized personnel on site for necessary
inspections may delay review of the permit application, and/or result in denial
of the application.
 
153.26 LIMITATIONS OF ZONING PERMIT.
 
Zoning permits issued pursuant to this chapter are limited in their
authorization to the work and/or development expressly described therein.
Issuance of a zoning permit does not convey any broad powers or authority to
the applicant beyond the purpose described in the zoning permit application and
for which the permit was issued. Zoning permits shall run with the land, are
site specific, and are not transferable to another property or site.
153.27 EXPIRATION OF ZONING PERMITS; EXTENSION.
 
If the work described in the zoning permit has not begun within one year from
the date of issuance, the permit expires and is void. Should the permittee
request an extension of the zoning permit in writing, the Zoning Administrator
may grant such an extension for not more than one year. Subsequent extensions
will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Any such request for an extension
must be made prior to the actual expiration of the zoning permit. The Zoning
Administrator is not empowered to reinstate an expired zoning permit.
153.28 REVOCATION OF ZONING PERMITS.
 
(A)   Zoning permits may be revoked for good cause shown. Procedures to revoke
zoning permits may only be initiated by the city and only the City Council is
authorized to revoke a zoning permit.
(B)   Prior to initiating any permit revocation procedure, the City shall have:
(1)   Conducted an inspection of the subject property;
(2)   Thoroughly investigated any complaints;
(3)   Contacted the permittee in writing notifying them of the nature of
complaints, issues, and/or potential violations; and
(4)   Provided the permittee every reasonable opportunity to address and
correct conditions, violations, or deficiencies.
(C)   A zoning permit may be revoked based on one or more of the following
findings:
(1)   That the initial application and/or representations made by the applicant
in connection with the application were fraudulent or otherwise inaccurate or
misleading to the extent that the decision to grant the zoning permit was based
upon or influenced by said application or representations; and
(2)   That operation of the authorized use or development has become a public
nuisance and/or an imminent threat to the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
(D)   The City Council may revoke a zoning permit upon approval of a motion by
simple majority where findings and cause for the revocation are set forth in
the motion to revoke.
(E)   The applicant shall be notified of the revocation action through a cease-
and-desist order issued by the City Council.
153.29 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS.
 
(A)   Any interpretation of these regulations or any decision made by the
Zoning Administrator pursuant to these regulations may be appealed to the Board
of Adjustment (BOA) following the procedures set forth below. Such an appeal
shall be filed with the BOA within 25 business days of the Zoning
Administrator’s decision.
(1)   The appellant shall file a written appeal on a form provided by the City
and shall provide all relevant supporting information. A filing fee shall be
paid by the appellant.
(2)   Upon receipt of the appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall publish a
notice in the official city newspaper at least ten days prior to the next
scheduled meeting of the Board of Adjustment and shall place the appeal on the
Board’s agenda for that meeting. The Board must meet
within 25 business days of an appeal filed with the Zoning Administrator.
(3)   The BOA shall conduct a hearing on the appeal following procedures set
forth in the Board’s adopted rules of procedure. No appeal shall be heard if
the appellant or a representative is not present. If the appeal involves an
action taken or permit granted to a third party, such as a property owner or
development, no hearing shall be conducted unless the third party is present.
(4)   Based upon relevant findings and conclusions, the BOA may uphold,
overturn, or modify the action or interpretation made by the
Administrator. The BOA shall take final action within 20 business days of the
initial opening of the public hearing.
(5)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the appellant and other interested
parties in writing of the BOA’s decision within five business days.
(6)   Any decision of the BOA may be appealed to district court as provided in
MCA § 76-2-327. Notice of intent to file an appeal shall halt all proceedings
by the Zoning Administrator to carry out the BOA decision, unless in the
judgment of the Zoning Administrator, such action is imperative due to imminent
public health or life safety concerns.
(B)   When in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator, a decision or
interpretation of the regulations will affect a specific property or class of
properties, and/or have a potentially significant impact on a neighborhood or
landscape of the city, the Zoning Administrator shall notify adjacent property
owners via first class mail of their intent to render a decision or
interpretation. The letter shall explain the pending decision and shall invite
comment for a period of not less than 15 days following the date of the letter.
At the end of this comment period, the Zoning Administrator may officially
render the decision or interpretation and communicate it in writing to all
parties involved. Once the decision or interpretation is finalized, the
decision or interpretation may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment through
the procedure set forth in division (A) above.
153.30 VARIANCES.
 
The Board of Adjustment (BOA) may, in specific cases, grant relief from the
dimensional standards (building setbacks, building heights, etc.) of these
regulations as set forth in MCA § 76-2-323. Variances shall not be granted for
a change in permitted, conditional or prohibited uses. Changes in permitted,
conditional or prohibited uses require a zoning text amendment or a zoning map
amendment.
(A)   The applicant shall apply for a variance on a form supplied by the city.
The applicable filing fee shall be paid, and all relevant supporting materials
shall be submitted.
(B)   Upon receipt of the application, the Zoning Administrator shall publish a
notice in the official city newspaper at least 15 calendar days prior to the
next regular meeting of the Board of Adjustment and shall place the variance on
the Board’s agenda for that meeting.
(C)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify all property owners within 150 feet
of the subject property by regular first-class mail at least 15 calendar days
prior to the date of the hearing by the BOA.
(D)   The BOA shall conduct a hearing on the proposed variance following
procedures set forth in the Board’s adopted rules of procedure. No hearing
shall be conducted if the applicant or a representative is not present.
(E)   In applying the provisions of MCA § 76-2-323(1)(c), the BOA may only
grant relief upon a finding that the following criteria are met in substance as
they may apply to the application:
(1)   The variance is necessitated due to exceptional and/or extraordinary
circumstances or conditions that are unique to the subject property, and are
not generally characteristic of similarly situated properties;
(2)   Approval of the variance(s) will preserve a property right or use that is
generally enjoyed by owners of similarly situated properties, and conversely,
approval of a variance will not bestow a special privilege on the applicant
that is not generally enjoyed by the owners of similarly situated properties;
(3)   The alleged hardship has not been created by the applicant;
(4)   Specific relief from the code shall be the minimum necessary; and
(5)   Adverse impacts associated with granting relief from the code are avoided
or effectively mitigated.
(F)   Conditions may be imposed by the BOA that will cause the above criteria
to be met.
(G)   Final action is required on a variance request within 20 business days of
the initial opening of the public hearing.
(H)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant and interested
parties of the BOA decision in writing within five (5) business days.
(I)   Decisions of the BOA may be appealed to the District Court as set forth
in MCA § 76-2-327.
(J)   Granting of a variance allows the applicant specific relief from the
provisions of this code. Granting of a variance does not convey broad powers to
deviate from other standards and requirements set forth herein. A variance runs
with the land and is not transferable to another site or property.
153.31 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
 
(A)   Duties; general. The Zoning Administrator is charged with the
administration, interpretation, and enforcement of the Zoning Code.
(B)   Powers and duties. The Zoning Administrator or their designees shall:
(1)   Enforce any and all provisions of these regulations;
(2)   Keep complete, accurate, and secure records;
(3)   Accept applications and appeals, and ensure their appropriateness and
completeness;
(4)   Update these regulations and the official zoning map as directed by the
City Council;
(5)   Report to the Zoning Commission and City Council any recommendations for
amendments and improvements to these regulations, and the procedures contained
herein;
(6)   Interpret these regulations as they apply to specific properties and
developments, with the provision that the Zoning Administrator does not have
the authority to alter these regulations as they may apply to a specific
property or to grant relief from the provisions of these regulations;
(7)   Determine the location of any zoning district boundary;
(8)   Render lawful similar use rulings for uses not specifically listed in the
use table for the applicable zoning district;
(9)   Make a zoning determination that clarifies what the zoning code allows on
a specific lot. Zoning determinations can include:
i.   The meaning of a regulation under this code.
ii.   How a land use should be classified under this code.
iii.   Whether a proposed structure complies with requirements of this code.
iv.   Whether an owner has vested rights under this code.
(1)   Receive and investigate allegations of noncompliance or violation of
these regulations and take appropriate abatement action;
(2)   Review and issue zoning permits;
(3)   Review and make recommendations to the Zoning Commission and the City
Council on conditional use permit applications;
(4)   Review and make recommendations to the Zoning Commission and the City
Council on applications for planned unit developments (PUD);
(5)   Make recommendations to the Board of Adjustment on variance applications;
and
(6)   Make recommendations to the Zoning Commission and City Council with
regard to amendments to these regulations, the official zoning map, and to
annexations.
153.32 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (BOA).
 
(A)   The Board of Adjustment is established as authorized in MCA § 76-2-321.
 
(B)   The duties and powers of the Board of Adjustment are as follows:
(1)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) members appointed by
the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
(2)   The Board of Adjustment is established by City Ordinance, as may be
amended from time to time.
(3)   The Board of Adjustment shall serve without compensation, except for
expenses authorized in the performance of their duties.
(4)   The Board of Adjustment shall have the authority to:
(a)   Hear and decide appeals in which it has been alleged that there is an
error in order, requirement, decision, or interpretation made by the Zoning
Administrator in the enforcement of these regulations;
(b)   Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance upon
which such board is required to pass under such ordinance; and
(c)   Hear and grant or deny any proper application for a variance to the
terms, conditions, or standards of these regulations.
 
(C)   The Board of Adjustment shall conduct hearings according to its own
adopted rules of procedure.
153.33 ZONING COMMISSION.
 
(A)   The City Planning Board shall also serve as the City Zoning Commission,
but the duties of the two entities are statutorily separated.
(B)   The Zoning Commission is established as authorized in MCA § 76-2-307.
(C)   The duties and powers of the Zoning Commission are as follows:
(1)   To conduct hearings and advise the City Council on matters of annexation,
including the appropriate zoning district to which annexed property may be
applied;
(2)   To conduct studies and investigations on growth and/or growth management
issues arising within and/or affecting the city, and to advise the City Council
on such matters; and
(3)   To hold public hearings on any request to amend these regulations and/or
the official zoning map of the city, and to make recommendations to the City
Council on such amendment requests.
(4)   Review and hold hearings on conditional use permit (CUP) applications and
provide a recommendation to the City Council.
(5)   Prepare, amend and recommend the Growth Policy to City Council.
153.34 AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING CODE TEXT.
 
(A)   Amendments to the text of the City’s Zoning Code may be initiated by the
City Council, Zoning Commission, Board of Adjustment, or any individual, group
of individuals, business, corporation, or other organization, whether located
or not within the city.
(B)   Applications for Zoning Code text amendments shall be made on a form
provided by the city, and the applicable filing fee shall be paid. No
application can be considered complete without the applicable fee.
(C)   In the application, the complete rationale for the amendment must be
provided, and the following criteria must be addressed to the extent they are
applicable:
(1)   How the proposed text amendment implements the growth policy more
effectively than existing language in the Zoning Code;
(2)   How the proposed text amendment will promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare;
(3)   How the proposed amendment facilitates the adequate provision of
transportation, water, wastewater, schools, parks, and other public services;
(4)   Impact of the proposed text amendment on motorized and nonmotorized
transportation systems;
(5)   How the proposed text amendment promotes compatible urban growth and
enhances the character and qualities of the city;
(6)   How the proposed text amendment will contribute to conserving the value
of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the
city; and
(7)   Additional community benefits, if any, that will be provided or promoted
by the proposed text amendment.
(D)   Once the Zoning Administrator has deemed the application complete, it
shall be forwarded to the Zoning Commission for review and a public hearing.
The public hearing shall be held no later than 60 calendar days after the
application has been received by the Zoning Commission. The Zoning
Administrator shall provide notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation at least 15 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing,
and all other procedures set forth in section MCA § 76-2-303 shall be followed.
The Zoning Administrator shall provide a written review and recommendation to
the Zoning Commission on the proposed text amendment.
(E)   The Zoning Commission shall forward its recommendation to the City
Council within seven (7) business days of the meeting at which the
recommendation is adopted.
(F)   The City Council shall take action on the proposed amendment and Zoning
Commission recommendation within 30 business days following the receipt of the
recommendation.
(G)   Final action to adopt a Zoning Code amendment shall be by ordinance and
will become effective 30 days after adoption of the ordinance per MCA.
153.35 AMENDMENTS TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
 
(A)   Amendments to the official zoning map of the city may be initiated by the
Zoning Commission, City Council, any individual, group of individuals,
business, corporation, or any other organization with a property interest in at
least one property within the amendment area. A property interest shall mean
fee simple ownership or a contractual interest in purchasing a property.
(B)   Applications for zoning map amendments shall be made on a form provided
by the city. The application shall include a scaled map of the proposed
amendment area depicting existing and proposed zoning districts. The
application must be signed by all owners of record of at least one property in
the area of the proposed amendment, or a separate letter of authorization, also
signed by all owners of record of at least one of the affected properties, may
be issued to the applicant.
(C)   In the application, the complete rationale for the zoning map amendment
must be provided, and the following criteria shall be addressed to the extent
they are applicable:
(1)   How the proposed map amendment implements the growth policy more
effectively than the existing zoning district(s);
(2)   How the proposed amendment will promote the health, safety, and general
welfare;
(3)   How the proposed amendment facilitates the adequate provision of
transportation, water, wastewater, schools, parks, and other public services;
(4)   Impact of the proposed amendment on motorized and non-motorized
transportation systems;
(5)   How the proposed amendment promotes compatible urban growth and enhances
the character and qualities of the city;
(6)   How the proposed map amendment will contribute to conserving the value of
buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city;
and
(7)   Additional community benefits, if any, will be provided or promoted by
the proposed map amendment.
(D)   Once the Zoning Administrator has deemed the application complete, it
shall be forwarded to the Zoning Commission for review and a public hearing.
The public hearing shall be held no later than 60 calendar days after the
application has been received by the Zoning Commission. The Zoning
Administrator shall provide notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation at least 15 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing,
and all other procedures set forth in MCA § 76-2-303 shall be followed. The
Zoning Administrator shall provide a written review and recommendation to the
Zoning Commission on the proposed map amendment.
(E)   The Zoning Commission shall forward its recommendation to the City
Council within seven business days of the meeting at which the recommendation
is adopted.
(F)   The City Council shall take action on the proposed amendment and Zoning
Commission recommendation within 45 business days following the receipt of the
recommendation.
(G)   Final action to adopt a zoning map amendment shall be by ordinance and
will become effective 30 days after adoption of the ordinance per MCA.
153.36 CONDITIONAL USES.
 
(A)   Purpose: This section establishes standards and required Findings of Fact
for Conditional Uses. The purpose of Conditional Uses is to allow uses that
may be suitable in some but not all locations in the zoning district in which
they are allowed or require special consideration because of unusual
operational or physical characteristics or must be designed and developed with
conditions to assure compatibility with adjoining uses.
 
A Conditional Use Permit (CUP) may be granted to allow a Conditional Use only
for a use or structure listed as such under the zoning district uses and only
after the Zoning Commission has made Findings of Fact that the Conditional Use
complies with the following standards. The following standards apply in
addition to standards of general applicability.
 
Only those uses specifically listed as conditional uses are allowed in the
applicable district unless in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, a
proposed conditional use is of the same general character as those listed.
 
(B)   The applicant shall apply for a CUP on a form supplied by the city. The
applicable filing fee, which is established by resolution by the City Council,
shall be paid, and all relevant supporting materials shall be submitted.
 
(C)   Upon receipt of an application that has been determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be complete, the Zoning Administrator shall publish a notice
in the official city newspaper at least 15 calendar days prior to the next
regular meeting of the Zoning Commission and shall place the permit application
on the Commission’s agenda for that meeting.
 
(D)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify all property owners adjacent to the
subject property by regular first-class mail at least 15 calendar days prior to
the date of the hearing by the Zoning Commission or the City Council.
 
(E)   The Zoning Administrator shall provide a written review and
recommendation on the proposed CUP to the Zoning Commission.
 
(F)   The Zoning Commission shall conduct a hearing on the proposed conditional
use permit. No hearing shall be conducted if the applicant or a representative
is not present and subsequent hearing date will be identified by the Zoning
Commission. The Zoning Commission may accept comment from members of the public
in attendance if the applicant or their representative is not in attendance.
 
(G)   Findings of Fact: At the conclusion of the public hearing the Zoning
Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council on the following
Findings of Fact on whether the proposed Conditional Use complies with the
following standards.
(1)   Consistent with Growth Policy: The Conditional Use is consistent with the
policies, goals, objectives, and strategies of the City of Boulder Growth
Policy.  
(2)   Compatibility: The Conditional Use is compatible with the character of
the immediate vicinity including the bulk, scale, and general appearance of
neighboring buildings and uses.
(3)   Minimizes Adverse Impact: The design, development, and operation of the
Conditional Use minimize and mitigate adverse effects, including visual impact
of the proposed use on adjacent lands.
(4)   Minimizes Adverse Environmental Impact: The development and operation of
the proposed Conditional Use minimizes adverse environmental impacts.
Environmental resources to be assessed include, but are not limited to,
wetlands, riparian areas, steep slopes, mature vegetation, and the floodplain.
(5)   Impact on Public Facilities and Services: The Conditional Use does not
have a significant adverse impact on public facilities and services, including,
but not limited to, transportation systems, potable water and wastewater
facilities, storm drainage, solid waste and recycling, parks, trails,
sidewalks, schools, police, fire, and EMT facilities.
(6)   Hazard, Nuisance: The proposed Conditional Use will not create a hazard
to persons or property and will not create a nuisance arising from, but not
limited to, traffic, noise, smoke, odors, dust, vibration, or illumination.
 
(H)   Mitigation: The Zoning Commission may recommend reasonable mitigation to
the City Council for the impacts identified in subsection G above for any
proposed CUP. Mitigation may include but is not limited to landscaping,
vegetative screening, parking areas, street construction, sidewalks, limits on
signage etc.
 
(I)   The City Council will review the Zoning Commission’s recommendation on
the proposed CUP at a regularly scheduled and noticed public meeting of the
Council. The Council shall render a final decision on the Commission’s
recommendation within 45 calendar days of the Commission’s recommendation and
shall provide the applicant with a written approval or denial including any
required conditions for an approval.
  
(J)   Other Codes: The Conditional use must comply with all applicable City
codes and ordinances.
 
(K)   Run with the Land: An approved CUP shall run with the land and may be
transferred to another owner.
 
(L)   Expiration, Discontinuance or Abandonment: An approved CUP shall expire
on the one (1) year anniversary date of approval if the permit is not put to
use, unless an alternate timeline is established in the development approval.
If a Conditional Use is operationally discontinued or abandoned for a period of
more than twelve (12) consecutive months, regardless of the removal or non-
removal of furniture/equipment or any intention to resume such activity in the
future, the Conditional Use may not be reestablished or resumed. Any subsequent
use of the site shall conform to this Code.
     
153.37 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR RESPONSIBLE FOR ENFORCEMENT.
 
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for enforcement of all
requirements and standards set forth in these regulations. The Zoning
Administrator shall be designated by the City Council.
153.38 ENFORCEMENT PROCESS.
 
(A)   Purpose: The purpose and intent of this section is to ensure compliance
with the Zoning Code and obtain corrections of violations that may occur. It
also establishes remedies and penalties that apply to violations of this Code.
 
(B)   The standards, guidelines and procedures of this Code shall be enforced
by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Boulder through its authority to
abate any violations and enjoin and restrain any person violating this Code
pursuant to Montana law.
 
(C)   Violations: Any of the following shall be a violation of this Code and
shall be subject to the remedies and penalties provided by this Code.
(1)   Establish Use, Structure or Sign Without Permit or Approval: To establish
or place any use, structure or sign upon land that is subject to this Code
without all required approvals, permits and certificates.
(2)   Development Without Permit or Approval: To develop, construct, remodel,
expand or any other activity of any nature that is subject to this Code without
all required approvals, permits and certificates.
(3)   Establish Use or Development Inconsistent with Permit: To engage in a use
or develop, construct, remodel or expand a structure or sign, or any other
activity of any nature that is inconsistent with the terms and conditions of
any permit, approval, certificate, or any other form of authorization required
for such activity.
(4)   Establish Use or Development Inconsistent With Code: To use, construct,
erect, remodel, expand, maintain, or move any building, structure or sign in
violation of any provision of this Ordinance.
(5)   Create A Nonconforming Condition: To reduce or diminish any lot area or
structure setback, or to increase the intensity or density of any use of land
or structure, except in accordance with the standards and procedures of this
ordinance.
 
(D)   Continuing Violations: After the Zoning Administrator issues a written
notice of violation to the owner of the land, building, structure, or sign that
is the subject of a violation, each calendar day the violation remains
uncorrected shall constitute a separate and additional violation of this Code.
 
(E)   Responsibility of Enforcement, Compliance: The Zoning Administrator shall
have the responsibility to enforce this Code. The owner of the land, building,
structure, or sign that is subject to a violation has the responsibility to
eliminate the violation and achieve compliance with this Code.
(F)   Enforcement Procedures: In addition to any additional authorities and
procedures provided to the City of Boulder by general or specific law, the
following procedures shall apply to the enforcement of this Code:
(1)   Inspection: The Zoning Administrator or their designee shall have the
authority to enter onto land within the boundaries of the City of Boulder to
inspect for violations of this Code.
(2)   Withhold Permit: The City may deny or withhold any permit, approval,
certificate, or any other form of authorization required by the provisions of
this Code upon determining that an uncorrected violation of this Code exists on
the land, building, structure, or sign for which a permit or authorization is
sought.
(3)   Condition a Permit: Instead of withholding or denying a permit or other
authorization, the City may grant such authorization subject to the condition
that a violation be corrected.
(4)   Revocation or Suspension of Permit: The Zoning Administrator may revoke
or suspend a permit, approval, certificate, or other authorization upon
determining any of the following actions has occurred:
i.   Departure from Plans: The actions of the landowner, contractor, developer,
or authorized agent of the owner have departed from the approved plans or
specifications, or the conditions or terms of an approved permit or other
authorization.
ii.   False Representation: The permit, approval, certificate, or other
authorization was obtained by false representation or was issued in error.
iii.   Violation: A violation exists on the land, building, structure, or sign
that is subject to the permit or other authorization.
(5)   Stop Work Order: The Zoning Administrator may require that work stop on
any land, building, structure, or sign that is subject to an uncorrected
violation of this Code or the terms or conditions of a permit or other
authorization. This Stop Work Order may be issued in conjunction with or
separate from a revocation or suspension of a permit.
(6)   Injunctive Relief: The City may seek an injunction or other equitable
relief in court to stop any violation of this Code or the terms or conditions
of a permit or other authorization.
(7)   Abatement: The City may seek a court order in the nature of mandamus,
injunction, or other action to abate or remove a violation and to restore the
premises to the condition that existed prior to the violation.
(8)   Civil Remedies: The City may seek civil penalties and other punishment
provided by the law.
153.39 APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE STAYS ALL ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS.
 
If the violation is of such a nature that it can be negated through relief from
the strict provisions of these regulations, a completed application for a
variance, properly filed with the Zoning Administrator, shall stay all
abatement proceedings until the Board of Adjustment, following the procedures
set forth in Section 153.30, renders a decision on the variance application
unless the Zoning Administrator determines that a stay could cause imminent
threat to life or property.
153.40 APPEAL STAYS ALL ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS.
 
Should the responsible party choose to appeal any interpretation or
determination by the Zoning Administrator relative to an alleged violation,
filing such an appeal with the Zoning Administrator shall stay all abatement
proceedings until the Board of Adjustment, following the procedures set forth
in Section 153.32 of this subchapter, renders a decision on the appeal unless
the Zoning Administrator determines that a stay could cause imminent threat to
life or property.
153.41 IMMINENT THREAT TO LIFE OR PROPERTY.
 
The provisions of Section 153.38 Enforcement Process notwithstanding, if in the
judgment of the Zoning Administrator, a violation of these regulations
constitutes an imminent threat to life or property, or could result in a hazard
to public health, the Zoning Administrator has the authority under this chapter
to issue an immediate cease and desist order. Once the threat to life,
property, or public health is removed, the abatement protocol shall be carried
out and no stay shall be permitted.
153.42 PENALTY.
 
(A)   Pursuant to MCA § 76-2-315, a violation of the standards and requirements
set forth in this chapter is a misdemeanor. Anyone convicted of violating the
provisions or conditions of this chapter may be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all
costs and expenses incurred in the case. Each day such violation continues is a
separate offense.
 
(B)   The owner or tenant of any buildings, structures, premises, or part
thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who
commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be
found guilty of a separate offense and penalties herein provided.
 
(C)   Nothing contained herein prevents the city from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
 
 
 
     
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
153.43 PURPOSE.
 
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth standards for property development,
maintenance, and use that may, and usually do, apply to several zoning
districts. Standards for parking, landscaping, measurement of setbacks and
height, and property maintenance not only will apply to every district
established by these regulations, but they will contribute substantially to the
preservation and enhancement of the city’s special character and qualities.
153.44 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
(A)   Requirements for permitted home occupations in the Residential R-
1 District and Mixed-Use MU District. A home occupation may be conducted as a
secondary use in a dwelling, provided that:
(1)   The use of the dwelling for the home occupation clearly must be
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes, and not more
than 33 percent of the floor area of the dwelling may be used in the conduct of
the home occupation.
(2)   There may be no change in the outside appearance of the building or
premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation other
than one sign, not exceeding six (6)square feet in area, nonilluminated and
mounted flat against the wall of the principal structure.
(3)   No traffic may be generated by a home occupation in greater volumes than
would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for
parking generated by the conduct of the home occupation shall be met off the
street. No home occupation, or any required parking for the home occupation,
shall use the parking space required for the residence.
(4)   No vehicles, except those normally used as passenger vehicles, will be
used for the home occupation unless stored or parked elsewhere.
(5)   No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable by
normal senses off the lot.
(6)   Any equipment or materials used in connection with a home occupation
shall be stored within the principal residential structure or accessory
building or in an enclosed space outside of the principal structure or
accessory building.
 
(B)   Home occupations allowed as conditional uses. Where a proposed home
occupation would not conform to any one of the conditions specified in division
(A) above, the home occupation must be reviewed as a conditional use under the
procedures of Section 153.36.
 
153.45 FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS.
 
All development in the Special Flood Hazard Area (formerly known as the FEMA
100-year floodplain), according to current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRM) (https://msc.fema.gov/portal/search#searchresultsanchor), shall comply
with the Floodplain and Floodway Management standards set forth in Title 15,
Chapter 152 of the City of Boulder Municipal Code. 
153.46 STRUCTURAL HEIGHT MEASUREMENT.
 
The “height of a structure” is defined as the mean linear distance from the
ground level on finished grade at the midpoint and immediately adjacent to each
of the walls of a structure to the highest point of the structure, not
including antennas, chimneys, steeples, or roof-top mechanical devices.
Structural height is further determined as follows.
(A)   Highest point of a structure. The highest point of a structure is the top
of the highest roof pitch for a hip or gabled roof, or top of parapet for a
flat roof not including any mechanical structures. Steeples, chimneys,
antennas, receiving dishes, and the like, are not subject to limitations of
structural height, except cell towers which are limited to 35 feet in height in
the MU and CB Districts and 70 feet in the GC.
(B)   Finished grade. Finished grade shall be construed as the grade at the
base or foundation of a structure necessary to achieve positive drainage away
from the structure only. Soil, fill, or other material may not be bermed
against a structure to circumvent height limits.
(C)   Natural grade. Natural grade shall be construed as meaning that the
natural slope and topography of the land need little or no modification to site
the structure. Where the nearest two points to natural grade are at different
grades (such as, a house that takes up grade through the structure), the
heights measured may be averaged.
153.47 SETBACK MEASUREMENTS AND ALLOWABLE ENCROACHMENTS.
(A)   Front setbacks.
(1)   A required front setback is measured at a right angle (90 degrees) from
the front property line to the nearest of the following two points on the
structure:
(a)   The foundation wall of the principal structure; or
(b)   The facing edge of a porch or deck over 16 square feet in area extending
from the front of the principal structure.
(2)   The following encroachments into the front setback are allowed:
(a)   Steps are allowed to encroach into the required front setback up to eight
feet;
(b)   Ramps to provide accessibility to disabled persons may encroach up to
100%, but may not encroach onto the public right-of- way without special
authorization from the owner of said right-of-way;
(c)   Eaves may encroach up to two feet; and
(d)   Porches and decks not exceeding 16 square feet in total area may encroach
up to four feet.
(B)   Side setbacks. A required side setback is measured at a right angle (90
degrees) from the side lot line to the nearest point of the foundation wall.
Chimneys, eaves, bay windows no more than eight feet in total length, and
garden windows may encroach no more than two feet into the required side
setback.
(C)   Rear setback. A required rear setback is measured at a right angle from
the rear setback line to the nearest point on the foundation wall. Eaves may
encroach no more than two feet, a deck or porch of no more than 16 square feet,
and total area may encroach no more than four feet.
153.48 OUTDOOR LIGHTING STANDARDS.
 
All outdoor lighting shall be downcast and shielded. No light trespass shall be
allowed, and no glare (direct sightline to an unshielded light source) shall be
visible from off-site. This includes all light sources such as freestanding
luminaires, building mounted lighting, and canopy lighting.
153.49 OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS.
 
(A)   Purpose: The purpose of the off-street parking requirements is to provide
the following
a.   Convenient and safe access to property,
b.   Alleviate hazards associated with access to traffic generating commercial
and industrial uses,
c.   Provide adequate and safe parking areas for residents and business
customers,
d.   Protect residential uses from the undesirable effects of abutting traffic
generating uses and parking areas, and
e.   Maintain the traffic carrying capacity of the street system serving
Boulder.
 
(B)   Definition: For the purpose of this title, an "off-street parking space"
consists of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening
doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street
or alley and maneuvering room.
 
(C)   When Required:
(1)   No building or structure may be erected, substantially altered, or its
use changed unless permanently maintained off-street parking and loading spaces
have been provided in accordance with the provisions of this title.
(2)   The provisions of this section, except where there is a change of use, do
not apply to any existing building or structure. Where a change of use involves
no additions or enlargements, there shall be provided as many of such spaces as
required by this title.
(3)   Whenever a building or structure constructed after the effective date of
this title is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of
housing units, seating capacity, or otherwise to create a need for an increase
in the number of existing parking spaces, additional parking spaces must be
provided on the basis of the enlargement or change; provided, whenever a
building or structure existing prior to the effective date of this title is
enlarged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more in floor area, number of
employees, number of housing units, seating capacity or otherwise, said
building or structure will then and thereafter comply with the full parking
requirements set forth herein.
 
(D)   Location and Design.
(1) Off-street parking as required by this chapter shall be located and
designed as follows:
i.   Single-family dwellings: On the same lot with the dwelling they are
required to serve.
ii.   Multifamily dwellings: On the same lot with the dwelling they are
required to serve.
iii.   Hospitals, sanitariums, apartments, rooming and boarding houses,
fraternity and sorority houses: Within 100 feet of the use they are required to
serve. iv. Commercial and industrial zones: Within 300 feet of the use they are
required to serve.
v.   All off-site parking areas must be accessible by a public street or alley.
vi.   All off-street parking spaces for residential units and commercial and
institutional uses shall be at least eight (8) feet wide and 20 feet long,
exclusive of access driveways, yards or ramps. Such spaces shall have a
vertical clearance of at least seven feet. vii. A plan of the proposed off-
street parking facility shall be submitted along with the application for a
zoning permit for the building the off-street parking is required to serve.
Said plan shall clearly indicate construction details, fencing and other
features which may be required by the zoning administrator. viii. Off-street
parking areas serving multi-family residential developments of more than ten
(10) units, commercial, industrial or institutional uses must comply with the
following provisions:
1.   Grading and drainage. Parking areas shall be graded and drainage
facilities installed to remove or retain surface run-off in a manner that does
not adversely affect adjacent properties, public streets or surface waters.
2.   Surfacing. Parking areas shall be surfaced with gravel or equivalent
material (three-quarter inch—1½ inches). Parking areas containing 20 or more
spaces shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other hard surface.
3.   Striping. Stalls in paved parking areas shall be marked with painted lines
not less than four inches wide.
 
(E)   Calculation of Off-Street Parking:
(1)   Off-Street Parking in the R- Residential and MU Mixed Use District: One
off-street parking space is required for each residential unit containing less
than ten (10) units. For example, each single-family residential unit must have
one (1) off-street parking space. A duplex must have two (2) off-street parking
spaces, a tri-plex must have three (3) off street parking spaces and so on for
the various types of residential developments and number of residential units.
The number of off-street parking spaces required by land use is outlined below
in Table 1:
 
Table 1 Parking Requirements
Residential Uses
Single family-Condominiums-             1.0 spaces per dwelling unit
Townhomes
Multifamily up to nine (9) residential  1.0 spaces per dwelling unit
units
Apartments (10) residential units or    1.0 spaces per dwelling unit
more
Bed and Breakfast Inns                  1.0 space per guest room
Short Term Rental (AirBnB-VRBO)         1.0 space per dwelling unit
Single-family residential unit less     0.5 space per dwelling unit
than 1,200 square feet in size.
Commercial and Institutional Uses
Automobile and machinery sales and      1.0 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor
service                                 area
Open sales area, trailer sales and      1.0 space per 1,500 sq. ft. of floor
rental                                  area
Business and professional offices,      1.0 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
banks
Bowling alley                           5.0 spaces per alley
Churches and other places of worship    1.0 space per four seats
Community or recreation center          1.0 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Convenience stores/gas station          4.0 spaces minimum
combination
Dancehall, skating rinks, court clubs   1.0 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Furniture, appliance, household and     3.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor
equipment sales                         area
Hospitals                               1.0 space per bed
                                       1.0 space per doctor
                                       0.5 space per employee
Libraries and museums                   1.0 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor
                                        area
Manufacturing and industrial uses       1.0 space per 1,000 sq. ft.
                                       or 0.75 space per employee
Medical and dental offices              1.0 space per 250 sq. ft., or
                                       1.0 spaces per doctor or dentist
                                       1.0 space per employee
Motels and hotels                       1.0 space per each guest room,
                                       1.0 space per employee on maximum shift
Mortuaries and funeral homes            1.0 space per four seats
Nursing, convalescent and rest homes    1.0 space per three beds
                                       1.0 space per employee on maximum shift
Restaurants and bars                    1.0 space per 100 sq. ft.
Restaurants: fast-food                  1.0 space per 100 sq. ft.
                                       1.0 space per employee on maximum shift
Retail stores                           1.0 space per 300 sq. ft.
Schools: Elementary, Middle             1.0 space per employee
                                       1.0 space per two classrooms
Schools: High School                    1.0 space per employee
                                       1.0 space per five students
Service stations, automobile repair and 1.0 space per 600 sq. ft.
services
Theatres, auditoriums, assembly halls   1.0 space per four seats
with fixed seats
Warehousing or storage buildings,       1.0 space per 300 ft. of office floor
freight terminals                       area
 
(F)   Handicap Accessible Parking Specific Standards
(1)   Accessible (handicapped) parking spaces, eight (8) feet wide and 20 feet
long shall be provided according to the Figure 1 and Table 2. Handicapped
parking spaces shall be clearly identified with a sign bearing the
international handicapped accessible symbol and marked "Reserved for
Handicapped."
(2)   Van accessible spaces. One out of each eight accessible spaces provided,
but at least one space in each parking facility, shall be van accessible.
(3)   Location. Accessible parking spaces shall be located so as to provide the
shortest accessible route to a primary building entrance.
(4)   Curb ramps and accessible routes. Curb ramps and accessible routes shall
be provided which allow unobstructed travel from an accessible parking space to
an accessible entrance. Parked vehicle overhangs shall not reduce the clear
width of an accessible route. Parking spaces and access aisles shall not exceed
2% grade in all directions.
 
 
                     Table 2
Total spaces in lot  Minimum number of ADA accessible spaces, with one van
                      accessible 
4—25                1
26—50               2
51—75               3
76—100              4
>100                  2 percent of total
 
Figure 1 Layout of Standard and Van Accessible Parking Spaces
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9f44937c21b6e548e4fc9b388fe480499534a454/
IMAGES/0-0-0-964_3983x4590.jpg] 
 
(G)   Maintenance of Multi-Family, Commercial and Institutional Parking Lots:
The owner of property used for parking must maintain such area in good
condition without potholes, accumulation of snow and remain free of trash and
other debris.
153.50 FENCING STANDARDS.
 
Fences and retaining walls are allowed as accessory structures in all zoning
districts, subject to zoning permits. The following standards must be met:
(A) Fencing - Retaining Wall.
(1)   Height; materials. In the R Residential District, no fence, hedge, or
freestanding wall (not part of a building) located within or bounding all of
the required lot setbacks, may exceed 72 inches (6-feet) in height. This
maximum fence height includes the height of a privacy screening fence located
on top of a deck. Allowable fencing materials and designs include:
(a)   Wood or vinyl (including PVC) picket or rail fencing;
(b)   Metal fencing;
(c)   Concrete block or wood timber retaining walls and
(d)   Other similar materials and designs as approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
(2)   Institutional security fencing. Open security fencing up to eight (8)
feet in height may be allowed by the Zoning Administrator for schools,
correctional facilities, and other public and quasi-public institutions when
necessary for the safety or restraint of the occupants thereof, without regard
to the setbacks specified in division (A)(1) above.
(3)   Obstruction at intersection. No portion of any fence shall pose a visual
obstruction at any street intersection. (See 153.51 of this chapter for
standards.)
(4)   Ornamental pedestrian entries. Ornamental pedestrian entries, such as
arches or arbors, shall not exceed ten feet in height.
(5)   Wire products. In the R Residential District and MU District, barbed
wire, razor wire, concertina wire, and similar wire products are not allowable
fencing materials.
(6)   Open security fencing. In the CB and GC Districts, for commercial storage
areas located inside or rear yards, open security fencing may be constructed up
to eight feet in height and may be topped with barbed wire. The barbed wire
etc. course is calculated as part of the allowable fence height.
(7)   Wildlife fences in excess of six feet. Any fence, or any portion of a
fence, used for keeping wildlife off of a property that is over 72 inches
in height (6-feet) must be made of a transparent material such as traditional
plastic mesh deer fence.
(8)   Maintenance. A zoning permit is not required for the repair and
maintenance of existing fencing where the repair and maintenance does not
change the height or footprint/location of the fence.
153.51 CORNER VISIBILITY.
 
(A)   Corner visibility triangle. Every street intersection shall have
associated with it a corner visibility triangle. This area shall be created by
extending the property lines based upon survey pins to an imaginary point in
the street where the lines intersect. From that point, 30 feet is measured back
along each line, then a line across both ends is drawn to close the triangle.
In most cases, this triangular area will include both public right-of-way and
private property adjacent to the right-of-way.
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9f44937c21b6e548e4fc9b388fe480499534a454/
IMAGES/0-0-0-971_4965x3750.jpg] 
(B)   Visibility standards. Within the corner visibility triangle, there shall
be no continuous obstructions between the heights of 30 inches and ten feet, as
measured from the adjacent road surface. This includes landscaping, fencing,
and structures of all kinds.
 
(C)   Applicability. This standard applies to streets of all functional
classifications but does not apply to intersections of a street and an alley.
153.52 MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT.
 
(A)   Parking and storage. Major recreational equipment shall not be parked or
stored on any City street right-of-way within the R-Residential or MU-Mixed Use
District for longer than a 14-day period (consecutive days). However, major
recreational equipment may be parked anywhere on a property except within the
front yard setback. A conditional use permit must be obtained in order to park
on any City street right-of-way within
the R-Residential or MU-Mixed Use District for a period longer than 14 days.
 
(B)   Use as living or sleeping quarters. A zoning permit must be obtained in
order to use a major recreational equipment for sleeping, living, housekeeping,
or any commercial purpose (including home-based business) and the equipment
must be parked or stored on private property and must not be located within the
front yard of a property. No major recreation equipment may be hooked up
directly to City water or sewer services. Use of major recreational equipment
as an accessory residential unit (ARU), or as guest quarters requires review
and approval under the process for conditional uses found in Section 153.36.
153.53 SIGNAGE.
The intent of this subchapter is to coordinate the physical dimensions of signs
to different land uses in the City’s zoning jurisdiction; to recognize
commercial communication requirements of all sectors of the business community;
to encourage the innovative use of design; to promote both renovation and
proper maintenance; to mitigate the impacts of commercial signs on the city’s
surrounding natural scenic beauty; to allow for special circumstances; to
ensure that signs are constructed and installed properly; and to protect the
public’s health, safety and general welfare.
(A)   Hazardous Signs and Sign Maintenance
a.   No sign permitted by this subchapter shall, due to its location, lighting,
size, intensity, or color create a hazard to the safe, efficient movement of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
b.   A sign as permitted by this subsection shall be maintained by the owner
and kept in good condition.
c.   In addition, all parts and supports shall be routinely painted and
repaired when in an unsafe, deteriorated or rotted condition.
d.   The surface of the ground under and about any freestanding sign shall be
kept free of weeds, rubbish, or flammable waste material.
e.   Any sign determined to be hazardous by the Zoning Administrator shall be
removed by the owner of the sign or be repaired or modified so that the
hazardous conditions no longer exists within 30 days of written notification of
the hazard unless otherwise specified.
 
(B)   Signs Permitted in All Districts.
The following signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts and shall not
require a zoning permit:
a.   Signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of the premises upon which the
sign is located;
b.   Legal notices, identification, information or directional signs erected or
required by government bodies;
c.   Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except
lettering, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights;
d.   Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking;
e.   Bulletin boards for churches, schools or other public, religious or
educational institutions;
f.   Signs advertising yard sales; and
g.   Political advertising signs.
 
(C)   Signs Permitted in all Mixed Use and Commercial Districts
Signage is permitted without a zoning permit if the following standards are
met.
a.   No freestanding sign shall be set nearer to the lot line adjacent to a
street than the required minimum setback for the principal uses permitted in
the zoning district.
b.   No sign that overhangs the public right-of-way shall be closer than two
and one-half feet from the curb or curb line.
c.   No sign that overhangs the public right-of-way shall be less than eight
(8) feet from the surface of the right-of-way to the bottom of the sign.
d.   No on-site sign in the Central Business District shall exceed 30 feet in
height as measured from either the grade at the sign or at the nearest roadway,
whichever is greater.
e.   No on-site sign in the General Commercial shall exceed 40 feet in height
as measured from either the grade at the sign or at the nearest roadway,
whichever is greater.
f.   No on-site sign in the Mixed-Use District shall exceed 10 feet in height
as measured from either the grade at the sign or the nearest roadway, whichever
is greater.
g.   Signs for home occupation must meet the standards in Section 153.44.
h.   All signs located within the right of way managed by the Montana
Department of Transportation (MDT) shall obtain the applicable permit from MDT.
i.   Any signage that does not meet these standards requires review under the
process for a conditional use prior to installation as identified in Section
153.36.
153.54 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD).
(A) Planned Unit Developments (PUD).
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow, with adequate review,
flexibility in the design of developments that do at least three (3) of the
following:
(1)   Encourage development with mixed uses, particularly a variety of housing
types and densities;
(2)   Create or preserve usable open space and recreation areas;
(3)   Preserve the natural characteristics of the land including topography,
native vegetation and scenic views;
(4)   Avoid construction in unsuitable areas;
(5)   Encourage creativity in design, including flexibility in residential
siting to achieve energy conservation;
(6)   Allow efficient provision of streets, utilities and other services; and
(7)   Provide lower-cost housing affordable by low- and moderate-income
families within the community.
b.   Definition. A Planned Unit Development (PUD) is a land development project
designed and planned as a single entity under a plan that offers a variety of
land uses, housing types and densities, and design features in addition to
those allowed by right or condition in the zoning district.
c.   Application and review.
(1)   Any person requesting approval of a planned unit development shall submit
an application for conditional use under the provisions of 153.36. The
application shall be accompanied by the required review fees and a PUD plan,
described below.
(2)   The PUD plan shall provide the following:
i.   A vicinity map showing the location of the site in relationship to
surrounding areas and showing the existing land uses and zoning of the site and
surrounding properties;
ii.   A map drawn to approximate scale showing: iii. Location, types and
heights of existing and proposed buildings and other structures, including
density and number of dwelling units or other uses of each structure;
iv.   Existing and proposed streets, alleys, bikeways, pedestrian walkways and
vehicle circulation patterns, off-street parking areas;
v.   Locations, dimensions and sizes of common and open space areas and those
that will be left in a natural state; and
vi.   Physical features such as streams, ponds, canals, rights-of-way,
utilities.
(3)   A written statement describing:
i.   A schedule for installing improvements, developing lots and constructing
structures;
ii.   Proposed types of ownership of dwelling units and other uses, and
restrictive covenants, if any; and
iii.   Means of providing maintenance of common facilities and open space areas
iv.   A PUD will be reviewed and approved under the procedures for conditional
uses pursuant to Section 153.36. Where the proposed PUD is subject to review as
a subdivision under the State Subdivision and Platting Act, the Zoning
Commission and Planning Board shall hold joint and concurrent review, including
a joint public hearing(s). Notice of each hearing shall be given in the manner
prescribed by this chapter and the municipality’s subdivision regulations.
v.   A PUD must conform to the conditions prescribed by the Zoning Commission
pursuant to Section 153.36 Conditional Uses.
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
      
12.   MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.17   Boulder boundary map
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles,
chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the “Boulder City
Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances” or
“code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or subsection.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning, application
or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in
law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY. The City of Boulder, Montana.
      CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the City Council.
      COUNCIL. The City Council.
      COUNTY. Jefferson County.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver and bodies politic. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing or other modes of
representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person, or the person’s
mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section is severable.
If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
   (D)   The repeal of a section or amendment stating that the provisions of a
chapter, subchapter or section are severable as provided in division (B) above
does not affect the operation of division (B) with respect to that chapter,
subchapter or section.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this municipality
exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated; on the effective date of that ordinance or following the
effective date, the rights, powers, duties or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties,
liabilities, powers and rights were transferred.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or
law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is
not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall
not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under
the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section
shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any
proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture or
liability.
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
         (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed
1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
         (M.C.A. § 2-6-1012)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
            This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection
or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
         Statutory reference:
            Inspection of public records, see M.C.A. §§ 2-6-1012 et seq.
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.17 BOULDER BOUNDARY MAP.
   (A)   The city shall include the land depicted within the corporate limits
of the city shown on the “Official Boundary Map of Boulder, Montana.”
   (B)   The “Official Boundary Map of Boulder, Montana,” and all notations,
references and other information shown on the map are hereby incorporated by
reference and made a part of this section.
   (C)   The official boundary map shall be kept in City Hall, and shall
demonstrate and depict the current status of boundaries of the city
jurisdictional area.
   (D)   The official boundary map shall bear the signature of the Mayor,
attested by the City Clerk-Treasurer, and the date of adoption of this section.
   (E)   The official boundary map shall bear the seal of the city under the
following words “This is to certify that this is the official boundary map of
Boulder, Montana, referred to in Ordinance Number 2008-02 of the City of
Boulder, Montana.”
   (F)   Whenever any changes are made to city boundaries, those changes
approved by the City Council shall be promptly entered on the official boundary
map, and a signed and dated certification attached to the map.
   (G)   No changes of any nature shall be made to the official boundary map
without approval of the Mayor and City Council.
   (H)   A copy of the official boundary map, duly certified by the City Clerk,
shall be filed in the office of the Clerk and Recorder. Each change to the
official boundary map adopted by the Mayor and City Council, duly certified by
the City Clerk, shall likewise be filed in the office of the Clerk and
Recorder.
   (I)   In the event that the official boundary map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret, the City Council may by resolution
adopt a new official boundary map which shall supersede the prior official
boundary map. The new official boundary map may correct drafting or other
errors or omissions in the prior map, but no such corrections shall have the
effect of amending the original official boundary map or any subsequent
amendment thereof. The new map shall be certified in the same manner as the
original official boundary map, noting that it supersedes the prior map.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 3-10-2008)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent violations,
except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and parking.
   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Seal
§ 11.01 SEAL.
   A seal in a circular form with the words “Town of Boulder, Montana” on the
outer circle, and in the interior and center of said circle, the words
“Jefferson County, 1911,” with a figure of a boulder and cedar tree, shall be
the seal of the city, to be used in all cases in which, by the laws and customs
of nations, it is necessary to use a seal by a corporation.
(Ord. 4, passed 6-2-1911)
CHAPTER 12: MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
Section
   
12.01   Definitions
   
12.02   Municipal infractions; penalties
   
12.03   Civil citations; service and requirements
   
12.04   Court proceedings
   
12.05   Disposition following judgment
   
12.06   Appeals following judgment
   
12.07   Issuance of civil citations not grounds for further legal action
   
12.08   Environmental actions
§ 12.01 DEFINITIONS.
   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. Any violation of the Boulder City Code, as amended,
which has been specifically declared to be a Municipal Infraction under
provisions of the Boulder City Code ("Code"); or whenever in any provision of
the Code or other ordinance of the City any act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful, or whenever in any such provision or ordinance the
doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise provided, any person, upon
conviction for the violation of any such provision of this code or ordinances,
shall be liable of a Municipal Infraction and punished as set forth herein.
   OFFICER. The Mayor, the City Administrator, the City Clerk, the City
Attorney, Sheriff Deputy, or any employee or official authorized to enforce
provisions of the Boulder City Code, as amended.
   PERSON. Any natural persons, corporations, trusts, partnerships,
incorporated or unincorporated associations, and any other legal entity.
   REPEAT VIOLATION. A recurring violation of the same section of the Boulder
City Code. Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist
constitutes a separate and distinct infraction.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 12.02 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   A Municipal Infraction is a civil offense and for a proven violation,
a civil penalty may be imposed.
   (B)   For a first violation, a civil penalty of not more than $300 shall be
imposed.
   (C)   For each repeat violation, a civil penalty not to exceed $500 shall be
imposed.
   (D)   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this Article does not
preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same
action.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 12.03 CIVIL CITATIONS; SERVICE AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any Officer may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a
Municipal Infraction.
   (B)   The citation may be served on the alleged violator by any one of the
following methods:
      (1)   Personal service; or
      (2)   By certified mail addressed to the defendant at the defendant's
last known mailing address, return receipt requested; or
      (3)   By publication, in the manner described in Rule 4D(5) of the
Montana Rules of Civil Procedure.
   (C)   A copy of the citation must be retained by the issuing officer and one
copy be sent to or filed with the clerk of the Boulder Municipal Court.
   (D)   The citation shall serve as notification that a Municipal Infraction
has been committed and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the defendant;
      (2)   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the
officer issuing the citation;
      (3)   The location and time of the infraction;
      (4)   The amount of the civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative
relief sought, or both;
      (5)   The manner, location and time in which the penalty may be paid;
      (6)   The time and place of court appearance; and
      (7)   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 12.04 COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   If the total amount of civil penalties does not exceed $3,000, the
matter shall be tried before the Municipal Court Judge in the same manner as a
small claim. If the total amount of civil penalties assessed exceeds $3,000,
the matter must be tried before a District Court Judge.
   (B)   The City has the burden of proof that the Municipal Infraction
occurred and that the defendant committed the infraction. The proof must be by
clear and convincing evidence.
   (C)   The court shall ensure that the defendant has received a copy of the
charges, and that the defendant understands the charges. The defendant may
question all witnesses who appear for the municipality and produce evidence or
witnesses on the defendant's behalf.
   (D)   The defendant may be represented by counsel of the defendant's own
choosing and at the defendant's own expense.
   (E)   The defendant may answer by admitting or denying the infraction.
   (F)   If a municipal infraction is proven, the court shall enter judgment
against the defendant. If the infraction is not proven, the court shall dismiss
the charges.
   (G)   If the person named in the citation is shown to have been served with
the civil citation in the proper manner and, without good cause, fails to
appear in response to the citation, judgment shall be entered against the
person by the court.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 12.05 DISPOSITION FOLLOWING JUDGMENT.
   (A)   A person against whom judgment is entered shall pay court costs and
fees as in small claims court under Title 25, Chapter 35 of the Montana Code
Annotated in addition to the penalties imposed by the court. If the action is
dismissed by the court, the City is liable for the court costs and court fees.
   (B)   All penalties and forfeitures collected by the court for Municipal
Infractions shall be remitted to the City in the same manner as fines and
forfeitures collected for criminal offenses.
   (C)   In addition to the imposition of civil penalties authorized by law
against a defendant, the City may seek alternative relief from the court in the
same action. Alternative relief may consist of any of the following:
      (1)   Direct that payment of the civil penalty be suspended or deferred
under conditions imposed by the court; or
      (2)   Order the defendant to abate or cease the violation; or
      (3)   Authorize the City to abate or correct the violation; or
      (4)   Order the City's costs for abatement or correction of the violation
be entered as a judgment against the defendant or assessed against the property
where the violation occurred, or both.
         (a)   The amount of costs imposed by Municipal Court shall not exceed
the jurisdictional amount for a money judgment in a civil action under section
3-11-103, Montana Code Annotated.
         (b)   If the City seeks abatement or correction costs in excess of the
jurisdictional limit provided in division (C)(4)(a) above, the matter shall be
referred to District Court for hearing and entry of an appropriate order. The
procedure for hearing in the District Court shall be the same procedure as that
for a small claims appealed under section 25-35-803, Montana Code Annotated.
   (D)   A defendant who willfully violates the terms of an order imposed by
the court is guilty of contempt.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 12.06 APPEALS FOLLOWING JUDGMENT.
   (A)   The defendant or the City may file a motion for a new trial or may
appeal the decision to District Court.
   (B)   A factual determination may by the trial court, supported by
substantial evidence as shown on the record, is binding for purposes of appeal
relating to the violation at issue, but is not admissible or binding as to any
future violations for the same or similar ordinance provision by the same
defendant.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 12.07 ISSUANCE OF CIVIL CITATIONS NOT GROUNDS FOR FURTHER LEGAL ACTION.
   Except for willful or wanton misconduct on the part of the City, the
issuance of a civil citation for a municipal infraction or the ensuing court
proceedings do not provide an action for false arrest, false imprisonment, or
malicious prosecution.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 12.08 ENVIRONMENTAL ACTIONS.
   An action brought by the City for an environmental violation does not
preclude, and is in addition to, any other enforcement action that may be
brought under state law.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 5-19-2025)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   EMPLOYEES AND OFFICIALS
      
32.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   FEES, FUNDS AND FINANCE
      
34.   POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
30.01   Ward descriptions
   
30.02   Town changed to city
   
30.03   National Incident Management System
   
30.04   Hazard mitigation plan
   
30.05   Fire Department
   
30.06   State Criminal Codes; police; judges
   
30.07   Police; authority to arrest
§ 30.01 WARD DESCRIPTIONS.
   (A)   Boundary of First Ward. The First Ward shall be described as follows:
all that portion of the city being easterly of the following described line:
beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of Lenore Lane with
the official described limits; thence following said Lenore Lane centerline
westerly to the intersection with the centerline of Monroe Street; thence
following said Monroe Street centerline southerly to the north bank of the
Boulder River, south of the south boundary of Block G of D.G. Warners Addition
to Boulder, Document 14-A, records of the county; thence following said north
bank southeasterly, remaining south of the south boundaries of Block G and
Block 40 of said D.G. Warners Addition, to the intersection with the centerline
of Montana Highway 69; thence following said Montana Highway 69 centerline
southerly to the intersection with the south limits line.
   (B)   Boundary of Second Ward. The Second Ward shall be described as
follows: all that portion of the city being westerly of the following described
line: beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of Lenore Lane
with the official described limits; thence following said Lenore Lane
centerline westerly to the intersection with the centerline of Monroe Street;
thence following said Monroe Street centerline southerly to the north bank of
the Boulder River, south of the south boundary of Block G of D.G. Warners
Addition to Boulder, Document 14-A, records of the county; thence following
said north bank southeasterly, remaining south of the south boundaries of Block
G and Block 40 of said D.G. Warners Addition, to the intersection with the
centerline of Montana Highway 69; thence following said Montana Highway 69
centerline southerly to the intersection with the south limits line.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 9-16-2019)
§ 30.02 TOWN CHANGED TO CITY.
   (A)   The town is advanced to a city of the third class.
   (B)   The city shall henceforth be called the “City of Boulder.”
   (C)   All officers of the city, holding office at the time of this section,
shall retain their offices as “city” officers through the durations of their
respective terms.
(Res. passed 10-22-2001)
§ 30.03 NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.
   The City Council hereby adopts the National Incident Management System.
(Res. 2007-05, passed 10-23-2006)
§ 30.04 HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN.
   The City Council hereby adopts the Hazard Mitigation Plan dated September,
2011.
(Res. 2012-04, passed 12-7-2011)
§ 30.05 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The City Council shall have the power to establish a Fire Department, and
prescribe and regulate its duties to maintain a fire alarm telegraph, to erect
engine, hose and hook-and-ladder houses, and provide engines and other
implements and apparatus for the extinguishing of fire.
(Ord. 10, passed 6-2-1911)
§ 30.06 STATE CRIMINAL CODES; POLICE; JUDGES.
   The criminal laws, statutes and code of the state as existing in the Montana
Codes Annotated of 1979, insofar as the same are not in conflict with the
ordinances of the city, and so far as Police Courts and Police Judges have
jurisdiction therein, are hereby adopted and declared to be the laws of the
city, and shall have the same force and effect in all respects the same as if
the same were set forth and separately passed and approved by the City Council
and Mayor as prescribed by law.
(Ord. 122, passed 10-27-1980)
§ 30.07 POLICE; AUTHORITY TO ARREST.
   (A)   The Chief of Police or any police officer is hereby authorized to make
the arrest of any person within the city limits who is accused or charged with
any crime or any offense against the laws of the state or the laws of the city,
either with or without a warrant.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or any police officer hereby further is authorized
to make the arrest of any person who is accused or charged with such crime
within five miles of the city limits either with or without a warrant.
(Ord. 2007-02, passed 1-8-2007)
CHAPTER 31: EMPLOYEES AND OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.01   Chief Engineer of the Fire Department
   
31.02   Police Judge
   
31.03   City Attorney
   
31.04   Indemnification of officers and employees
   
31.05   City Administrator
   
31.06   Employment Policy Manual
§ 31.01 CHIEF ENGINEER OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The Mayor shall nominate, and by and with the consent of the Council, shall
appoint a Chief Engineer of the Fire Department in and for the city, whose duty
it shall be to manage and control the fire engines and apparatus furnished by
the city for the extinguishing and the prevention of fires, to superintend and
direct all fire companies, and to examine and inspect all buildings, chimneys,
flues and boilers, and other things within the city, and require the same to be
put in a safe condition or removed, if liable to cause fire.
(Ord. 9, passed 6-2-1911)
§ 31.02 POLICE JUDGE.
   The Council may designate a Justice of the Peace in which the city is
situated, to act as Police Judge, and the Justice of the Peace so designated,
must act as a Police Judge in all cases arising out of a violation of
ordinances where the city is a party, and he or she shall do and perform such
other duties as are provided in the Political Code, and as may from time to
time be enjoined upon him or her by ordinance or order of the Council.
(Ord. 6, passed 6-2-1911)
§ 31.03 CITY ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The Mayor shall nominate and by and with the consent of the City
Council, shall appoint a duly licensed and practicing attorney residing in the
city, as the City Attorney.
   (B)   The said City Attorney shall continue as such until he or she resigns
or is removed by the City Council.
   (C)   The said City Attorney shall hold office at the pleasure of the City
Council and may be removed by that body at any time by an affirmative vote of a
majority of the members of said Council.
   (D)   The said City Attorney shall be paid a salary of $240 per year for his
or her services which sum or any part thereof shall be payable from whatever
money is collected in the way of fines imposed and paid as a penalty for the
violation of any of the ordinances of the city; and in the event that there is
not sufficient money so collected in any year to pay said salary then and in
that event any unpaid balance due the City Attorney as of December 31 of any
year shall cease to be a charge against the city.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to represent the city in all
matters of a legal character both civil and criminal at all times he or she is
appointed to said office. He or she shall sit with the City Council in all
regular meetings and at such special meetings of which he or she is duly
notified and aid and assist the City Council in all matters wherein he or she
can so do.
   (F)   The annual salary of the attorney for the city shall be a sum
commensurate with the professional services rendered by said attorney on a fee
for service basis in accordance with the usual charges made for like services
by members of the State Bar Association.
(Ord. 61, passed 4-29-1937; Ord. passed 5-29-1973)
§ 31.04 INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   In any civil action brought against any public official or employee of the
city alleging a violation of Initiative 75, the city shall defend the action on
behalf of the official or employee and indemnify the official or employee for
any liability resulting from the alleged violation of Initiative 75.
(Ord. 169, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 31.05 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Position of City Administrator. There is a position of City
Administrator in the city.
   (B)   Scope of position. The scope of the position of City Administrator in
the city is described as follows: The city provides governmental and
proprietary services to an approximate 1,400-person community. The City
Administrator is responsible for, at the direction of the Mayor and Council,
for the management and direction of the operations of all city departments.
   (C)   Appointment. The City Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the consent of the City Council. This position shall be chosen by the
Mayor on the basis of his or her qualifications with special reference to his
or her actual experience and knowledge in respect to the duties of his or her
office hereinafter set forth.
   (D)   Compensation. The compensation of the City Administrator shall be
fixed by the City Council of the city and the City Administrator shall be an
exempt position for purposes of compensation. The compensation fixed may be
apportioned between the several departmental budgets as the City Council may
direct.
   (E)   Duties. The duties of the City Administrator include, but are not
limited to:
      (1)   General direction and management of the following departments:
Public Works, including Municipal Utility Operations, Police, Fire, Ambulance
and City Administration;
      (2)   Preparation and management of the annual budget for all funds;
      (3)   Financial accounting for all funds;
      (4)   Payroll and associated payroll liabilities;
      (5)   Mid- and long-range planning for all city operations in conjunction
with the Mayor and Council;
      (6)   Development and Implementation of city policy in conjunction with
the Mayor and Council;
      (7)   Coordinate and assist in the development of municipal law in
conjunction with the Mayor, City Council and City Attorney;
      (8)   Explain and interpret municipal law and city policy to the public
in response to requests and assist the public in all aspects;
      (9)   Attend all regular and special City Council meetings: oversees or
performs as accurate recording of the proceedings, preparation of the minutes,
proper legislative terminology and recording, indexing and filing for the
public record; distributes information as requested;
      (10)   Maintenance of the administrative and public works information and
technology network and the associated computers and telemetry system;
      (11)   Direct and manage accounts payable and receivable;
      (12)   To present at the first or second regular meeting of each month to
the City Council, a full and detailed statement of the amounts of money
belonging to the city, received by him or her and disbursed during the
preceding month and the state of each particular fund, which statement must be
verified by his or her oath;
      (13)   Share duties with the City Clerk serving as custodian of official
city records and public documents and other documents and other records,
requiring such certification; seals and attests by signature to ordinances,
resolutions, contracts, easements, deeds, bonds or other documents requiring
city certification; catalogs and files all city records;
      (14)   To render at any time an account to the Council showing the money
on hand and the condition of the treasury;
      (15)   Responsible annually to submit to the City Council at its last
meeting prior to June 1, a detailed account of all receipts and expenditures
during the past fiscal year and an abstract thereof must be published in the
official newspaper;
      (16)   To oversee the pay out, in the order which they are registered,
all warrants presented for payment when there are funds in the treasury to pay
the same;
      (17)   To deposit all moneys in his or her possession and under his or
her control, excepting such as may be required for current business, in a
solvent bank or banks located in such city, subject to national supervision or
state examination as the Council shall designate, and no other. All moneys
deposited shall require a two-party check, i.e., City Clerk and City
Administrator;
      (18)   To attend all meetings of the Council, to record and sign the
proceedings thereof and all ordinances, resolutions and contracts passed,
adopted or entered into, and to sign, number and keep a record of all licenses,
commissions or permits granted or authorized by the Council;
      (19)   To record all ordinances and resolutions passed and adopted by the
Council;
      (20)   To enter in a book record kept for that purpose, the date, amount
and the person in whose favor and for what purpose warrants are drawn upon the
city treasury;
      (21)   To countersign and cause to be published or posted, as provided by
law, all ordinances and resolutions passed or adopted by the Council;
      (22)   To file and keep all records, books, papers or property belonging
to the city and to deliver the same to his or her successor when qualified;
      (23)   Shares duties with the City Clerk for preparing and processing
financial statements as required by state law;
      (24)   The City Administrator shall have general administrative powers
over all streets and alleys, waterworks, wastewater collection and disposal
facilities street lighting, building permits, public parks and the various
departments of the city heretofore created and to administer such public works.
The City Administrator may head one or more departments as the City Council may
direct, and shall at all times be responsible for coordination, administration
and supervision of all departments charged with maintaining such public works.
To that end, he or she have power and shall be required to:
         (a)   Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies and equipment
for which funds are provided in the budget, and to review all claims submitted
relating to activities of departments under his or her jurisdiction and
recommend appropriate action thereon to the City Council;
         (b)   Assist department heads with preparing a preliminary budget for
all departments under his or her jurisdiction and be responsible for its
administration after adoption;
         (c)   Supervise the department heads in keeping proper inventory
records of city property chargeable to the various departments; and in keeping
records of repairs and maintenance of city equipment and public works;
         (d)   Enters all inventories into the valuations system and property
affixes a “Property of the City” tag to all property purchased; and
         (e)   Recommend to the Mayor and Council members those persons to be
employed by the departments under his or her jurisdiction, and the suspension
or removal of such employees in accordance with city policy.
      (25)   Coordinate and direct activities of departments under his or her
jurisdiction, including the temporary shifting of employees of one department
to another as the needs of the various departments dictate, and the division of
an employee’s services between two or more departments;
      (26)   Submit monthly reports to the Council of the various departments’
activities at the first regularly scheduled Council meeting of the month
including but not limited to reports from the City Clerk, police report,
ambulance report, Fire Department report and the public works report;
      (27)   Advise the Council of the financial condition and future needs of
the departments and make such recommendations as he or she may deem advisable;
      (28)   Investigate all complaints relating to departmental activities
under his or her jurisdiction and report such complaints to the Mayor according
to city policy;
      (29)   Inspect and supervise, in cooperation with, and under the
direction of the City Engineer and/or acting City Engineer, all construction
and maintenance work performed pursuant to contracts awarded by the city;
      (30)   Perform job evaluations on all city department heads and monitor
compliance for all staff; and
      (31)   Perform such other duties as the City Council may prescribe.
   (F)   Position qualifications. To be appointed City Administrator, a person
must have the following qualifications:
      (1)   Extensive experience in the management and direction of operations,
budgeting and personnel management;
      (2)   A strong financial and accounting background preferably with a
working knowledge of governmental accounting;
      (3)   A strong background in municipal public works;
      (4)   Computer and network proficiency with a good working knowledge of
accounting and payroll programs, preferably Black Mountain Software; and
Microsoft Office word processing and spreadsheet applications; and
      (5)   Strong organizational and planning skills.
   (G)   Supervision exercised. The City Administrator is responsible for the
direct and indirect supervision of all city employees.
   (H)   Supervision received. The City Administrator is supervised and
directed by the Mayor and City Council.
   (I)   Selections guidelines. Formal application, rating of education and
experience, oral interview and reference check and job related tests may be
required.
   (J)   Illustrative information. The duties listed above are intended only as
an illustration of the various types of work that may be performed. The
omission of specific statements of duties does not exclude them from the
position if the work is similar, related or a logical assignment to the
position.
   (K)   No agreement. The job description set forth above does not constitute
an employment agreement between the employer and employee and is subject to
change by the employer as the needs of the employer and requirements of the job
change.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 2-25-2008)
§ 31.06 EMPLOYMENT POLICY MANUAL.
   (A)   Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the “Employment
Policy Manual Ordinance of the City of Boulder, Montana.”
   (B)   Compliance required. All persons applying for, maintaining employment
or seeking to grieve issues of employment with the city shall comply with the
policies and procedures set forth in said Manual.
   (C)   Incorporation herein. The provisions of the Employment Policy Manual
attached to the document codified herein are incorporated in this section.
   (D)   Interpretation, conflict with other laws. In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this section shall be held to be requirements of
applying for, maintaining employment or seeking to grieve issues of employment
with the city. Whenever the requirements of this section are at variance with
the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or
ordinances, the more restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall
govern.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 10-17-2016)
CHAPTER 32: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
32.01   Council; meetings
   
32.02   Board of Health
   
32.03   Study Commission
   
32.04   Planning Board
   
32.05   Zoning Commission
   
32.06   Tree Advisory Board
 
   
32.99   Penalty
§ 32.01 COUNCIL; MEETINGS.
   The Council shall hold its stated meetings for the transaction of municipal
business on the third Monday of each month at the hour of 6:30 p.m. or at such
other hour as may be fixed by resolution. If a regular Monday meeting falls on
a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held the next day on a Tuesday. Special
meetings may be called by the Mayor, or any two Aldermen, at any time. The City
Administrator or Clerk, on their requisition, must give reasonable notice
thereof, in writing, to all the members of the Council present in the city.
(Ord. 2009-01, passed 10-14-2008)
§ 32.02 BOARD OF HEALTH.
   (A)   There be and is hereby created a Board of Health in and for the city.
Such Board of Health shall consist of the Mayor, the Sanitary Committee of the
Council and a regularly licensed and practicing physician residing within the
city, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the Council, and
who shall be designated as Secretary of the Board of Health and Health Officer;
who shall serve for one year and without compensation.
   (B)   The said Board of Health shall exercise a general supervision over the
health and general cleanliness of the city, and is hereby given full power to
take all necessary and proper steps to ensure the good health and cleanliness
of the city. It shall have full power to prevent the introduction of all
infectious and contagious diseases into the city; to remove to a place provided
for that purpose all persons suffering from infectious or contagious diseases
when, in its judgment, such removal is necessary.
   (C)   The Board of Health is thereby given power and authority to adopt such
rules and regulations, and to do all acts which may be necessary for the
promotion of health, and to prevent the spread of infectious or contagious
diseases within the city.
   (D)   The Health Officer shall visit and examine, or cause to be visited and
examined, every side person who shall be reported as sick with any contagious
or infectious disease, and such person, if necessary, shall be removed to the
pest house, or other place provided for persons sick with contagious or
infectious diseases; and when so removed, provide him or her with suitable
nurses, medical attendance and medicine. If a person so dealt with is unable to
pay the expense thereof, it shall be borne by the city or employee of any
restaurant, butcher shop, hotel or boarding home shall be required to make
provisions for and to remove all garbage swill, slope or other refuse matter
daily from their places and shall not be permitted to place, throw or deposit
the same in any cesspool, privy or vault in the city, unless such cess pool or
vault has been provided for the public use and place of deposit thereof, by the
City Council.
   (E)   It shall require a two-thirds vote of the Council to change any order
or act of the Board of Health.
(Ord. 16, passed 6-2-1911) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.03 STUDY COMMISSION.
   (A)   Pursuant to M.C.A. § 16-5103, the city’s Local Study Commission is
established.
   (B)   The Study Commission shall consist of three members to be nominated
and elected as provided in M.C.A. § 16-5107.
(Res. 89, passed 5-21-1974)
§ 32.04 PLANNING BOARD.
   The city will form a City Planning Board in accordance with M.C.A. §§ 76-1-
101 and 76-1-221. The City Council intends to direct the Planning Board, once
formulated, to begin the process of formulating a growth policy for the city,
and other tasks as authorized by law.
(Ord. 2003-02, passed 1-27-2003)
§ 32.05 ZONING COMMISSION.
   The City Planning Board is hereby appointed as the City Zoning Commission
and to carry out its duties as set forth in §
153.09, specifically:
   (A)   Review proposals and make recommendations to the City Council
regarding proposals for the amendment of the zoning ordinance and the official
zoning map; and
   (B)   Review and approve applications for conditional use permits under the
procedures set forth in §
153.11.
(Res. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 32.06 TREE ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Title and purpose.
      (1)   This section shall be known as the “Tree Ordinance.”
      (2)   The purpose of this section is to establish a Tree Board. This
section does not address tree planting on private land.
   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. When not inconsistent with the content, words used in the present
tense include future, words in plural include the singular and words in the
singular include plural. The word “shall” is mandatory and not merely
directory.
      CITY. The City of Boulder, Jefferson County, Montana.
      PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
of any kind.
   (C)   Establishment of a Tree Board.
      (1)   Creation of Tree Board. 
         (a)   There shall be created a Board to be known as “Tree Board”
composed of five citizens of the city. All five members shall be appointed by
the City Council. The Board is an advisory board which will provide advice and
information regarding trees to the Mayor, City Council and city staff.
         (b)   All members of the Tree Board shall serve without pay. Committee
members shall be appointed as follows: Three for three years and two for two
years and serve until their successors are duly appointed and approved by the
City Council. The Tree Board shall select a Chairperson and Secretary from
among the members of the Board.
      (2)   Duties of the Tree Board. 
         (a)   The duties of the Tree Board shall be to study the problems,
determine the needs and provide recommendations to the city, and establishing a
tree planting and maintenance program.
         (b)   Other duties shall be to assist the properly constituted
officials of the city, as well as the Council and citizens of the city in the
dissemination of news and information regarding the selection, planting,
maintenance and removal of trees within the corporate limits, and to make such
recommendations from time to time to the City Council, as to desirable
legislation concerning the tree program and activities for the city. The Tree
Board shall provide regular and special meetings at which the subject of trees
insofar as it relates to the city may be discussed by the members of the Board,
officers and personnel of the city, and all others interested in the tree
program.
      (3)   Adoption of rules. Within a reasonable time after the appointment
of said Board and the approval of the members thereof, upon the call of the
Chairperson, said Tree Board shall meet and organize such other officers and
committees as may be appropriate. The said Tree Board shall then provide for
the adoption of rules and procedures and for the holding of regular and special
meetings as said Tree Board shall deem advisable and necessary in order to
perform the duties set forth.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-18-2011)
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person or persons violating any provision, clause or part of §
32.02, or who shall refuse to obey and carry out the orders of the Board of
Health or Health Officer, or shall in any way interfere with or prevent the
said Officer or Board from carrying out any of the provisions of §
32.02, or shall in any way be guilty of a violation of any rule or regulation
made by the said Board of Health shall, on conviction, be fined in any sum not
exceeding $100 for each offense, and costs of prosecution.
(Ord. 16, passed 6-2-1911)
CHAPTER 33: FEES, FUNDS AND FINANCE
Section
Fees and Charges; Taxes
   
33.01   Fees for record searches
Financing and Funds
   
33.15   Distributing of revenues
   
33.16   Bridge Fund
   
33.17   Capital Improvement Fund
FEES AND CHARGES; TAXES
§ 33.01 FEES FOR RECORD SEARCHES.
   (A)   The City Council adopts the following list of fees that shall be
implemented effective February 19, 2019, for City Court:
 
Certified copies                 $0.75 per page
Civil forms self-help packet     $7.50 per case
Copy costs                       $0.50 per page
Electronic reports or statistics $10, plus copy fee per page
Fax fee                          $2 for first page and $1 per page thereafter
Records check                    $20 per records check
Redacted copies                  $1 per page
 
   (B)   (1)   Any postage, shipping fees or retrieval from long-term storage
will be assessed at actual cost and if the requestor asks for those records to
be mailed or shipped to the requestor those actual costs will also be charged.
      (2)   Fees are due and payable at the time of all requests.
      (3)   All fees collected by the City Court shall be deposited in revenue
source 1000-101000-351030 City Court fines and forfeitures.
(Res. 2019-08, passed 3-19-2019)
FINANCING AND FUNDS
§ 33.15 DISTRIBUTING OF REVENUES.
   (A)   All moneys received by the city from taxes levied for municipal and
administrative purposes, from liquor licenses and from each and every license
of every name, description and kind, granted by the said city, and the amounts
of all fines and penalties received for the violation of ordinances and all
moneys now on hand, not otherwise appropriated, and all other moneys not
designated by law for any other fund, are hereby set aside for the current
expenses of the said city, and are hereby placed in the respective funds
hereinafter created, named and designated.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer upon the payment of any
moneys into the city treasury from any of the sources set out in division (A)
above, to place the same aside in the fund hereinafter designated, which said
moneys are to be used solely in the payment of warrants drawn upon the said
respective funds.
   (C)   The General Fund of the said city shall consist of all moneys received
from taxes levied for the current fiscal year to defray the expenses of the
Executive Department of the said city, and of all moneys received by the said
city from liquor licenses, and from each and every license of every name,
description and kind granted by the said city, and of all such other moneys as
may from time to time bo transferred to the said fund by resolution of the City
Council.
   (D)   The Police Fund of the said city shall consist of all moneys received
from taxes levied for the current fiscal year to defray the expenses of the
Police Department of the said city, and of all moneys received by the said city
as fines and penalties for the violation of ordinances, and of all such other
moneys as may from time to time be transferred to said fund by resolution of
the City Council.
   (E)   The Fire Fund of the said city shall consist of all moneys received
for taxes levied for the current fiscal year to defray the expenses of the Fire
Department of the said city, and all of such other moneys as may from time to
time be transferred to the said fund by resolution of the City Council.
   (F)   The Street Fund of the said city shall consist of all moneys received
from taxes levied for the current fiscal year to defray the expenses of the
Street Department of the said city, and of all moneys received by the said city
from persons liable for the road poll taxes, and of all such other moneys as my
from time to time be transferred to the said fund by resolution of the City
Council.
   (G)   The Garbage Fund of the said city shall consist of all moneys received
for taxes levied for the current fiscal year to provide for the removal, of
garbage in said city and of all such other moneys as may from time to time be
transferred to the said fund by resolution of the City Council.
   (H)   The Light Fund of the said city shall consist of all moneys received
for taxes for the current fiscal year to defray the expenses of lighting the
streets and public buildings of the said city.
   (I)   The Contingent Fund of the said city shall consist of all moneys
received for taxes levied for the current fiscal year to provide for the
contingent and miscellaneous expenses of the said city, and of all other moneys
now on hand not otherwise appropriated.
   (J)   The City Council may, by resolution from time to time, transfer from
one fund to another moneys in the city treasury received from licenses, fines
and penalties, but moneys collected as taxes levied for specific purposes shall
not be diverted from the purposes for which the same wore levied.
(Ord. 41, passed 6-14-1911)
§ 33.16 BRIDGE FUND.
   There is hereby created a fund, known as the Bridge Fund, and said fund
shall be used in the erection and maintenance of bridges within the corporate
limits of the city, and for the repairing and maintenance of all bridges now
within the corporate limits of said city belonging to it, and said bridge fund
shall not be used for any other purpose except those above mentioned, except by
a two-thirds vote of the City Council.
(Ord. 8, passed 6-2-1911)
§ 33.17 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Capital Improvement Fund, which may
receive money from any source, including from other city funds that have been
allocated in any budget year, but not expended or encumbered by the end of the
fiscal year. Money in the Capital Improvement Fund must be invested pursuant to
law and all interest and income from the investment must be deposited in the
Capital Improvement Fund.
   (B)   There is also established a Capital Improvement Program (CIP) for the
city, which shall designate and list in priority order, along with the
estimated cost, those capital facilities and items of capital equipment
proposed for replacement or refurbishing by means of the Capital Improvement
Fund for approval by the City Council during the annual budget process.
(Ord. 2013-03, passed 8-19-2013)
CHAPTER 34: POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
Section
Procurement, Purchasing and Surplus Disposal
   
34.01   Introduction
   
34.02   Definitions
   
34.03   City Administrator and Attorney responsibilities
   
34.04   Enforcing the contract
   
34.05   Remedies for unlawful solicitation or award
   
34.06   Jurisdiction
   
34.07   Contract transfers and collusion prohibited
   
34.08   Suspension or debarment from doing business
   
34.09   Bidding preferences
   
34.10   Bid and proposal preparation
   
34.11   Vendor protest
   
34.12   Standards of responsibility
   
34.13   Specifications
   
34.14   Bid, proposal and contract performance security
   
34.15   Public notice
   
34.16   Mistakes and minor variations in bids and offers
   
34.17   Requests for information
   
34.18   Late bids or proposals
   
34.19   Competitive sealed bids
   
34.20   Competitive sealed proposal
   
34.21   Small purchases or limited solicitations of supplies and services
   
34.22   Sole source procurement
   
34.23   Exigency procurement
   
34.24   Procurement of used equipment
   
34.25   Procurement from sheltered workshops or work activity centers
   
34.26   Authority to dispose of supplies
   
34.27   Disposition of surplus supplies
Identity Theft Program
   
34.40   Adoption
 
   
34.99   Penalty
PROCUREMENT, PURCHASING AND SURPLUS DISPOSAL
§ 34.01 INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   The procurement of supplies and services, and disposal of surplus
supplies of the city is governed by M.C.A. §§ 7-5-4301 through 7-5-4322. These
ordinances supplement the statutes and should be interpreted in harmony with
the statutes. If there are any conflicts between the ordinances and statutes,
the statutes are controlling authority.
   (B)   All persons who participate in the procurement and surplus process of
the city agree to conform to the laws of the state and the ordinances of the
city.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCY. An agency, bureau, commission, committee, council, department or
other entity, instrumentality, officer, agent, employee or other person acting
on behalf of the city.
   ADVANTAGEOUS. A judgmental assessment of what is in the city’s best
interest.
   BID. The executed document submitted by a “bidder” in response to an
invitation for bid.
   BRAND NAME SPECIFICATION. A specification that cites a brand name, model
number or some other designation that identifies a specific product as an
example of the desired characteristics and/or quality of merchandise.
   CENTRAL STORES. The program operated by the city which develops standard
specifications, procures, warehouses and delivers certain supplies for city
agencies.
   CITY. The City of Boulder.
   CONTROLLED ITEMS. Those supplies and services identified by the city as
commonly used items which, when consolidated for purchasing purposes, result in
volume adequate to obtain discounted prices.
   DAYS. Calendar days. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed
by these rules, the day of the event after which the designated period of time
begins to run is not to be included, but the last day of the period so computed
is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, in which
event the period runs until the end of the next business day.
   DESCRIPTIVE LITERATURE. Information available in the ordinary course of
business which shows the characteristics, construction or operations of an item
and enables the city to consider whether the item meets its needs.
   EXCLUSIVE CONTRACT. That city agencies must obtain the specified supply or
service from the contract holder(s), unless the contract allows otherwise.
   EXIGENCY. A purchase made without following normal purchasing procedures due
to a sudden and unexpected happening or unforeseen occurrence or condition
which requires immediate action.
   FOB or F.O.B. Free on board; a term used in conjunction with an identified
physical location to determine:
      (1)   The responsibility and basis for payment of freight charges; and
      (2)   The point at which title for the shipment passes from seller to
buyer. Deliveries are usually FOB destination which means a shipment is to be
delivered to the destination designated by the buyers.
   OFFER. Proposal.
   OFFEROR. A person submitting a proposal when a procurement is made by a
request for proposal process.
   OFFICE SUPPLY. An item commonly used in a business office such as pens,
pencils, paper and the like.
   PURCHASE ORDER. A document used to formalize a purchase contract with a
vendor.
   REQUEST FOR INFORMATION. A document used to informally solicit information
about a market or type of available supply or service where there is not enough
information readily available to write an adequate specification or work
statement.
   REQUEST FOR QUOTE.  Any source selection method allowed for in M.C.A. Title
18.
   REQUISITION.  The document used to request that a contract be entered into
for a specific need, and may include, but is not limited to, the description of
the requested item, delivery schedule, transportation data, criteria for
evaluation, suggested sources of supply, and information supplied for the
making of any written determination required by M.C.A. Title 18, Chapter 4 or
these rules.
   RESIDENT BIDDER. A bidder that meets the requirements of M.C.A. § 18-1-103.
   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER OR OFFEROR. A person who has the capability in all
respects to perform rally the contract requirements and the integrity and
reliability which will assure good faith performance.
   RESPONSIVE BIDDER OR OFFEROR. A person who has submitted a bid or offer
which conforms in all material respects to the invitation for bids or request
for proposals.
   RESTRICTIVE SPECIFICATION. Specifications that unnecessarily limit
competition by eliminating supplies and services that would be capable of
satisfactorily meeting actual needs.
   SOLICITATION. An invitation for bid, a request for proposal, or any other
document issued by the city for the purpose of soliciting bids or proposals to
enter into a contract with the city.
   SPECIFICATIONS.  A detailed description of what the purchaser requires and
what a bidder or offeror must offer to be considered for an award.
   STATE-MADE. Manufactured or produced in the state and made with the use of
parts, material or supplies of which 50% or more were manufactured or produced
in this state; or employment of persons of whom 50% or more are bona fide
residents of the state as defined in M.C.A. § 18-2-401.
   SURPLUS SUPPLIES. Supplies no longer needed by an agency for its use in the
discharge of its duties and responsibilities, excluding books.
   TERM CONTRACT. A contract in which supplies or services are offered at a
predetermined unit price for a specific period of time.
   UNIT PRICE. The price of a selected unit of a supply or services; such as,
price per ton, foot, box.
   VENDOR. A seller of supplies or services.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.03 CITY ADMINISTRATOR AND ATTORNEY RESPONSIBILITIES
   (A)   The city, through the City Administrator, is responsible for all
procurements of all supplies and services for the city. All activities,
including procedures, manuals and forms, which govern such procurements will be
prepared by or under the supervision of the City Administrator.
   (B)   The City Administrator will identify and purchase all products and
services subject to the approval of the City Council.
   (C)   The City Administrator in his or her discretion may delegate authority
to department heads to purchase products and services in aggregate amounts less
than $1,000 subject to the approval of the City Council. Factors to be
considered in making the decision to delegate include:
      (1)   The expertise of the potential delegate in terms of procurement
knowledge and any specialized knowledge pertinent to the authority to be
delegated;
      (2)   The past experience of the potential delegate in exercising similar
authority;
      (3)   The degree of economy and efficiency to be achieved in meeting the
city’s requirements if authority is delegated; and
      (4)   The consistency of delegation under similar circumstances.
   (D)   The City Attorney will review all bid specifications, bids, offers and
other documents and procedures for compliance with the statutes and ordinances.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.04 ENFORCING THE CONTRACT.
   (A)   The City Administrator is responsible for receiving supplies and
services procured on behalf of the city. Receiving means inspecting the supply
or service and checking it against the contract to ensure that it is
acceptable, complete and in compliance with the terms of the contract.
   (B)   Agencies should submit complaints about vendor performance to the City
Administrator. The Administrator will investigate complaints and attempt to
resolve the problem to the city’s satisfaction. The Administrator will notify
the complaining agency of any action taken as a result of the complaint.
   (C)   The city reserves the right to assess liquidated damages for failing
to comply with delivery requirements indicated in the bid or proposal. This sum
may be deducted from vendor payment for failure to deliver when specified.
Liquidated damages should not be punitive and should only be used where it is
difficult to determine actual damages at the time of contracting.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.05 REMEDIES FOR UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION OR AWARD.
   (A)   This section establishes non-exclusive remedies for a solicitation or
award of a contract determined to be in violation of the law.
   (B)   A bidder, offeror or contractor aggrieved in connection with the
solicitation or award of a bid or contract, or any resident taxpayer, may
protest to the city. The protest must be submitted to the city in writing no
later than 14 days after award of a bid or execution of the contract, whichever
is sooner. The protesting party may request a hearing before the City Council.
   (C)   The City Council will issue a written decision stating the reason for
the action taken by the city with regard to the bid or contract.
   (D)   In a protest or hearing the city may, in an appropriate case, order a
remedy provided in divisions (E) or (F) below.
   (E)   If before an award it is determined that a solicitation or proposed
award of a contract is in violation of law, the solicitation or proposed award
may be:
      (1)   Canceled; or
      (2)   Revised to comply with the law.
   (F)   (1)   If after an award it is determined that a solicitation or award
of a contract is in violation of law and the person awarded the contract has
not acted fraudulently or in bad faith, the contract may be:
         (a)   Ratified and affirmed, provided it is determined that doing so
is in the best interests of the city; or
         (b)   Terminated, in the discretion of the City Council, and the
person awarded the contract may be compensated for services or products
actually supplied to the city before the termination.
      (2)   If after an award it is determined that a solicitation or award of
a contract is in violation of law and the person awarded the contract has acted
fraudulently or in bad faith, the contract may be:
         (a)   Declared void; or
         (b)   Ratified and affirmed if that action is in the best interests of
the city, without prejudice to the city’s rights to appropriate damages.
   (G)   The city is not required to delay, halt or modify the procurement
process pending the result of a protest, hearing or court action.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.06 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The City Court has exclusive jurisdiction of any claims in civil
actions arising from procurement or surplus sale activities for the collection
of money due to the city or from the city to any person when the amount sought,
exclusive of interest and costs, does not exceed $5,000.
   (B)   The Montana Fifth Judicial District Court in the county has exclusive
original jurisdiction over any claims in civil actions arising from procurement
or surplus sale activities for the collection of money due to the city or from
the city to any person when the amount sought, exclusive of interest and costs,
exceeds $5,000.
   (C)   All persons who participate in the procurement and surplus process of
the city agree to submit themselves to the exclusive jurisdiction of the state
courts as set forth herein by participating in such processes.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.07 CONTRACT TRANSFERS AND COLLUSION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A contract or order or any interest in a contract or order may not be
transferred, assigned or subcontracted by the party to whom the contract or
order is given to any other party without the express written approval of the
city, and the city may declare void any unapproved transfer, assignment or
subcontract.
   (B)   Collusion or secret agreements between bidders for the purpose of
securing any advantage to the bidders as against the city in the awarding of
contracts is prohibited. The city may declare the contract void if the city
finds sufficient evidence after a contract has been let that the contract was
obtained by a bidder or bidders by reason of collusive or secret agreement
among the bidders and/or with some other person to the disadvantage of the
city.
   (C)   All rights of action for a breach of a contract by the contracting
parties are reserved to the city.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.08 SUSPENSION OR DEBARMENT FROM DOING BUSINESS.
   (A)   The city may decide not to do business with a vendor if it is not a
responsible or responsive vendor as defined in these ordinances.
   (B)   The city may suspend a vendor from bidding on city procurement upon
written determination that probable cause exists for suspension under M.C.A. §§
18-1-113 and 18-4-241. A notice of suspension, including a copy of the
determination, shall be sent to the affected vendor. The notice must state
that:
      (1)   The suspension is for the period it takes to complete an
investigation into possible debarment;
      (2)   Bids or proposals will not be accepted from the suspended vendor
during the period of suspension; and
      (3)   The suspended vendor may request a redetermination.
      (4)   Suspension is effective upon the notice of suspension and, unless
the suspension is terminated by the City Council, it will remain in effect
until its expiration date.
   (C)   The city may debar a vendor from doing business with the city for
cause:
      (1)   Upon written determination that the vendor:
         (a)   Submitted any false statement or affidavit to the city in a
procurement or surplus disposal process;
         (b)   Engaged in collusion or other unlawful activity in the bidding
or contracting process;
         (c)   Violated the terms of any contract or failed to perform any
contract with the city or any other entity or person;
         (d)   Has been debarred from contracting with any other government
entity; or
         (e)   Any other cause which the city determines to be so serious and
compelling as to affect responsibility as a contractor with the city.
      (2)   The City Administrator shall prepare a written decision regarding
debarment and send a copy to the affected vendor. The decision shall: recite
the facts relied upon; indicate the term of debarment; indicate the reasons for
the action, and to what extent affiliates are affected.
      (3)   Debarment is effective upon issuance and remains effective until
its expiration date unless otherwise terminated.
   (D)   The City Administrator shall maintain a list of vendors suspended or
debarred from doing business with the city. The list shall be available to all
city agencies and the public upon request.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.09 BIDDING PREFERENCES.
   (A)   State resident and state-made preferences, as required in M.C.A. §§
18-1-102 and 18-1-112, must be applied by a public agency when awarding
contracts for supplies except in the following instances:
      (1)   Procurements using the competitive sealed proposal process (request
for proposal) as defined in M.C.A. § 18-4-304 and ARM X. 1.602;
      (2)   Small purchases or limited solicitations as defined in M.C.A. § 18-
4-305 and ARM X. 1.603;
      (3)   Cooperative purchasing as defined in M.C.A. § 18-4-401;
      (4)   Procurements involving services as defined in M.C.A. § 18-4-123; or
      (5)   Procurements involving funds obtained from the federal government,
including term contracts, except in those cases where applicable federal
statutes expressly mandate geographic preference.
   (B)   To assess eligibility, the city requires vendors to apply for
preference by completing an affidavit on a form provided by the city. The
affidavit must be on file with the city at the time of bid opening, or be
submitted with the bid to be considered for preference eligibility. The
business name and federal identification number on the affidavit must match the
business name and federal identification number on the submitted bid documents
in order to be considered eligible for the preference. Branch offices of a
state resident company must have a separate affidavit on file with the city
unless the submitted bid documents reflect the same business name and same
federal identification number as the parent company’s affidavit. Vendors who
submit inaccurate information on this form may be subject to suspension or
debarment as set forth above.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.10 BID AND PROPOSAL PREPARATION.
   (A)   A bid or proposal which does not indicate any exceptions is accepted
by the city in response to the specifications or request for proposal as having
no exceptions. Any exceptions to the specifications on the part of the bidder
or offeror must be clearly indicated. Exceptions may be rejected.
   (B)   Each item on which a bidder or offeror submits a quotation must be new
and unused and of the latest model or manufacture unless otherwise specified by
the city. It shall be equal in quality and performance characteristics to that
indicated in the invitation for bid or request for proposal.
   (C)   The price for each item must be stated and shall be clearly shown in
the space provided on the form. Only one unit price shall be shown for each
item unless specific provision is made in the form for an optional figure. The
price of each item shall be extended to show the total price for the quantity
requested. In case of error in extension, the unit price shall prevail.
   (D)   Item-by-item unit price bids must be submitted and will receive
primary consideration for award. All-or-none bids may be submitted as
alternatives and will be considered if clearly in the best interest of the
city.
   (E)   Unless stated otherwise in the solicitation, payment will be due 30
days from:
      (1)   The receipt of a properly executed claim; or
      (2)   Upon satisfactory receipt of the merchandise or service, whichever
is later.
   (F)   Vendors may quote a cash discount based on early payment; however,
such discounts will not be considered in determination of low bid and payment
terms will remain as in division (E) above.
   (G)   Vendors will offer a firm price for 30 days after a bid or proposal
opening, pending award, unless otherwise provided for in the invitation for
bids or request for proposal.
   (H)   Unless otherwise specified in the invitation for bids or request for
proposals, all bids and proposals shall show the delivered price FOB
destination to the city, including all transportation and handling charges.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.11 VENDOR PROTEST.
   (A)   Except for small purchases or limited solicitations, a bidder, offeror
or contractor aggrieved in connection with the solicitation, award or
administration of a contract, may protest to the City Council. A resident
taxpayer may also protest. The City Council may exercise its discretion when it
decides what is in the best interest of the city.
   (B)   In the event the protest concerns the administration of an existing
contract, the protesting party must follow the protest procedure set out in the
contract. If there is no procedure stated in the contract, the protesting party
must submit a protest in writing no later than 14 days after the cause of
action, question or dispute has arisen. If the protest is not resolved by
mutual agreement, the City Council shall issue a written decision on the
protest within 30 days after the receipt of the protest. In issuing the final
decision, the decision must state the reason for the action taken by the city
with regard to the contract.
   (C)   DAYS mean calendar days as defined in ARM X.1.201.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.12 STANDARDS OF RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Among factors that may be considered in determining whether the
standard of responsibility has been met are whether a prospective contractor:
      (1)   Has available the appropriate financial, material, equipment,
facility and personnel resources and expertise, or the ability to obtain them,
necessary to indicate capability to meet all contractual requirements;
      (2)   Has a satisfactory record of integrity;
      (3)   Is qualified legally to contract with the city;
      (4)   Has not failed to supply any necessary information in connection
with the inquiry concerning the responsibility;
      (5)   Has a satisfactory record of past performance; and
      (6)   Has not acted in any manner to circumvent or fail to comply with
solicitation, award or administration of a contract ordinances, policies or
procedures of the city.
   (B)   Nothing shall prevent the city from establishing additional
responsibility standards for a particular procurement, provided that these
additional standards are set forth in the solicitation, or from using past
performance with the city as a reference.
   (C)   A prospective contractor must supply information requested by the City
Administrator concerning the responsibility of the contractor in a timely and
convincing manner. If the contractor fails to supply the requested information,
the city shall base the determination of responsibility upon any available
information or may find the prospective contractor non-responsible.
   (D)   The prospective contractor may demonstrate the availability of
necessary financing, equipment, facilities, expertise and personnel by
submitting upon request:
      (1)   Evidence that the contractor possesses the necessary items;
      (2)   Acceptable plans to subcontract for the necessary items; or
      (3)   A documented commitment from, or explicit arrangement with, a
satisfactory source to provide the necessary items.
   (E)   If a bidder or offeror who otherwise would have been awarded a
contract is found nonresponsible, a written determination of non-responsibility
setting forth the basis of the finding must be prepared by the City
Administrator. The determination must be made part of the procurement file and
a copy of the determination mailed to the affected bidder or offeror.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.13 SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Specifications shall clearly describe the city’s requirements and
allow for the obtaining of a supply or service which is adequate and suitable
for the city’s needs in a cost effective manner. Specifications may take into
account, to the extent practicable, the costs of ownership and operation as
well as initial acquisition costs and shall permit maximum practicable
competition consistent with this purpose.
   (B)   Specifications shall, to the extent practicable, emphasize functional
or performance criteria and limit design or other detailed physical
descriptions to those necessary to meet the needs of the city. To facilitate
the use of the criteria, the city shall attempt to include as a part of its
requisitions the principal functional or performance needs to be met and any
compatibility requirements.
   (C)   In developing specifications, accepted commercial standards shall be
used and unique requirements shall be avoided, to the extent practicable.
   (D)   Brand name items or descriptions may be used to indicate standards of
quality, performance and/or use desired.
   (E)   Restrictive specifications shall not be used unless no other manner of
description will suffice. In that event, a written determination shall be made
that it is not practicable to use a less restrictive specification.
   (F)   A specification for a specific brand of supplies or services may be
used if the city has a documented need to maintain a standard of performance
and compatibility with existing supplies, equipment or staff experience.
   (G)   The suggested format for specifications is as follows:
      (1)   Name of commodity;
      (2)   Purpose/use for commodity;
      (3)   Description of commodity:
         (a)   Each item of the description should fulfill a functional or
physical requirement;
         (b)   If brand names are necessary to indicate quality levels, list an
acceptable brand name;
         (c)   Justification shall be provided and attached if a single brand
is necessary; and
         (d)   Justification shall be provided and attached if the commodity is
to be a sole source purchase.
      (4)   Description of other requirements, such as warranty, training,
parts, manuals, service and the like;
      (5)   Description of any unusual conditions, such as installation, field
tests, fiscal year funding source and the like;
      (6)   Date commodity is to be delivered;
      (7)   Location where commodity is to be delivered;
      (8)   Name, address and phone number of agency contact person; and
      (9)   Receiving procedures (if testing, sampling or other evaluation will
be performed when commodity is delivered to determine acceptability) must be
described.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.14 BID, PROPOSAL AND CONTRACT PERFORMANCE SECURITY.
   (A)   The city may, at its discretion, require bid or proposal security and/
or contract performance security for the procurement of services and supplies.
   (B)   Bid or proposal security and contract performance security
requirements must be stated in the invitation for bids or the request for
proposals.
   (C)   The preferred types of security are bonds as described in M.C.A. § 18-
4-312(3)(a) and cash as described in M.C.A. § 18-4-312(3)(c) and (d). The
security must be payable to the city and the contract performance security must
remain in effect for the entire contract period.
      (1)   If a certificate of deposit, money market certificate, cashier’s
check, certified check, irrevocable letter of credit, bank money order or bank
draft is determined to be acceptable, it must be issued from a federally
chartered or state-chartered bank or savings and loan association that is
insured by or for which insurance is administered by the federal deposit
insurance corporation or that is drawn and issued by a credit union insured by
the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund.
      (2)   Irrevocable letters of credit in excess of $100,000 will not be
accepted as security for contracts.
      (3)   Facsimile copies of bid or contract security are not acceptable.
      (4)   Certificates of deposit or money market certificates will not be
accepted as security for bid, proposal or contract security unless the
certificates are assigned only to the city. All interest income from these
certificates must accrue only to the contractor and not the city.
   (D)   Factors to consider in requiring bid security and in determining the
amount of the security include:
      (1)   Type of commodity;
      (2)   Past city experience;
      (3)   Labor required to perform contract; and
      (4)   Materials required to perform contract.
   (E)   All bid security and proposal security, except bonds, will be returned
to the unsuccessful bidders within 30 days from date of the award.
   (F)   Factors to consider in requiring contract performance security and in
determining the amount of security include:
      (1)   Type of commodity;
      (2)   Past city experience;
      (3)   Labor required to perform contract;
      (4)   Materials required to perform contract;
      (5)   Amount and number of subcontracts;
      (6)   Damages chargeable to the city if the contractor defaults; and
      (7)   Estimated dollar amount of total contract.
   (G)   All contract performance security, except bonds, will be returned to
the successful bidder or offeror upon completion of the contract, or at the
discretion of the procurement official as documented to assure contract
completion, or warranty period as declared within the contract.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.15 PUBLIC NOTICE.
   (A)   Invitation for bids and request for proposals shall be mailed, posted
electronically or otherwise advertised to a sufficient number of bidders or
offerors required to secure competition.
   (B)   Where appropriate, the city may require payment of a fee or a deposit
for supplying the invitation for bids or request for proposals.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.16 MISTAKES AND MINOR VARIATIONS IN BIDS AND OFFERS.
   (A)   The city may allow a bidder or offeror to correct minor mistakes in a
bid or offer if the mistake is clearly not attributed to an error in judgment,
and the mistake and the intended correct bid or offer is clearly evident on the
form of the document. Examples of correctable mistakes include, but are not
limited to:
      (1)   Typographical errors;
      (2)   Errors in extending unit prices;
      (3)   Transposition errors;
      (4)   Arithmetical errors; and
      (5)   Signature omitted.
   (B)   The city may permit a bidder or offeror to withdraw a low bid or
proposal if:
      (1)   A mistake is clearly evident on the face of the document but the
intended correct information is not similarly evident; or
      (2)   The bidder or offeror submits proof of evidentiary value which
clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.17 REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION.
   A request for information, as defined in ARM 2.5.201, may be used by an
agency only to obtain preliminary information about a market or the type of
available supply or service, where there is not enough information readily
available to write an adequate specification or work statement. A request for
information may not be used as a source selection method to procure a supply or
service.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.18 LATE BIDS OR PROPOSALS.
   (A)   Regardless of cause, late bids and proposals will not be accepted and
will automatically be disqualified from further consideration. It shall be the
vendor’s sole risk to assure delivery at the specified office by the specified
time.
   (B)   Late bids and proposals will not be opened and may be returned to the
vendor at the expense of the vendor or destroyed if requested.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.19 COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDS.
   (A)   “Sealed bid” is the preferred method of competitive procurement for
city supply contracts and service contracts estimated to exceed the amount
designated in ARM 2.5.603 as a small purchase or a limited solicitation. Sealed
bids shall be solicited with an invitation for bid.
   (B)   The invitation for bids shall include the following:
      (1)   Instructions and information to bidders concerning the bid
submission requirements, including the time and date established for bid
opening, the address of the office to which bids are to be delivered, and any
other special information;
      (2)   The purchase description, delivery or performance schedule, and any
inspection and acceptance requirements not included in the purchase
description; and
      (3)   The contract terms and conditions, including warranty and bonding
or other security requirements, as applicable.
   (C)   The invitation for bid may incorporate documents by reference if the
invitation for bid specifies where such documents can be obtained.
   (D)   Addenda, if any, will be provided to all vendors who received an
invitation for bid, or notice of the addenda will be placed in the electronic
format designated for giving public notice.
   (E)   Upon receipt of a bid or a facsimile transmission of a bid, the City
Administrator will cause it to be time-stamped and stored in a secure place
until the time and date set for bid opening. In order to be considered timely,
a complete printed bid response must be delivered to the specified destination
by the specified time.
   (F)   Bids shall be opened publicly at the time, date and place designated
in the invitation for bid.
   (G)   The city may request city agencies or private consultants to perform
tests or to provide technical expertise to determine product or service
acceptability on bids received.
   (H)   Following determination of product acceptability, bids will be
reviewed to determine which bidder offers the lowest cost to the city in
accordance with the specifications set forth in the invitation for bids,
including the applicable preference provisions.
   (I)   Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to permit contract award to a
bidder submitting a higher quality item than that designated in the invitation
for bid if such bidder is not also the lowest bidder as determined under
division (H) above.
   (J)   Multiple award contracts are allowable if determined to be in the best
interest of the city.
   (K)   The discretion of the City Council, will be used to resolve tie bids.
   (L)   The city may use supply schedules established by the federal General
Services Administration or State Procurement Division as sources of bids. The
supply schedule item must meet or exceed the specifications, terms and
conditions of the invitation for bid and must be the lowest acceptable bid in
order to be selected. The pertinent supply schedule must be recorded as a bid
from the supplier for the inspection of all bidders.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.20 COMPETITIVE SEALED PROPOSAL.
   (A)   “Competitive sealed proposal” is a procurement option allowing the
award to be based upon an evaluation process using stated criteria to arrive at
a contract that will be the most advantageous to the city.
   (B)   Competitive sealed proposals, solicited through a request for
proposals may be practical when one or more of the following conditions exist:
      (1)   The contract needs to be other than a fixed-price type;
      (2)   Oral or written discussions may need to be conducted with offerors
concerning technical and price aspects of their proposal;
      (3)   Offerors may need to be afforded the opportunity to revise their
proposal, including prices;
      (4)   Award may need to be based upon a comparative evaluation as stated
in the request for proposals of differing price, quality and contractual
factors in order to determine the most advantageous offering to the city.
Quality factors include technical and performance capability and the content of
the technical proposal; and/or
      (5)   Price will only be one of several criteria considered in
determining an award, if evaluated at all.
   (C)   The request for proposals must be prepared in accordance with ARM X.l
.601(2) through (4) and must also include:
      (1)   A statement that discussions may be conducted with one or more
offerors who submit proposals, but that proposals may be accepted and a
contract issued without such discussions; and
      (2)   The criteria that will be used to evaluate the proposals.
   (D)   Facsimile transmission of a proposal is only acceptable on an
exception basis with prior approval of the procurement officer.
   (E)   Proposals shall be time-stamped upon receipt and held in a secure
place the City Administrator until the established time.
   (F)   (1)   After the time established for receipt of proposals, the City
Administrator shall open the proposals and inspect the proposals for material
not available for public inspection.
      (2)   The City Administrator will remove this material and then make the
remainder of the proposals available for public inspection. Offerors submitting
a proposal containing a claim to shield confidential information must include a
statement that attests to the offeror’s acceptance of the legal and financial
responsibility for defending the claim. In addition, any claim to shield trade
secret material must be made by an offeror’s legal counsel using the affidavit
form prescribed by the city.
   (G)   For the purpose of conducting discussions, proposals shall be
initially classified as:
      (1)   Responsive; or
      (2)   Non-responsive.
         (a)   Proposals may be found non-responsive any time during the
evaluation process if:
            1.   Any of the required information is not provided; and
            2.   If the submitted price is found to be excessive or inadequate
as measured by criteria stated in the request for proposals.
         (b)   The proposal is not within the plans and specifications
described and required in the request for proposal.
         (c)   Non-responsive proposals will be eliminated from further
consideration.
   (H)   (1)   Discussions may be held with one or more offerors to:
         (a)   Promote understanding of the city’s requirements and the
offerors’ proposals; and
         (b)   Facilitate arriving at a contract that will be most advantageous
to the city taking into consideration all criteria set forth in the request for
proposals.
      (2)   Discussions may include oral presentations, interviews,
demonstrations, responses to specific questions, modifications and
negotiations.
      (3)   At the discretion of the City Council, one or more offerors may be
provided an opportunity to submit a best and final offer if additional
information is required in order to reach a final decision. Unless the request
for proposals so states, a best and final offer may not be requested from the
offeror(s) on price alone.
   (I)   References and the credit and financial responsibility of the offerors
may be verified as appropriate.
   (J)   The evaluation shall be based on the evaluation criteria set forth in
the request for proposals. The evaluators shall exercise discretion in
assigning points or value to a proposal, which involves a judgmental assessment
of the evaluation criteria. The award must be made to the responsive and
responsible offeror whose proposal best meets the evaluation criteria.
   (K)   The City Council reserves the right to negotiate with one or more
offerors for the award of a contract that is most advantageous to the city. The
department reserves the right to award a contract without negotiations or to
reject any or all proposals.
   (L)   Interested parties are responsible for making their own arrangements
to make copies of proposal materials.
   (M)   Multiple award contracts are allowable if determined to be in the best
interest of the city.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.21 SMALL PURCHASES OR LIMITED SOLICITATIONS OF SUPPLIES AND SERVICES.
   (A)   M.C.A. § 7-5-4302 provides, that except as provided in M.C.A. §§ 7-5-
4303 or 7-5-4310, all contracts for the purchase of any automobile, truck,
other vehicle, road machinery, other machinery, apparatus, appliances,
equipment or materials or supplies of any kind in excess of $20,000 or for
construction, repair or maintenance in excess of $25,000 must be let to the
lowest responsible bidder after advertisement for bids. The city may procure
supplies or services below these limits using purchase techniques that best
meets the city’s needs.
   (B)   The limited solicitation procedure must be documented.
   (C)   Procurements shall not be artificially divided or sequenced to avoid
using proper purchasing processes.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.22 SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT.
   (A)   The provisions of this rule apply to all sole source procurements of
$5,000 or greater unless exigency procurements described in these ordinances
are necessary.
   (B)   Sole source procurement is not permissible unless a required item is
available from only a single supplier. A requirement for a particular
proprietary item does not justify a sole source procurement if there is more
than one potential bidder or offeror for that item. The following are examples
of circumstances which could necessitate sole source procurement:
      (1)   The compatibility of equipment, accessories or replacement parts is
the paramount consideration; or
      (2)   There is no existent equivalent product.
   (C)   For purchases greater than $5,000, the determination as to whether a
procurement shall be made as a sole source shall be made by the city. In cases
of reasonable doubt, competition should be solicited.
   (D)   The city may conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price,
delivery and terms.
   (E)   A record of sole source procurements greater than $5,000 shall be
maintained by the city that lists:
      (1)   Each vendor’s name;
      (2)   The amount and type of each contract;
      (3)   A listing of the supplies or services procured under each contract;
and
      (4)   The identification number of each contract file.
   (F)   The following items do not require sole source justification and shall
be purchased directly by the City Administrator:
      (1)   Licenses;
      (2)   Dues to associations;
      (3)   Renewal of software license agreements; or
      (4)   Purchase or renewal of maintenance agreements for software or
hardware.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.23 EXIGENCY PROCUREMENT.
   (A)   An exigency procurement of $5,000 or greater shall be limited to those
supplies or services necessary to meet the exigency.
   (B)   The determination as to whether a procurement shall be made as an
exigency procurement shall be made by the City Administrator. The determination
must be in writing and must state the basis for an exigency procurement and for
the selection of a particular vendor.
   (C)   The procedure used shall be selected to assure that the required
supplies or services are procured in time to meet the exigency. However, such
competition as is practicable shall be obtained.
   (D)   A record of each exigency procurement shall be made as soon as
practicable and shall set forth:
      (1)   The vendor’s name;
      (2)   The amount and type of the contract;
      (3)   A listing of the supplies or services procured under the contract;
and
      (4)   The written documentation required in division (B) above.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.24 PROCUREMENT OF USED EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Purchase of used equipment is allowable if in the best interest of the
city.
   (B)   Unless justified as sole source or exigency, the award of the contract
will be made by identifying the requirements and proceeding with the
competitive bidding or proposal process.
   (C)   Criteria to consider in making this determination include:
      (1)   Consideration of the type, use and life expectancy of new versus
used equipment;
      (2)   Comparing the purchase price of new and used equipment;
      (3)   Comparing the price and general condition of used equipment among
several vendors;
      (4)   Consideration of the freight charges and FOB point;
      (5)   Investigation of manufacturer or brand and availability of
warranty, maintenance and parts; and
      (6)   Clarification of payment terms.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.25 PROCUREMENT FROM SHELTERED WORKSHOPS OR WORK ACTIVITY CENTERS.
   The city may purchase supplies and services from sheltered workshops as
defined in M.C.A. § 18-5-101. Such purchases are exempt from competitive
bidding laws and rules and may be made directly.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.26 AUTHORITY TO DISPOSE OF SUPPLIES.
   The city may not transfer, sell, trade or otherwise dispose of supplies
owned by the city without written authorization of City Council.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 34.27 DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS SUPPLIES.
   (A)   The city may transfer surplus supplies among the several departments
of the city.
   (B)   Surplus supplies must be offered to the public through competitive
sealed bids, public auction, established markets or posted prices.
      (1)   It is recognized, however, that some types and classes of items can
be sold or disposed of more readily and advantageously by other means,
including barter.
      (2)   In such cases and also where the nature of the supply or unusual
circumstances call for its sale to be restricted or controlled, the city may
employ such other means, including appraisal, if the city makes a written
determination that such procedure is advantageous to the city.
      (3)   On sales greater than $300, only United States postal money orders,
certified checks, cashier’s checks or business checks may be accepted.
   (C)   Competitive sealed bidding:
      (1)   If a sale is to be made by competitive sealed bidding, notice of
the sale must be given at least ten days before the date set for opening bids
by:
         (a)   Mailing a request for sale bids to prospective bidders,
including those bidders on lists maintained at the property and supply bureau
for this purpose; and
         (b)   Newspaper advertisement may also be used.
      (2)   The request for sale bids must list the supplies offered for sale;
designate their location and how they may be inspected; and state the terms and
conditions for bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly.
      (3)   Award must be made in accordance with the provisions of the request
for sale bids to the highest responsive and responsible bidder, if the price
offered by such bidder is acceptable to the city. If the price is not
acceptable, the city may:
         (a)   Reject the bids in whole or in part and negotiate the sale, but
the negotiated sale price must be higher than the highest responsive and
responsible bidder’s price; or
         (b)   Resolicit bids.
   (D)   When appropriate, an experienced auctioneer should be used to cry the
sale and assist in preparation of the sale. The solicitation to bidders should
stipulate all the terms and conditions of any sale.
   (E)   Established markets are places where supplies such as livestock and
produce are regularly sold in wholesale lots, and prices are set by open
competition. Surplus supplies may be sold in established markets for such
supplies.
   (F)   Surplus supplies may be sold at posted prices as determined by the
city when such prices are based on fair market value and the sale is conducted
pursuant to written procedures established by the city.
   (G)   Surplus supplies may be traded-in only if the city determines the
trade-in value is expected to equal or exceed the value estimated to be
obtained through the sale or other disposition of the supplies.
   (H)   The city may permit other government units, non-profit organizations
or private businesses to participate in an auction or other appropriate
marketing methods.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
IDENTITY THEFT PROGRAM
§ 34.40 ADOPTION.
   (A)   The city recognizes the responsibility to safeguard personal customer
information within the workplace.
   (B)   The creation and implementation of an Identity Theft Prevention
Program will identify, detect, mitigate and update red flags that signal the
possibility of identity theft in connection with the opening of a “covered
account” or any existing “covered account.”
   (C)   This program will utilize guidelines set forth in the Federal Trade
Commission “Red Flags Rules and Address Discrepancy Rules” under the Fair and
Accurate Credit Transaction Act of 2003 (FACTAct Red Flag Policy 2003). The Red
Flag Policy and Identity Theft Protection Program, attached to the ordinance
codified herein, as Exhibit A, is hereby adopted and approved.
(Res. 2010-16, passed 5-17-2010)
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   A person who violates the provisions of M.C.A. § 2-2-201 or §§
34.01 through
34.27, or both, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than
$500 or imprisoned in the county jail no more than six months. The city may at
its option declare any contract in violation of the provisions of M.C.A. § 2-2-
201, or §§
34.01 through
34.27, or both, void ab initio.
(Ord. 173, passed 9-10-2001)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
      
51.   PRIVATE WATER WELLS
      
52.   REFUSE COLLECTION
      
53.   NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL GAS
      
54.   SEWER REGULATIONS
      
55.   WATER SYSTEM
CHAPTER 50: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
Section
   
50.01   Chlorination of water
§ 50.01 CHLORINATION OF WATER.
   The city is opposed to federally controlled and directed mandatory
chlorination of the city’s water system under proposed promulgation/
implementation of the Public Health Service Act, Title XIV, commonly known as
the “Safe Drinking Water Act.”
(Ord. 163, passed 9-13-1993)
CHAPTER 51: PRIVATE WATER WELLS
Section
   
51.01   Title
   
51.02   Definitions
   
51.03   Restrictions
   
51.04   Authorized wells
   
51.05   Revocation
   
51.06   Property authorized for well use by permit
   
51.07   Control valves
   
51.08   Domestic wells serving newly annexed property
   
51.09   Marking
   
51.10   Administration
   
51.11   Conflict with other laws
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Water Well Code of the
City of Boulder, Montana.”
(Ord. 2008-04, passed 3-10-2008)
§ 51.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation or body politic, and
includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative
thereof.
   WATER WELL. Any digging, drilling or excavation, by hand or by the use of
machinery or equipment, whereby water is obtained from under the surface of the
ground to be used on or above the ground surface.
(Ord. 2008-04, passed 3-10-2008)
§ 51.03 RESTRICTIONS.
   No other water well is authorized, except as provided in this chapter.
Except as may be allowed by the express permission of the city, piping from a
water well may not be connected directly or indirectly or cross-connected to
piping connected to the city’s water distribution system.
(Ord. 2008-04, passed 3-10-2008) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 AUTHORIZED WELLS.
   (A)   Upon obtaining a well permit pursuant to this chapter, a person may
use a water well within the city limits for the following purposes:
      (1)   Production of manufactured goods, whether or not such goods are
designed for human consumption. Well water used for production of manufactured
goods may not be used for other domestic uses except as otherwise allowed by
this chapter; and
      (2)   Uses not necessitating potable water.
   (B)   A person desiring to install and use a water well shall make
application therefor to the city for a well permit. Any such application shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   Name of applicant;
      (2)   Purpose for which the well and well water are to be used. For
manufacturing uses, a statement of why well water is preferable to city water;
      (3)   A site plan and legal description of the property proposed to
contain the well and of the property to be served by the well. The site plan
must show the proposed location of the well and well equipment or piping
associated with the well water distribution system. The site plan must also
show all underground utilities (such as, water, sewer service, gas, electric,
telephone, cable television and the like). The applicant shall verify utility
locations when preparing the site plan by contacting the “one call utility
locate system” and shall preserve such evidence on site until the well is
drilled;
      (4)   Name of person who will drill the well; and
      (5)   Proof that the applicant either has obtained a ground water
appropriation certificate from the state or that a certificate is not required.
   (C)   Before the well is put into operation, a city official will inspect it
to determine that the well will be utilized only for permitted purposes and
that no unauthorized connections or cross-connections from the well to the
city’s water distribution system have occurred. Cross-connections may be
authorized by the Public Works Director if the city’s water distribution system
is protected from backflow from the well according to the applicable plumbing
or water quality codes designed to protect public health. The city official
will also inspect the drilling premises to determine compliance with division
(E) below. The city official shall make the investigation necessary to
determine that the well being applied for is within the property boundaries
described in the application and will not adversely affect city owned utilities
(such as, water and sewer mains, storm drains and similar structures) that may
cross through the applicant’s property, with or without an easement, as
determined by the utility locate verification required in division (B)(3)
above.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the permit
required hereunder shall be obtained by the person applying for the same or by
the drilling firm responsible for drilling the well. The permit is valid for a
period of 180 days from the date of issuance, and if drilling of a new well or
development of an existing well is not commenced within that time period, the
permit lapses.
   (E)   During the drilling process, any products of the operation shall be
confined to the premises upon which the well is being drilled. Discharging of
waste materials in or on city rights-of-way, alleys, streets or drainageways is
prohibited. In the event waste materials are improperly discharged, the
property owner or driller will be required to complete restoration and cleanup
to city specifications prior to final approval of well operation.
   (F)   The city may grant a permit for the use of a well for one of the
purposes announced in this section, but only after making the following
findings:
      (1)   For manufacturing purposes:
         (a)   The existence of a bona fide manufacturing or commercial need
for the use of well water in the manufacture of a product. For purposes of this
section, the mere fact that well water may be less expensive to use in the
manufacturing process may not be considered a bona fide manufacturing or
commercial purpose;
         (b)   That city water is used to separately supply other water demands
on the premises;
         (c)   The well is not directly or indirectly connected or cross-
connected to the city’s water distribution system; and
         (d)   The applicant has agreed to pay a reasonable fee to the city
that will compensate the city for providing standby potable water and sewage
services to the manufacturing premises. The fee will be based upon existing
rates and charges for utility services then in effect and adopted by the city.
      (2)   For uses not requiring potable water:
         (a)   The well, its piping, and fixtures will not be directly or
indirectly connected or cross-connected to the city’s water distribution system
unless the city’s water distribution system is protected from backflow from the
well by means approved by the Public Works Director as provided in division (C)
above; and
         (b)   The well will be used exclusively for the purpose stated in the
application.
      (3)   The application is not a subterfuge for using the well in question
for potable human consumption or domestic or commercial uses not allowed by
this chapter.
   (G)   Wells producing water that is discharged into the city’s wastewater
system must have a city approved water meter to measure water produced by the
well.
(Ord. 2008-04, passed 3-10-2008) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05 REVOCATION.
   Any permit granted under the terms of this chapter may be revoked by the
Public Works Director if it affirmatively appears that the person operating or
using said well is doing so in violation of this chapter. Revocations by the
Public Works Director under this section may be appealed to the City
Administrator. Appeals must be made in writing to the City Administrator within
30 days after mailing the written notice of revocation.
(Ord. 2008-04, passed 3-10-2008)
§ 51.06 PROPERTY AUTHORIZED FOR WELL USE BY PERMIT.
   A well permitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and prior city
ordinances may be used by an applicant applying for a permit pursuant to this
chapter and its use is limited to the property listed on the application.
(Ord. 2008-04, passed 3-10-2008)
§ 51.07 CONTROL VALVES.
   For any authorized well drilled, dug or excavated pursuant to a permit
granted hereunder, the city may require that the well be equipped with adequate
shutoff valves or control valves for the purpose of controlling the flow of
water from the well and for the protection of the city’s water system from
pollution from a cross-connection between well piping and the city’s water
system. Protection shall consist of installation of a backflow prevention
device. The city may require the installation of appropriate backflow
protection devices on the city’s water system when an existing well is used for
irrigation or on any existing or new manufacturing use utilizing a well
pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-04, passed 3-10-2008) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.08 DOMESTIC WELLS SERVING NEWLY ANNEXED PROPERTY.
   Wells actively used as the sole potable water source for domestic purposes
on property annexed into the city may continue to be used as the potable water
source for the property and may be repaired, replaced and maintained, providing
all of the following apply:
   (A)   A permit for the use has been obtained pursuant to this chapter;
   (B)   The quality of the water produced by the well is potable and fit for
human consumption and use;
   (C)   Subsequent replacements or renovations of the well do not enlarge the
initial capacity of the well as originally developed; and
   (D)   The property cannot reasonably be served by the city’s water
distribution system. Property served by a well must discontinue the use of that
well and connect to the city’s water distribution system when the property is
capable of being served by city water pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 2008-04, passed 3-10-2008) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.09 MARKING.
   The issuance of a water well permit shall be conditioned on marking the
water well in a manner to be designated by a city official for the purposes of
identification, location and for inspection at such times as may be reasonably
required.
(Ord. 2008-04, passed 3-10-2008)
§ 51.10 ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Public Works Department is hereby designated and charged with the
duty of administering and enforcing the regulations herein prescribed.
(Ord. 2008-04, passed 3-10-2008)
§ 51.11 CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be requirements adopted for the promotion of the health,
safety and welfare of the general public. Whenever the requirements of this
chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations or ordinances, the more restrictive or that imposing the
higher standards shall govern.
(Ord. 2008-04, passed 3-10-2008)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful to install or operate any well in violation of this
chapter. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by
a fine of up to $500 and imprisonment for up to six months in the county jail.
Each day the infraction exists constitutes a separate violation. A civil action
may also be filed against a person violating the provisions of this chapter to
obtain an injunction preventing such actions in violation hereof.
(Ord. 2008-04, passed 3-10-2008)
CHAPTER 52: REFUSE COLLECTION
Section
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Functions of City Clerk
   
52.03   Funds, appropriations, borrowing, other means
   
52.04   Permits
   
52.05   Prohibitions; private responsibility
   
52.06   Collection by city
   
52.07   Open burning prohibited
   
52.08   Enforcement; service of notice and orders; hearings
   
52.09   Inspection
   
52.10   Disposal site attendant
   
52.11   Regulations
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any institution, governmental unit corporation, individual,
partnership or other entity.
   PREMISES. Land, buildings or other structures, vehicles or parts thereof,
upon or in which refuse is stored.
   REFUSE. All solid wastes of a community, including garbage, ashes, rubbish,
dead animals, street cleaning and solid market and industrial wastes, but not
including body wastes.
   RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY. The legally designated authority of the City Clerk,
who shall be authorized and directed to implement and enforce the provisions of
this chapter, or his or her authorized representative.
(Ord. 92, passed 10-8-1973)
§ 52.02 FUNCTIONS OF CITY CLERK.
   The City Clerk, in order to protect the health and safety of the people of
this city, is authorized and directed, by implementing and enforcing the
provisions of this chapter, to control the storage, collection, and disposal of
refuse within the city, and at any refuse disposal site so designated as one
being utilized by the city, for such purposes, to provide a public refuse
collection and refuse disposal service, from premises within the city, so that
the type and usual quantity of refuse can be safely and expeditiously handled
by such private or public refuse collection and refuse disposal service, and/or
to approve and regulate the establishment, maintenance and operation of private
refuse collection and refuse disposal methods and sites.
(Ord. 92, passed 10-8-1973)
§ 52.03 FUNDS, APPROPRIATIONS, BORROWING, OTHER MEANS.
   (A)   The city is authorized to make funds available by appropriation, by
borrowing, or by other means, in accordance with the laws of the state and the
procedures of the city, for equipment or the collection or disposal of refuse,
and for the establishment, maintenance and operation of refuse collection
systems and refuse disposal methods and sites; the city, is further authorized
to issue licenses to private refuse collection services and permit them to
perform refuse collection functions within the city.
   (B)   Refuse service charges within the city, for the purpose of financing
the establishment, maintenance, and operation of refuse collection systems or
refuse disposal methods and sites are hereby levied in accordance with the
following schedules.
      (1)   The rate of charge for collection services provided by the city,
and refuse disposal site operation by the city, subject to exceptions provided
for the Boulder River School and Hospital, shall be $4.25 per month for each
unit as established in the following schedule:
Apartment houses/3 apartments                   1 unit
Banks                                           2 units
Bars                                            3 units
Beauty salons and barber shops                  1 unit
Food processors unit
Gas station (just gas and oil)                  1 unit
Grocery store                                   5 units
Hotel per 5 rooms                               1 unit
Laundromat                                      2 units
Motel per 5 units                               1 unit
Office building; 2 offices                      1 unit
Offices                                         1 unit
Post office                                     2 units
Print shop                                      1 unit
Residence                                       1 unit
Restaurants                                     4 units
School per 80 students or portions thereof      1 unit
School lunch per 60 students or portion thereof 1 unit
Shops and garages                               3 units
Stores (other)                                  3 units
Trailer located in trailer court                3/4 unit
 
      (2)   The monthly charge for the dwelling of persons who are receiving
Social Security benefits and living in a self-owned dwelling shall be $1.25 per
month per unit.
      (3)   The city will not collect refuse from the Boulder River School and
Hospital, nor shall there be a collection or disposal charge at this time.
Arrangements for equitable compensation to the city for disposal site operation
shall be negotiated forthwith; provided, however, that the Boulder River School
and Hospital must meet all standards of this chapter for disposal and covering
of refuse. If Boulder River School and Hospital delivers refuse to the refuse
disposal site at times when it is closed, the Boulder River School and Hospital
will be required to cover the refuse at its own expense.
   (C)   Refuse service charges, as provided by this section, shall be payable
monthly, by separate billing in conjunction with the water bill. Such refuse
service charges shall be collected by the City Clerk of the city.
   (D)   Residents of the city may dispose of their own refuse at the refuse
disposal site, during its regular hours of operation, at no charge; provided,
they comply with all requirements of this chapter. Residents who dispose of
their own refuse shall, nevertheless, be required to pay the fees set forth
above.
   (E)   Nonresidents of the city may deliver refuse to the refuse disposal
site in the manner required by this chapter. A refuse disposal site fee shall
be collected at the refuse disposal site from said non-residents according to
the following schedule:
      (1)   One-half ton: $0.75 per load;
      (2)   One ton: $1.50 per load;
      (3)   Two tons: $2.25 per load;
      (4)   Five tons and up: $4.50 per load;
      (5)   Trucks hauling railroad ties, tires or building material from
construction sites: $7.50 per load; and
      (6)   All private contract garbage haulers $4.50 per load.
(Ord. 92, passed 10-8-1973)
§ 52.04 PERMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person who does not possess an unrevoked
permit from the City Clerk to engage in the business of refuse collection or
refuse disposal for compensation in the city. The City Clerk shall issue
permits for such applicants; provided that such permits shall be limited to
persons having proper equipment and personnel to collect and dispose of refuse
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and provided further, that
the method of disposal used is in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (B)   Every person desiring to engage in the collection and/or disposal of
refuse shall make written application to the city, setting forth the name of
such person, the residence address thereof or the address of the place of
business, a description of the equipment to be used in the collection and/or
disposal of such refuse, the place of disposal, and the method of disposal to
be practiced. Upon approval of such application, the City Clerk shall issue a
permit to the applicant. The permit fee shall be $20 per year payable in
advance to the city.
   (C)   Any person whose application for a permit has been denied may request,
and shall be granted, a hearing before the City Council, under the procedure
provided by §
52.06.
   (D)   A permit issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each
year. Permits shall be renewable annually, in the same manner and upon payment
of the same annual fee as provided in division (A) above.
(Ord. 92, passed 10-8-1973) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 PROHIBITIONS; PRIVATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The owner or his or her agent, or the occupant, of any premises within
the city shall be responsible for the sanitary condition of the premises
occupied by him or her, and it shall be unlawful for any person to place,
deposit, or allow to be placed or deposited on his premises any refuse, except
as designated by the terms of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person responsible for refuse on premises not served by a licensed
refuse collection system authorized by the city; or for refuse not acceptable
for collation by a licensed refuse disposal service, shall make arrangements
for the collection and disposal of such refuse with a refuse collector who
holds a valid refuse collection license issued by the city.
(Ord. 92, passed 10-8-1973) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 COLLECTION BY CITY.
   The city shall establish and maintain regular refuse collection routes and
services as specified in the operating rules and regulations and amendments
thereto.
(Ord. 92, passed 10-8-1973)
§ 52.07 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.
   The burning of any refuse, garbage, rubbish, rubble or petroleum product,
except in a fireplace within a building or an incinerator approved by the City
Clerk or City Health Officer is prohibited.
(Ord. 92, passed 10-8-1973) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.08 ENFORCEMENT; SERVICE OF NOTICES AND ORDERS; HEARINGS.
   (A)   Whenever the city determines that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, or of
any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, it shall give notice of such alleged
violation to the person or persons responsible therefor as hereinafter
provided.
      (1)   Such notice shall:
         (a)   Be put into writing;
         (b)   Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
         (c)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires; and
         (d)   Be served upon the holder of a permit issued under this chapter,
or upon the owner or his or her agent or the occupant of any premises within
the city; provided, that such notice shall be deemed to have been properly
served when a copy thereof has been served personally, or in accordance with
any other method authorized or required under the laws of this state.
      (2)   Such notice may:
         (a)   Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and
         (b)   State that, unless conditions or practices described in such
notice which violate this chapter are corrected within the reasonable time
specified in such notice, a permit which has been issued pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended or revoked.
   (B)   Any person who is affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, or of any
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request, and shall be granted, a
hearing on the matter before the City Council; provided, that such person shall
file, in the office of the City Clerk, a written petition requesting such
hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the ground therefor, within ten
days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition, the
City Clerk shall set a time and place for hearing, and shall give the
petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be
given an opportunity to be heard. The hearing shall be commenced not later than
ten days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided, that, upon
application of the petitioner, the City Clerk may postpone the date of the
hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period when, in his or her
judgment, the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such
postponement.
   (C)   After such hearing, the City Council shall sustain, modify or withdraw
the notice, depending upon its finding based on such hearing as to whether or
not the provisions of this chapter and of the regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with. If the City Council sustains or modifies such
notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice shall automatically
become an order if a written petition for a hearing has not been filed in the
office of the City Clerk within ten days after such notice was served. In the
case of any notice which states that a permit required by this chapter may be
suspended or revoked, the City Council may suspend or revoke such permit if an
order is issued and corrective action has not been taken within the time
specified in the notice.
   (D)   The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision
of the City Council shall be summarized, put in writing, and entered as a
matter of public record in the office of the City Clerk. Such record shall
include, also, a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the
matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Council or City Clerk
nay seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided
by the laws of this state.
   (E)   Whenever the City Clerk or City Health Officer finds that an emergency
exists involving a serious health hazard which requires immediate action to
protect the public health, he or she may, without notice or hearing, issue a
written order citing the existence of such an emergency and the conditions
violating this chapter which require corrective action to remove such health
hazard. If such corrective action has not been taken, the City Clerk or City
Health Officer may take such action as may be necessary to protect the public
health, including stoppage of processing operations. Notwithstanding other
provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any
person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but
upon petition to the City Council shall be afforded a hearing as soon as
possible, but in any case not later than three days after the petition was
filed. After such hearing, depending on the finding as to whether or not the
provisions of this chapter and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto have
been complied with, the City Council shall continue such order in effect, or
modify it, or revoke it.
(Ord. 92, passed 10-8-1973)
§ 52.09 INSPECTION.
   The City Clerk, after identifying himself or herself, shall have the power
to enter at reasonable times upon private or public property for the purpose of
inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 92, passed 10-8-1973)
§ 52.10 DISPOSAL SITE ATTENDANT.
   The City Council may hire an attendant, who shall have the authority of a
Deputy Marshal, to supervise and regulate all dumping operations st said refuse
disposal site, and who shall perform his duties subject to the direction of the
City Clerk and the City Council.
(Ord. 92, passed 10-8-1973)
§ 52.11 REGULATIONS.
   The City Council is hereby authorized and directed, after public hearing
thereon, if deemed desirable, to adopt such written regulations as may be
necessary for the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. Such regulations shall be published once in a newspaper published
within the city. The City Council shall file a certified copy of all
regulations which it may adopt with the Clerk of the city, and with any person
designated as being responsible for the maintenance operation, opening and
closing of the city’s refuse disposal and such regulations shall be made
available for the inspection of the public on request. Such regulations shall
have the same force and effect as the provisions of this chapter and the
penalty for violation thereof shall be the same as the penalty for violation of
the provisions of this chapter, as hereinafter provided. A copy of the initial
rules and regulations adopted with this chapter and made a part thereof by this
reference is attached to the ordinance codified herein, and that is called
Exhibit “A”.
(Ord. 92, passed 10-8-1973)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any
regulation adopted thereunder, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $300 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, and each day’s
failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute a separate
violation.
(Ord. 92, passed 10-8-1973)
CHAPTER 53: NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL GAS
Section
   
53.01   Application of regulations
   
53.02   Inspector
   
53.03   License and bond required for gas fitters
   
53.04   Gas piping and appliances to be inspected
   
53.05   Gas installations to conform to good practice
   
53.06   Unsafe conditions
   
53.07   Dispute between gas utility and consumer
   
53.08   Fees for inspection
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all installations, extensions,
additions, alterations, maintenance and repairs of gas piping, equipment and
appliances on a consumer’s premises from the outlet of the utility’s gas meter.
(Ord. 85, passed 12-13-1961)
§ 53.02 INSPECTOR.
   The City Clerk shall enforce the provisions of this chapter, and for the
purpose shall have the right to enter any and all buildings and premises at all
reasonable times to inspect gas piping equipment and appliances. All
inspections and services performed by the City Clerk shall be construed as
being done under the police power of the city, and shall in no way increase the
liability of the city in the event of damage to persons or property which may
result from any such gas installation.
(Ord. 85, passed 12-13-1961)
§ 53.03 LICENSE AND BOND REQUIRED FOR GAS FITTERS.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation engaging in the business of
installing, maintaining or repairing gas piping equipment, or appliances, shall
first apply to the City Treasurer for a license to engage in such business and
do such work and shall pay to the City Treasurer the sum of $75 as an annual
fee. Said license shall be renewed annually. The license shall be issued on a
calendar-year basis with a proration of the annual fee on the basis of six
months.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall install gas piping, equipment or
appliances unless said person, firm or corporation shall have first complied
with all of the provisions of this section with regard to said license as set
forth hereinbefore.
   (C)   Prior to issuance of said license, the applicant shall file and
thereafter keep on file in the office of the City Clerk, and in full force and
effect at all times, a surety bond executed by a surety company duly authorized
to transact business in the state in the sum of $3,000, conditioned to the
effect that such person, firm or corporation shall perform all work in
connection with the installation, maintenance and repair of gas piping,
equipment and appliances in a skillful and workmanlike manner, using only
suitable and proper materials, equipment and appliances and shall comply with
all of the provisions of the ordinances of the city thereto.
(Ord. 85, passed 12-13-1961)
§ 53.04 GAS PIPING AND APPLIANCES TO BE INSPECTED.
   (A)   Every person, firm or corporation shall make application to the City
Clerk, furnishing required plans and specification, and obtain a permit from
said City Clerk before installing, extending or altering any gas piping,
equipment or appliance for the conveyance or use of natural or artificial gas
on a consumer’s premises from the outlet of the utility’s gas meter. Said
permit form shall be provided by the City Clerk. In the absence or inability to
act of said City Clerk, the Mayor shall designate some other fit and proper
person to perform said duties and shall notify the utility thereof.
   (B)   The gas utility or any employee or agent thereof, or any other person,
must first obtain the consent of the said City Clerk or such other person
designated by the Mayor as hereinbefore provided, to “turn on” gas at the meter
into any new system of gas piping, or into any old system of gas piping which
has been extended or altered on a consumer’s premises beyond the utility’s gas
meter. The utility shall, upon demand of the City Clerk or other person
designated, turn gas on at any time for the purpose of inspection and test.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except an agent of the gas
utility, to “turn on” gas at the meter into any new system of gas piping or
into any old system of gas piping after it has been “turned off” for any
reason.
(Ord. 85, passed 12-13-1961) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.05 GAS INSTALLATIONS TO CONFORM TO GOOD PRACTICE.
   (A)   All gas piping, equipment and appliances for the conveyance and use of
natural or artificial gas shall be installed to conform with generally accepted
good practice. The standards for “Installation of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances
in Buildings” as adopted and amended from time to time by the American Gas
Association, while not exclusive, shall be deemed to be generally accepted good
practice.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to turn gas into or use any gas piping, equipment
or appliance until the same has been inspected and approved by the City Clerk,
as provided in this chapter.
   (C)   Rubber hose connections or fittings arranged for rubber hose
connections for gas heaters or similar appliances shall not be permitted.
   (D)   Concealed gas fuel piping must not have any plugged openings except
for such gas fuel appliances as will be installed. All plugged openings in
concealed piping must be exposed. Concealed unions, standard weight steel
couplings, gas cocks, valves or bushings will not be permitted. Concealed
dresser-type couplings will not be permitted inside buildings.
   (E)   All gas-consuming appliances installed shall be equipped with an
effective draft diverter, shall be properly vented to a suitable flue, and
shall be inspected to determine that all products of combustion are vented to
atmosphere, except that AGA-approved gas ranges need not be vented. AGA-
approved gas refrigerators, gas mangles and other appliances, the consumption
of which is less than 5,000 Btu per hour, need not have draft diverters or be
vented to flues.
   (F)   Piping shall be of a size and so installed as to provide a supply of
gas sufficient to meet the maximum demand of all appliances served by that
piping without undue loss of pressure between the meter and the appliance or
appliances.
   (G)   All piping, equipment and appliances shall be tested for tightness
before being used, either by a meter “turn-on” test or an “air pressure” test,
as follows.
      (1)   Meter “turn-on” test: all gas outlets shall be closed and gas shall
be turned into the system and the hand on the test dial of the meter carefully
watched to ascertain that no gas is passing through the meter. This test shall
be applied for a reasonable length of time, but in no case for less than 15
minutes.
      (2)   Air pressure test: air pressure of not less than three pounds per
square inch above the atmospheric pressure shall be applied to the system for a
period of not less than ten minutes, in case of concealed piping, the air
pressure test must be used, with pressure at not less than six pounds per
square inch above atmospheric pressure.
      (3)   All testing apparatus shall be furnished by the installer. Piping
shall be completely roughed in and ready for testing prior to the time an
inspection is requested.
   (H)   Standard full weight wrought iron or steel pipe, free from defects,
shall be used in conveying gas from meter to appliances, except that approved
seamless, well annealed, nonferrous tubing with approved fittings may be used
for permanent connections of small stationary appliances such as radiant fires
installed in fireplaces and the like. All fittings for wrought iron or steel
pipe (except stop cocks or valves) shall be of best quality malleable iron.
Threads shall be in accordance with the American Pipe Thread Standard.
(Ord. 85, passed 12-13-1961) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.06 UNSAFE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Whenever an inspection shall reveal a condition unsafe to life or
property, the City Clerk shall notify the consumer of what is necessary to
correct the unsafe condition and shall not permit gas to be turned on until all
such conditions have been corrected, remedied and made safe. The City Clerk may
make subsequent inspections and tests of gas piping, gas installations and gas
appliances when he or she believes, or has reason to believe, that any
appliance’s piping or venting is in an unsafe condition to life or property and
the City Clerk shall order the gas utility to discontinue the supply of gas to
any consumer when any such condition is found and until the same is remedied.
   (B)   The consumer shall be responsible for the installations, appliances,
apparatus and equipment on his or her side of the point of delivery, and for
the natural gas after it passes said point of delivery. The consumer assumes
the duties of having inspected his or her house piping, appliances, apparatus,
equipment, chimneys and flues and every part thereof to see that the same are
clean and in proper working order. In the event the consumer finds the gas
service to be defective, he or she should immediately notify the utility to
that effect.
(Ord. 85, passed 12-13-1961)
§ 53.07 DISPUTE BETWEEN GAS UTILITY AND CONSUMER.
   Whenever there shall arise a dispute between a gas utility and a consumer
relative to the safety of any installation or appliance, the matter shall be
referred to the City Clerk who shall examine the same or cause it to be
examined and make final determination thereon.
(Ord. 85, passed 12-13-1961)
§ 53.08 FEES FOR INSPECTION.
   There shall be paid to the City Treasurer for the making of each inspection
by the City Clerk of any gas piping, gas installations, gas fixtures and
appliances, the following amounts: for the first appliance, $1.50; and for each
additional appliance after the first $0.50. This fee shall be paid upon taking
out permit required hereinbefore.
(Ord. 85, passed 12-13-1961)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, company or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less
than $10, nor more than $300, or by imprisonment not more than 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 85, passed 12-13-1961)
CHAPTER 54: SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
Sewers and Drains
   
54.01   Definitions
   
54.02   Director of Public Works
   
54.03   Wastewater Enterprise Fund
   
54.04   Duties of Clerk-Treasurer
   
54.05   Responsibility of Clerk-Treasurer
   
54.06   Wastewater fees, charges and payments
   
54.07   Use of public sewers required
   
54.08   Private sewage disposal
   
54.09   Building sewers and connections
   
54.10   Use of the public sewers
   
54.11   Protection from damage
   
54.12   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
54.13   Public water connection required
Sewer Service Regulations
   
54.25   Definition
   
54.26   Required service connection
   
54.27   Cost of extension of service
   
54.28   Project application and approval
   
54.29   Regulation of construction
   
54.30   Subsequent extensions and connections
 
   
54.99   Penalty
SEWERS AND DRAINS
§ 54.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING DRAIN.  The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   CITY WASTEWATER SYSTEM. The wastewater (sanitary sewerage) utility of the
city is hereby named the “Boulder Wastewater System.”
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct
from sanitary sewage.
   INSPECTOR. The person or persons duly authorized by the city, to inspect and
approve the installation of building sewers and their connection to the public
sewer system.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface,
and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Director of Public Works of the Municipal Sewage Works
of the city, or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   WASTEWATER UTILITY. There is a wastewater (sanitary sewerage) utility of the
city, which includes the wastewater (sanitary sewerage) system infrastructure
now constructed by the city and any expansion of said system, which may take
place in the future.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 54.02 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The Director of Public Works shall have charge of the operation and
maintenance of the city wastewater system under direction of the Mayor, and
must be a certified wastewater system operator as required by law.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 54.03 WASTEWATER ENTERPRISE FUND.
   There is an accounting entity maintained by the City Clerk-Treasurer and
designated the Wastewater Enterprise Fund and all receipts arising from the
operation of the city wastewater system including the collection of user fees,
or the sale of such property or material connected with the management or
operation of the wastewater system, or any appropriation made by the City
Council for the purpose of maintenance, construction or extension of the
wastewater works shall be recorded in this fund.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 54.04 DUTIES OF CLERK-TREASURER.
   It is the duty of the Clerk-Treasurer, under the direction of the Mayor, to
have charge of the collection of all wastewater fees when due and payable and
of keeping a record of accounts showing the true and complete status of each
individual user’s account. The Clerk shall be responsible for preparation and
mailing of bills for wastewater fees due from all users, along with other
notices that may from time to time be required. It shall be the duty of the
Clerk-Treasurer to have charge of the clerical work of the city wastewater
system.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 54.05 RESPONSIBILITY OF CLERK-TREASURER.
   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall be responsible for receiving and depositing
wastewater fees in the Wastewater Enterprise Fund and such fund shall be kept
entirely separate and apart from all other funds of the city and no money shall
be paid out of the same except by disbursements approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 54.06 WASTEWATER FEES, CHARGES AND PAYMENT.
   User fees and charges for wastewater service shall be set by resolution of
the City Council.
   (A)   A fee structure shall be applied to all wastewater users.
   (B)   The owner of property served by the city wastewater system shall be
liable for all wastewater service fees and charges.
   (C)   The property owner is responsible for the payment of all wastewater
bills. Payments will be accepted from tenants, but that will not relieve the
property owner of liability if the amount due becomes delinquent.
   (D)   The hook-up fee for a new connection and for disconnection and
reconnection shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
   (E)   Should the property owner desire to discontinue wastewater service,
whether temporary or permanent discontinuance, the city must be notified by the
property owner in writing at the time service is to be discontinued.
   (F)   Charges shall be delinquent if not paid on or before the due date, and
a delinquency which continues 15 days or more shall result in termination of
wastewater service unless arrangements acceptable to the city have been made.
Once terminated, the water service shall not be restored until the user’s
account is paid in full, including both current and delinquent charges, or
until arrangements acceptable to the city have been made. The city shall have
the sole discretion to decide what arrangements, if any, are acceptable. The
Water Department may also exact an additional charge for disconnecting and
reconnecting the water supply. The city will accept no responsibility for any
damage to property in the event services are discontinued.
   (G)   The city shall have an action at law for the collection of delinquent
charges, and may also recover reasonable collection costs and attorney’s fees.
   (H)   Whenever the service is terminated to a user by request, or by order
of the Sewer Department, the charge for restoration of service set forth in
fees shall be paid by the user before service is restored.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 54.07 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within said
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city any sanitary sewage,
industrial waste or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facilities
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.08 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying
with all recommendations of the State Board of Health.
   (B)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public
sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tank, cesspools and
similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and the site
reclaimed.
   (C)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
   (D)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirement that may be imposed by the City or County
Health Officer.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 54.09 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the City Administrator.
   (B)   Drains for the purpose of removing sewage from premises within the
city, or drains connecting to the sewer system of the city, shall be
constructed and connected with the sewers only in strict compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. The work shall be done only by persons who hold a
valid plumber’s license, and who are under approved bonds for the full and
faithful performance of the work, in the event that a request for sewer
services to any person’s property necessitates the extension of sewer main
service, such costs of construction, including engineering, shall be borne by
the requesting party unless otherwise agreed to by the city. Each residence or
business shall be separately and independently connected to the sewer main.
   (C)   The entire cost of repairing or maintaining any sewer pipe to the main
including the saddle shall be paid by the property owner.
   (D)   No construction of new sewer lines or relocating or repair of any
existing sewer lines connected to the main shall be done without a permit
issued by the city. The permit shall be present at the job site the whole time
the work is in progress, and shall be exhibited to any official of the city
upon request.
   (E)   Before any work is done towards installing the building sewer, the
owner or person installing the building sewer shall furnish proof to the City
Administrator of the existence of an in-force surety bond covering such work in
the minimum of $1,000 to indemnify said city from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by said installation.
   (F)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior
lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
   (G)   Old building sewers or portions thereof may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the said
inspector to meet all requirements of this chapter. When old building sewers or
portions thereof are used, all portions of the building sewer shall pass
through or across undisturbed ground. A cesspool or septic tank filled within
two years of the date of installing the building sewer and connecting it to the
public sewer shall be considered as disturbed ground.
   (H)   The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification
(Designation A-74) or equal; vitrified clay sewer pipe, ASTM Specification
(Designation C13) or plastic pipe that meets State Plumbing Code standards. Any
part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service
pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe with leaded joints or plastic
pipe that meets state standards or Schedule 80 sewer pipe.
   (I)   All joints and connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight.
Vitrified clay sewer pipe or plastic pipe that meets State standards shall be
fitted with factory made Resilient Compression Joints meeting the ASTM
Specifications for Vitrified Clay Pipe Joints having Resilient Properties
(Designation C425).
      (1)   Before joining the pipe in the trench, the bell and spigot surface
shall be wiped free of dirt or other foreign matter. A lubricant or sealer as
recommended by the pipe manufacturer shall be applied to the bell and spigot
mating surfaces just before they are jointed together.
      (2)   The top or one side of the spigot end shall be positioned into the
bell end of the pipe previously laid and shall then be shoved home to compress
the joint and to assure a tight fit between the interfaces.
      (3)   Joints for extra heavy cast iron soil pipe shall be made by
inserting a roll of hemp or jute and thoroughly caulking it into place and then
following with pure molten lead well caulked, not less than one inch deep. No
paint, varnish or putty will be allowed in the joints until they have been
tested and approved. Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by
approval of the said inspector.
   (J)   The size and slope of the building sewers shall be subject to the
approval of the said inspector, but in no event shall the diameter be less than
four inches. No building sewer for a commercial building or a multiple dwelling
shall be less than four inches in diameter. The slope of such pipe shall not be
less than one-eighth inch per foot. A slope of one-fourth inch per foot shall
be used whenever practical. A Y or T fitting may be installed near the building
sewer for cleanout purposes.
   (K)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth shall be sufficient to
afford protection from frost. All excavations required for the installation of
a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the
said inspector. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with
A.S.T.M. Specification (Designation C12) except that no backfill shall be
placed until the work has been inspected by the inspector or his or her
representative.
   (L)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drains shall
be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. No
water operated sewage ejector shall be used.
   (M)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made at the Y branch designated for that property, if such branch is available
at a suitable location, any connection not made at the designated Y branch in
the main sewer shall be made only as directed by the said inspector.
   (N)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the said
inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. Backfilling shall not be done until final inspection is made by
the Sewer Inspector. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
said inspector or his or her representative.
   (O)   All building drains shall be cast iron soil pipe or plastic pipe and
shall extend a minimum distance of five feet outside of the building
foundation; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to trailer
houses.
   (P)   No old cesspool or septic tank shall be connected to any portion of a
building sewer that is also connected to the public sewer.
   (Q)   All excavation for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so to protect the public from hazards.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.10 USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any public
sewer, any harmful water or wastes, whether liquid, solid or gas, capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works.
   (C)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the said inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amount, or any flammable wastes,
sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. Where installed, they
shall be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously
efficient operation at all times.
   (D)   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having
harmful or objectionable characteristics shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Superintendent. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Director
of Public Works, the owner shall provide at his or her expense, such
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to treat these wastes prior to
discharge to the public sewer. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be
submitted for the approval of the Director of Public Works and of the State
Board of Health, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced
until said approval is obtained in writing. Where preliminary treatment
facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her
expense.
   (E)   When required by the Director of Public Works, the owner of any
property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install
and maintain, at his or her expense, a suitable control manhole in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. All
measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of water and wastes
shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Sewage, and shall be determined at the control manhole or upon
suitable samples taken at said manhole. In the event that no special manhole
has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer
is connected.
   (F)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the
industrial concern.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.11 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the city wastewater system.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.12 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   The Director of Public Works, Inspector and other duly authorized employees
of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 54.13 PUBLIC WATER CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   No building shall be connected to the city wastewater system, unless the
premises has been first connected to the city water system.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015) Penalty, see §
54.99
SEWER SERVICE REGULATIONS
§ 54.25 DEFINITION.
   As used in this subchapter, unless the context requires otherwise, PERSON
means an individual, firm, partnership, company, association, joint stock
association; private, municipal or public corporation; board, commission,
agency or department of government, or any body politic; and includes a
trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 54.26 REQUIRED SERVICE CONNECTION.
   All residential housing and other buildings within the city and requiring
sewage disposal shall be connected to the sewer system of the city; provided a
public sewer is within 150 feet of the property line.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 54.27 COST OF EXTENSION OF SERVICE.
   A person who develops or constructs within the city any residential housing
or other facilities in an area not served by the city sewer system on the
effective date of this chapter and which requires the extension of any main
line of the city sewer system to service said facilities shall pay the entire
cost of constructing such extension. All sewer main line extensions constructed
pursuant to this chapter shall, on the date of completion and final approval,
become the property of the city and shall be operated and maintained by said
city.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 54.28 PROJECT APPLICATION AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   Prior to construction or contracting for construction for any sewer
main line extension pursuant to this chapter, the following shall be submitted
to the city:
      (1)   A written application describing the proposed project, accompanied
by a map adequately describing the proposed mains, services, length, size, type
and depth of mains and pipes, and the geographical location of said items,
together with supporting data and date of anticipated completion;
      (2)   Satisfactory evidence that any necessary easements have been
obtained;
      (3)   Satisfactory evidence of financial ability to pay for the total
cost of construction; and
      (4)   Reliable estimates of the cost of construction.
   (B)   No construction may be started until project approval is granted by
the city.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 54.29 REGULATION OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The necessary construction may be performed in accordance with a
contract between the person requiring extension and a contractor, between the
city and a contractor, or between the person requiring the extension, the city,
and a contractor, as shall be determined by the city in each case.
   (B)   Any sewer line extended and constructed pursuant to this chapter shall
conform to the applicable sewer system regulations of the city and shall be
subject to inspection and final approval by the City Public Works Director, the
City Administrator, or other authorized official.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 54.30 SUBSEQUENT EXTENSIONS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Any person who requires a subsequent extension of a sewer main line
constructed pursuant to this chapter, or who requires service from a main line
constructed pursuant to this chapter, shall repay the proportionate cost of
construction to the person who originally incurred and paid said cost. Said
proportionate cost and method of payment shall be equitably determined by the
city.
   (B)   No extension or service connection may be made pursuant to this
section until the person requiring the extension or connection agrees in
writing to so repay and furnishes a copy of the written agreement to the city.
The requirements of this section may also be satisfied by furnishing to the
city a copy of a written waiver, of the right to repayment established by this
section, signed by the person entitled to repayment.
   (C)   The repayment required by this section may be made in equal annual
installments, and shall be made in full in not more than two years. Payment
shall be made to the city for direct reimbursement to the person who originally
incurred and paid said cost.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 54.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   A person who violates any provision of §§
54.01 through
54.13 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
in an amount not exceeding $500, and each day that any person violates a
provision of §§
54.01 through
54.13 constitutes a separate offense punishable as such.
      (2)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
54.01 through
54.13 shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned the city by reason of such violation.
   (C)   Any person violating §
54.11 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than
$500.
   (D)   A person who violates any provision of §§
54.25 through
54.30 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
in an amount not exceeding $500, and each day that any person violates a
provision of §§
54.25 through
54.30 constitutes a separate offense punishable as such.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
CHAPTER 55: WATER SYSTEM
Section
   
55.01   Water system
   
55.02   Definitions
   
55.03   Director of Public Works
   
55.04   Revenues from water sales and service
   
55.05   Billing and delinquent accounts
   
55.06   Owners responsible for usage charges
   
55.07   Rules and regulations
   
55.08   Regulation of sprinkling
 
   
55.99   Penalty
§ 55.01 WATER SYSTEM.
   The water system now constructed by the city and any expansion of said
system which may take place in the future of said system is hereby named the
city water system.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 55.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership company association, joint stock
association, private, municipal or public corporation; board, commission,
agency, or department of government or any body politic; and includes a
trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative.
   WATER UTILITY. There is a water utility of the city, which includes the
water system infrastructure now constructed by the city and any expansion of
said system, which may take place in the future.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 55.03 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The Director of Public Works shall have charge of the operation and
maintenance of the city water system under direction of the Mayor and must be a
certified water system operator as required by law.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 55.04 REVENUES FROM WATER SALES AND SERVICES.
   (A)   Water Enterprise Fund. There is an accounting entity maintained by the
City Clerk-Treasurer and designated the Water Enterprise Fund and all receipts
arising from the sale of water, the collection of water fees, or the sale of
such property or material connected with the management or operation of the
water system, or any appropriation made by the City Council for the purpose of
maintenance, construction or extension of the water works shall be recorded in
this fund.
   (B)   Establishing of water rates. The revenues of the city water system
shall be obtained by charging the consumer a monthly water rental fee as well
as all charges for and relating to water service. These user fees and charges
for water service shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   Responsibility of the Clerk. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall be
responsible for receiving and depositing water fees in the Water Enterprise
Fund and such fund shall be kept entirely separate and apart from all other
funds of the city and no money shall be paid out of the same except by
disbursements approved by the City Council.
   (D)   Duties of the Clerk. It is the duty of the Clerk-Treasurer, under the
direction of the Mayor, to have charge of the collection of all water fees when
due and payable and of keeping a record of accounts showing the true and
complete status of each individual user’s account. The Clerk shall be
responsible for preparation and mailing of bills for water fees due from all
users, along with other notices that may from time to time be required. It
shall be the duty of the Clerk to have charge of the clerical work of the water
system.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 55.05 BILLING AND DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   Water users will be billed at the beginning of each month. Each
billing will specify a due date by which time the bill is expected to be paid.
   (B)   Charges shall be delinquent if not paid on or before the due date, and
a delinquency which continues 30 days or more shall result in termination of
water service until arrangements acceptable to the city have been made. Once
terminated, the water service shall not be restored until the user’s account is
paid in full, including both current and delinquent charges, or until
arrangements acceptable to the city have been made. The city shall have the
sole discretion to decide what arrangements, if any, are acceptable. The Water
Department may also exact an additional charge for disconnecting and
reconnecting the water supply. The city will accept no responsibility for any
damage to property in the event service is discontinued.
   (C)   Whenever a water service is terminated to a user by request, or by
order of the Water Department, the charge for restoration of service set forth
by resolution of the City Council shall be paid by the user before service is
restored.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 55.06 OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR USAGE CHARGES.
   (A)   The owner of property served by the city water system shall be liable
for all water service fees and charges. The property owner is responsible for
the payment of all water/sewer bills. Payments will be accepted from tenants,
but that will not relieve the property owner of liability if the amount due
becomes delinquent.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall bill water charges directly to the owner of
rented dwellings.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 55.07 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The general rules and regulations adopted by the State Public Service
Commission are hereby adopted as the general rules and regulations of the city
water system. The following special rules and regulations are required by local
conditions and supplement the general rules to govern the city water system.
   (B)   The rules, regulations and water rates of this chapter, shall be
considered a part of the contract with each person, company or corporation
supplied water service by the city. Any person, company or corporation using
the service shall be considered to have given his, her or their express consent
to be bound by these rules and regulations. When in violation, water service
may, upon due notice, be disconnected from the building or other place of such
violation, and shall not again be turned on, except by the order of the Mayor/
City Administrator and upon payment of the sum of past due amounts, and a shut-
off and turn-on charge.
      (1)   The owner or owners of property requiring a connection to the water
mains of the city shall pay a water main connection fee. In addition to the
connection fee, the property owner will pay for all parts/supplies including
the curb stop, water meter, and labor costs incurred to complete the
connection. The hook-up fee for a new connection and for disconnection and
reconnection shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
      (2)   All service lines from the main water line to the premises of
consumers must be at least six feet deep, and upon the installation of a
service line, the depth must be measured and approved by the Public Works
Director or some person appointed by him or her, before the service line is
connected to the water main and water is furnished by the city.
      (3)   The service lines from the water mains to the user’s premises must
be of suitable tubing consistent with the standards of the American Waterworks
Society.
      (4)   In the event disputes or complaints are tendered on the part of
consumers, such disputes or complaints must be presented to the Mayor/City
Administrator in writing. In the event disputes or complaints are not resolved,
the consumer must present his, her or their dispute or complaint to the City
Council for its consideration and the Council will render the decision on the
matters presented.
      (5)   Curb boxes when installed must be installed one foot outside of the
property line on residential hook-ups and one foot in from the outside edge of
the curb on business hook-ups.
      (6)   There shall be a water meter installed upon the service pipe at the
service location of each water consumer in an approved outside meter pit or
vault. This meter is to be selected by the Public Works Director and installed
under the direction of the employees of the Water Department, who shall select
the place on the property where the meter will be installed.
   (C)   The meter pit or vault for the meter to be located in will be
installed at a location to be determined by the employees of the Water/Sewer
Department. The meter must be protected from freezing and other damage. The
cost of initial installation will be borne by the city at no cost to the
property owner for those water consumers on the existing system as of September
13, 2015 (completion of the water meter project). After the initial
installation, all new connections and/or changes to water service lines
requiring a new meter, meter pit or vault; the costs will be borne by the
property owner. Such costs will be included in the hookup fees charged by the
city for new users and changes. The city shall not be liable in any manner
should any alteration of the premises required to repair, access or change a
water meter.
   (D)   Meters for those buildings existing on Main Street will not be
required to install a meter pit or vault; those meters are to be installed on
the main service line at a location inside the building. If, for any reason,
the Public Works Director deems an outside meter pit or vault would not be
feasible at a certain location, the city will be allowed to install a meter on
the main service line of that property inside the building.
   (E)   If any water consumer interferes with the installation of a meter or
refuses to allow the installation of a meter at a place on the premises
selected by the Water Department, the water shall be turned off and shall not
be turned on again until a water meter is installed as required and a fee as
established by the City Council is paid for turning on the water. In addition,
the party interfering with the installation of the meter or refusing to allow
the installation of a meter may be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day the
meter is not installed and fined according to §
55.99.
   (F)   Water consumers are not permitted to interfere in any way with the
meter pit and/or water meter after they are set in place. In case a meter seal
is broken or the working parts of the meter have been tampered with or the
meter or pit damaged, the city may render a bill for water charges together
with the full cost of repairs or replacement of the damaged meter or meter pit.
In addition, a person found tampering with the water meters or his or her
installation may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined according to the
penalties in §
55.99.
   (G)   All water meters, meter pits or vaults installed in the city must be
of a type and brand approved by the Public Works Director or his or her
designee. All meters shall be capable of being radio read and shall be
compatible with the city’s meter reading system.
   (H)   The water shall not be turned on to any house or service pipe except
by permission of the Public Works Director, and then not until the applicant
has fully complied with every requirement in this chapter. Plumbers are
strictly forbidden from turning water into any service pipe, except by order or
permission in writing from the Public Works Director. This rule shall not be
construed to prohibit plumbers from turning water into pipes for the purpose of
testing them, and for that purpose only.
   (I)   All property owners using the city’s water service shall keep their
own service pipes in good repair and protected from freezing at their own risk
and expense. It is the policy of the city that no claims or demands against the
city shall be accepted by the city by reason of broken or plugged service lines
on the water user’s property. All costs of repair and/or equipment for existing
waterlines from the mainline to the residence or served structure shall be
borne by the person receiving the water service.
   (J)   Should the property owner desire to discontinue water service, whether
temporary or permanent discontinuance, the city must be notified by the
property owner in writing at the time service is to be discontinued.
   (K)   Any person tapping the mains or opening or closing any valves,
corporation cocks or curb cocks, or opening or closing any fire hydrant,
without authority from the city to do so shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (L)   The city reserves the right at any time, without notice, to shut off
the water in the mains for the purpose of dealing with emergency situations or
making repairs or extensions or for any other purpose. The city shall have
access at all reasonable times to all parts of any buildings or premises for
the purpose of inspecting the size and condition of the pipes and fixtures and
the manner in which the water is used.
   (M)   The city has jurisdiction over the city water system, including the
wells, pipe lines, storage tanks, conduits, rights-of-way, curb boxes, meters
and any other appurtenances. Any person found guilty of trespassing thereon
with the intent to deface or defraud, or any tampering or interfering with any
of the appliances, fixtures, meters, valves or property, with malicious or
fraudulent intent, or any person found guilty of interfering with the water
supply shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to §
55.99.
   (N)   Property owners sharing a common building or structure shall provide,
at their own expense, separate shut off valves as approved by the Director of
Public Works for the delivery of water services from the city and shall allow
sole control over any and all of the valves in the event of non-payment by any
property owners sharing the common building or structure.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015) Penalty, see §
55.99
§ 55.08 REGULATION OF SPRINKLING.
   The City Council shall have the authority to regulate outdoor sprinkling
hours and days and whenever sprinkling is allowed whenever, in the discretion
of the City Council, circumstances warrant. (Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
Penalty, see §
55.99
§ 55.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding $500, and each day that any person violates a provision of this
chapter constitutes a separate offense punishable as such.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city
by reason of such violation.
   (C)   Any person found guilty of trespassing thereon with the intent to
deface or defraud, or any tampering or interfering with any of the appliances,
fixtures, meters, valves or property, with malicious or fraudulent intent, or
any person found guilty of interfering with the water supply shall upon
conviction thereof, be fined a sum not exceeding $500 or punishment by
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both fine and imprisonment, and shall be
liable for damages in an amount equal to the loss incurred by the city,
together with the costs of any legal action, in addition to the fine and
imprisonment.
   (D)   Conviction of a violation of the established sprinkling schedule (§
55.08) shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a first conviction of $25;
on a second conviction $50 and third or subsequent conviction $100. All fines
collected shall be credited to the City Water Utility Enterprise Fund.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-2015)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
72.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
73.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   When local authorities may and shall alter limits
   
70.02   Minimum speed regulations
   
70.03   Special speed limitations on trucks, truck-tractors, motor-driven
cycles and vehicles towing house trailers
   
70.04   Special speed limitations
   
70.05   Restrictions on use of controlled access roadway
   
70.06   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 WHEN LOCAL AUTHORITIES MAY AND SHALL ALTER LIMITS.
   (A)   Whenever local authorities in their respective jurisdictions determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed
permitted under this chapter is greater or less than is reasonable and safe
under the conditions found to exist upon a highway or part of a highway, the
local authority may determine and declare a reasonable and safe limit thereon
which:
      (1)   Decreases the limit at intersection;
      (2)   Increases the limit within an urban district but not to more than
55 mph during nighttime; or
      (3)   Decreases the limit outside an urban district, but not to less than
35 mph.
   (B)   Local authorities in their respective jurisdictions shall determine by
an engineering and traffic investigation the proper speed for all arterial
streets and shall declare a reasonable and safe limit thereon which may be
greater or less than the speed permitted under this chapter for an urban
district.
   (C)   Any altered limit established as herein above authorized shall be
effective at all times or during hours of darkness or at other times as may be
determined when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon such
street or highway.
   (D)   Any alteration of speed limits on state highways or extensions thereof
in a municipality by local authorities shall not be effective until such
alteration has been approved by the Commission.
(Ord. 89, passed 10-14-1969)
§ 70.02 MINIMUM SPEED REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to
impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when
reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. Police
officers or highway patrol officers are hereby authorized to enforce this
provision by directions to drivers, and in the event of apparent willful
disobedience to this provision and refusal to comply with direction of an
officer in accordance herewith the continued slow operation by a driver shall
be a misdemeanor, except that inability to comply with such order will not be
construed as willful disobedience.
   (B)   Whenever the Board or local authorities within their respective
jurisdictions determine on the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation that slow speeds on any part of a highway consistently impede the
normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Board of such local authority
may determine and declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall
drive a vehicle except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with
law.
(Ord. 89, passed 10-14-1969) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 SPECIAL SPEED LIMITATIONS ON TRUCKS, TRUCK-TRACTORS, MOTOR DRIVEN
CYCLES AND VEHICLES TOWING HOUSE TRAILERS.
   (A)   No person shall operate any truck or truck-tractor the gross weight of
which exceeds 8,000 pounds at a speed greater than 50 mph.
   (B)   No person shall operate any motor-driven cycle from one-half hour
after sunset to a half hour before sunrise and at any other time when due to
insufficient light, at a speed greater than 35 mph unless such motor-driven
cycle is equipped with a head lamp or lamps which are adequate to reveal a
person or vehicle at a distance of 300 feet ahead.
   (C)   No person shall operate a vehicle which is towing a house trailer at a
speed greater than a maximum of 50 mph.
(Ord. 89, passed 10-14-1969) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 SPECIAL SPEED LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle equipped with solid rubber or
cushion tires at a speed greater than a maximum of ten mph.
   (B)   No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated
structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater than the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure,
when such structure is signposted as provided in this section.
   (C)   The Board upon request from any local authority may, or upon its own
initiative shall, conduct an investigation of any bridge or other elevated
structure constituting a part of a highway, and if it shall thereupon find that
such structure cannot with safety to itself withstand vehicles traveling at the
speed otherwise permissible under this chapter, the Board shall determine and
declare the maximum speed of vehicles which such structure can withstand, and
shall cause or permit suitable signs stating such maximum speed to be erected
and maintained at a distance of not less than 100 feet before each end of such
structure.
   (D)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this section,
proof of said determination of the maximum speed by said Board and the
existence of said signs shall constitute conclusive evidence of the maximum
speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
(Ord. 89, passed 10-14-1969) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS ROADWAY.
   (A)   The Commission may by resolution or order entered in its minutes, and
local authorities may, by ordinance with respect to any controlled access
roadway under their respective jurisdictions, prohibit the use of any such
roadway by pedestrians, bicycles or other nonmotorized traffic or by any person
operating a motor-driven cycle.
   (B)   The Commission or the local authority adopting any such prohibitory
regulation shall erect and maintain official signs on the controlled access
roadway on which such regulations are applicable and, when so erected, no
person shall disobey the restrictions stated on such signs.
(Ord. 89, passed 10-14-1969) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or highway patrol officer or traffic-control
device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the
local authorities indicate a different length by signs or markings;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of said entrance when properly signposted;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel; or
      (14)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(Ord. 89, passed 10-14-1969) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter unless such violation is by this chapter or other law of this
state declared to be a felony.
   (B)   Every person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter for which another penalty is not provided shall for
a first conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not less than $10 nor more
than $100; for a second conviction within one year thereafter such person shall
be punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than upon a third or
subsequent conviction within one year after the first conviction such person
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $300.
   (C)   Upon conviction the court costs, or any part thereof, may also be
assessed against the defendant in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 89, passed 10-14-1969; Ord. 167, passed 3-9-1998; Ord. 2010-03, passed 8-
16-2010; Ord. 2021-01, passed 5-17-2021)
CHAPTER 71: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
   
71.01   Effect of regulations
   
71.02   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles
   
71.03   Riding on bicycles
   
71.04   Clinging to vehicles
   
71.05   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
71.06   Carrying articles
   
71.07   Lamps or other equipment on bicycles
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required by this chapter.
   (B)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(Ord. 89, passed 10-14-1969) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by this chapter, except as to special regulations in this chapter, and
except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can
have no application.
(Ord. 89, passed 10-14-1969) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 RIDING ON BICYCLES.
   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
(Ord. 89, passed 10-14-1969) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.
(Ord. 89, passed 10-14-1969) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing
a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
   (C)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
(Ord. 89, passed 10-14-1969) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars.
(Ord. 89, passed 10-14-1969) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07 LAMPS OR OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved
by the Board which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet
to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a
motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet
to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
   (B)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Ord. 89, passed 10-14-1969) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter unless such violation is by this chapter or other law of this
state declared to be a felony.
   (B)   Every person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter for which another penalty is not provided shall for
a first conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not less than $10 nor more
than $100; for a second conviction within one year thereafter such person shall
be punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $200; upon a third or
subsequent conviction within one year after the first conviction such person
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $300.
   (C)   Upon conviction the court costs, or any part thereof, may also be
assessed against the defendant in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 89, passed 10-14-1969; Ord. 167, passed 3-9-1998; Ord. 2010-03, passed 8-
16-2010; Ord. 2021-01, passed 5-17-2021)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Stop streets
      
II.   U-turns
SCHEDULE I. STOP STREETS.
   (A)   Centennial Avenue, at all points west of the intersection of said
Avenue and Main Street, and Main Street in said city at all points north of
said intersection, shall be and the same hereby are declared to be “Stop”
streets.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any automobile, truck,
motorcycle or other motor vehicle into or upon said stop streets from any point
within the limits of the city, without first stopping said automobile, truck,
motorcycle or other motor vehicle just before entering said stop street and
carefully observing traffic both ways on said stop streets, to the end that any
traffic on said stop streets shall have the right-of-way over any automobile,
truck, motorcycle or other motor vehicle so entering said stop streets.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not exceeding $100.
(Ord. 64, passed 4-29-1937; Ord. 2021-01, passed 5-17-2021)
SCHEDULE II. U-TURNS.
   (A)   No automobile or other motor vehicle shall make a U-turn anywhere on
Main Street or one block east or west of Main Street in the city. For purposes
of this section, U-TURN is defined as turning from the roadway across the
opposite lane of traffic at an angle in excess of 90 degrees.
   (B)   Anyone violating any provision of division (A) above shall, upon
conviction, be fined in a sum not less than $25 nor more than $100.
(Ord. 146, passed 2-22-1988)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Truck parking
SCHEDULE I. TRUCK PARKING.
   (A)   Trucks of a rated capacity in excess of 26,000 pounds GVW are hereby
prohibited from parking on Main Street within the city between the hours of 9:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (B)   Any person violating a provision of division (A) above shall, upon
complaint and conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $300.
(Ord. 100, passed 12-8-1975; Ord. 2004-03, passed 9-8-2003)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   GARBAGE, REFUSE; BURNING
      
92.   NUISANCES
      
93.   JUNK VEHICLES
      
94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
95.   PARKS AND RECREATION
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Dogs and Other Animals
   
90.001   Definitions
   
90.002   Enforcement
   
90.003   Licensing
   
90.004   Warnings
   
90.005   Dog shows or service dogs
   
90.006   Prima facie evidence of violation
   
90.007   Animal census
   
90.008   Nuisance dogs
   
90.009   Vicious animals
   
90.010   Restraint required
   
90.011   Investigation
   
90.012   Interference with law enforcement officer
   
90.013   Cruelty to animals
   
90.014   Execution of fine or imprisonment
   
90.015   Proper enclosure
   
90.016   Freeing confined animals
Impounding Animals
   
90.030   Seizure and impounding of animals
   
90.031   Notice of impoundment; redemption
   
90.032   Disposition of unredeemed animals
   
90.033   Alternative to death of animal; removal of animal from municipality
Control of Livestock
   
90.045   Animals and fowl to be kept in enclosures
   
90.046   Number of animals allowed by weight
   
90.047   Staking prohibited
   
90.048   Premises to be maintained
   
90.049   Application
   
90.050   Enforcement
Fowl at Large
   
90.065   Fowl at large
   
90.066   Enforcement
Animal Kennels
   
90.080   Definitions
   
90.081   License; fee; issuance; application
   
90.082   Classes established; license fees
   
90.083   Expiration of license
 
   
90.999   Penalty
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
§ 90.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED. Failure to redeem an impounded animal within 72 hours of
incarceration, leaving an animal in any place where is may suffer injury,
hunger or exposure or become a public nuisance or changing residence and
failing to move an animal within 24 hours.
   ANIMAL. All vertebrates except human beings.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER or ACO. Any person hired by or contracted with by the
city to enforce this chapter. This term includes a law enforcement officer of
the city.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises provided by the city and maintained for
impounding and caring for dogs and other animals.
   AT LARGE. Any animal which is off the premises of its owner and is not under
the immediate and continued control of its owner or an authorized agent of the
owner either by leash or voice and/or signal control. Animals controlling or
protecting livestock or in other related agricultural activities are to be
excluded from this definition.
   BITE. Any abrasion, scratch, puncture, laceration, bruise, tear or piercing
of the skin inflicted by the teeth of an animal.
   DOG. Any canine animal, of either sex (whether or not spayed or neutered),
or any dingo, wolf, coyote or cross that is being kept as a dog.
   OWNER. Any person, corporation, partnership, association or other legal
entity owning, keeping or harboring a dog, or allowing the same to habitually
remain on or be fed on or about one’s premises.
   RESTRAINT. An animal is controlled by a leash, at “heel” beside a competent
person and obedient to that person’s command, within a vehicle with permission
of the owner, or within the property limits of the premises controlled by the
owner or other person consenting thereto.
   SEVERE INJURY. Any physical injury that results in broken bones or
disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery.
   VACCINATION. The inoculation of a dog with anti-rabies vaccine, having an
effective immunity of at least two years, and administered under the direction
of the Public Health Officer by a licensed veterinarian or with any other
vaccine approved by the Public Health Officer and the State Veterinarian.
   VETERINARIAN. A doctor of veterinary medicine holding a valid license.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. An animal which bites or attempts to bite any human being
without provocation or which harasses, chases, bites or attempts to bite any
other animal including livestock or any domestic pet.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-31-2009)
§ 90.002 ENFORCEMENT.
   This chapter shall be enforced by the ACO or any city law enforcement
officer.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004)
§ 90.003 LICENSING.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to own, harbor or keep any dog over the
age of five months, or to permit such a dog which is owned, harbored or
controlled by him or her to be within the city limits unless the dog has
attached to its neck or leg a substantial collar containing a metal license tag
which is issued by the authority of the municipality for the purpose of
identifying the dog and designating a license number. No person shall own, keep
or harbor any dog within the city limits unless such dog is licensed as herein
provided.
      (1)   Application for such license shall be made to the City Clerk, or
such other agent as shall be designated by him or her, which shall state the
name and address of the owner and the name, breed, color, age and sex of the
dog. The license fee shall be paid at the time of making application, a
numbered receipt given to the applicant and a numbered metallic tag shall be
issued to the owner.
      (2)   The annual license fee shall be $5 for each neutered male or spayed
female dog. The annual license fee shall be $20 for each un-spayed or un-
neutered dog. Any person bringing any dog into the city, after the date this
chapter is effective, except as otherwise provided, shall immediately make
application for such license and pay the license herein provided for; but such
license shall expire on the thirty-first day of the following December. No
application for a dog license shall be accepted until the applicant has
produced satisfactory evidence that the dog for which the license is to be
issued has been vaccinated for rabies within two years immediately preceding
the date of application with “avianized flury” strain rabies vaccine.
   (B)   In the event that a license tag issued for a dog shall be lost, the
owner may obtain a duplicate tag upon the payment of $2 to the City Clerk.
   (C)   If there is a change of ownership of a dog during the license year,
the new owner may have the current license transferred to his or her name upon
application to the City Clerk.
   (D)   No person shall use for any dog a license receipt, or license tag, or
evidence of vaccination for rabies issued for any other dog.
   (E)   The license tag provided for herein shall be stamped with a number and
the year for which issued. The shape, design or color of each tag shall be
changed from year to year. Every licensed dog shall at all times wear a choke
chain, collar, harness or leg chain to which is attached its licence tag.
   (F)   The unauthorized removal of the tag hereinbefore mentioned from any
dog shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   (G)   No person shall place or cause to be placed upon the collar or around
the neck of any dog, any counterfeit of the tag hereinbefore mentioned.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-31-2009) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.004 WARNINGS.
   At the ACO’s discretion, one warning may be issued to owners of animals in
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.005 DOG SHOWS OR SERVICE DOGS.
   (A)   No license shall be required for dogs brought into the city-county for
the purpose of participating in any dog show; but such dogs must be vaccinated
as required by §
90.003.
   (B)   Licenses shall be required for dogs trained to assist sight or hearing
impaired persons or other personal service dogs, when such dogs are actually
being used by sight or hearing impaired or other disabled persons, but the fees
provided for in §
90.003 shall be waived. Such dogs must be vaccinated as required by §
90.003.
   (C)   Licenses shall be required for dogs trained to assist law enforcement
officers, but the fees provided for in §
90.003 shall be waived. Such dogs must be vaccinated as required by §
90.003.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004)
§ 90.006 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF VIOLATION.
   It is the responsibility of every owner of a dog which is within the city
limits to comply with the provisions hereof. If any dog is seen within the city
limits without having a current license tag attached to it by one of the means
provided for herein, or running at large, it shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this chapter by the owner of said dog.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.007 ANIMAL CENSUS.
   At least once every five years, a complete census may be taken of all dogs,
cats and other animals in the city and anyone found to be harboring an
unlicensed animal required to be licensed by the provisions of this chapter
shall be required immediately to obtain a license for such animal or shall be
cited into court to answer to charges of violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004)
§ 90.008 NUISANCE DOGS.
   (A)   It is a public nuisance for any dog to:
      (1)   Threaten people or property specifically including livestock, other
dogs or pets;
      (2)   Damage or destroy property;
      (3)   Be abandoned or deserted by its owner;
      (4)   Run at large and not be restrained as required by this chapter;
      (5)   Chase vehicles in public streets, ways or parks;
      (6)   Cause annoyance to any person by prolonged barking, howling,
yelping or other means;
      (7)   Deposit or buildup of excreta or waste material on any public walk,
recreation area or private property;
      (8)   Be an unconfined female dog or other animal in heat (estrus);
      (9)   Not be vaccinated as required by this chapter; or
      (10)   Be owned, kept or maintained without a current license as required
by this chapter.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep or maintain any
such nuisance dog. Any such nuisance dog may be taken up and impounded by the
Animal Control Officer or any law enforcement officer. Any person aggrieved by
a nuisance may file a complaint with the Animal Control Officer alleging a
violation of this section.
   (C)   All female dogs or other animals in heat (estrus) shall be kept in a
confined area not accessible to male animals which may be running at large.
   (D)   A dog owner shall be responsible for the immediate removal of any
excreta or waste material deposited or built up by his or her dog on any public
walk, recreation area or private property. It shall be unlawful for the owner
to fail to dispose of the excreta in a sanitary manner. A dog owner may not
allow a dog to deposit waste material on public property except in designated
areas.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.009 VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   For purposes of this chapter, a VICIOUS ANIMAL is defined in §
90.001.
   (B)   Any animal which is impounded as a vicious animal may, at the
discretion of the impounding city officer, be impounded for a period of ten
days from the date of pickup.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.010 RESTRAINT REQUIRED.
   The owner shall keep his or her dog under restraint at all times and shall
not permit such dog to be off the premises or property of the owner, unless
under the control of a competent person.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.011 INVESTIGATION.
   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the Animal
Control Officer or any law enforcement officer is empowered to demand from the
occupants of any premises, upon or in which a dog is kept or harbored, the
exhibition of such dog or other animal and the license or tag for the animal.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004)
§ 90.012 INTERFERENCE WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or detain the Animal
Control Officer or any other law enforcement officer in the performance of any
duty or power imposed on such officer by this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.013 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of cruelty to animals if he or she
knowingly or negligently subjects an animal to mistreatment or neglect by:
      (1)   Inflicting pain upon or injuring any animal;
      (2)   Provoking, haranguing, teasing, tormenting or in anyway disturbing
a dog or other animal with the intent to cause it to bark or attack any person;
      (3)   Laying out or exposing any poison for the purpose of killing any
animal;
      (4)   Overworking, beating, tormenting, injuring or killing any animal;
      (5)   Carrying any animal in a cruel manner;
      (6)   Failing to provide an animal in his or her custody with proper
food, drink or shelter;
      (7)   Promoting, sponsoring, conducting or participating in a horse race
of more than two miles; or
      (8)   Promoting, sponsoring or conducting or participating in any fight
between any animals.
   (B)   Any animal whose owner has been charged with cruelty to that animal
may be retained at the animal shelter until disposition of the charge, if the
Animal Control Officer believes that returning the animal to the owner may
endanger its life. At the hearing, if the owner is convicted, the judge shall
determine whether the animal will be returned to the owner or placed for
adoption by the animal shelter.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.014 EXECUTION OF FINE OR IMPRISONMENT.
   If the judgment is for a fine and imprisonment, until fine be paid, the
defendant must be committed to the custody of the proper officer and by him or
her detained until the judgment is complied with. The imprisonment must not
exceed one day for every $75 of fine.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-31-2009) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.015 PROPER ENCLOSURE.
   While on the owner’s property, a vicious or potentially vicious animal shall
be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or
structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to
prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides
and a secure top, and shall also provide protection from the elements for the
dog. If it has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be imbedded in
the ground no less than two feet.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.016 FREEING CONFINED ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for any person to open gates or doors or otherwise cause or
permit dogs or other animals to escape confinement against the wishes of the
owner.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004) Penalty, see §
90.999
IMPOUNDING ANIMALS
§ 90.030 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDING OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any dog which is found running at large or abandoned may be seized and
impounded by any law enforcement officer.
   (B)   Any other animal which is found running at large or abandoned may be
impounded by a law enforcement officer.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004)
§ 90.031 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT: REDEMPTION.
   (A)   The impounding official shall give notice of impoundment of any animal
by causing personal service on the owner, or some responsible person at the
owner’s residence or place of business. If such person cannot be found, notice
shall be given by posting in the County Sheriff’s office at the county jail in
the city.
   (B)   The owner must redeem the impounded animal within 72 hours after the
giving of the notice or it shall be subject to disposal by the Animal Control
Officer or any law enforcement officer as provided in §
90.032. The owner of any impounded dog or other animal may not regain
possession of the animal until he or she has paid an impounding fee of $25,
plus $10 for its keeping, for each 24-hour period, or part thereof, that it is
impounded.
   (C)   In addition, the Animal Control Officer, or any law enforcement
officer, may collect from the owner of the animal, the actual expenses of
seizing such dog or other animal.
   (D)   The Animal Control Officer or any law enforcement officer may issue a
ticket or notice to appear in court to the person redeeming any dog or other
animal impounded for violation of any provision of this chapter, or any other
dog or animal ordinance of the city, and file a complaint in the City Court.
   (E)   In the event a dog or any other animal is redeemed, and such animal is
unlicenced as provided by the licensing ordinances of the city, the person
redeeming must, within 48 hours of the time of redemption, show proof to the
Administrator that said dog has received all shots required by existing city
ordinances and obtain a license for said dog from said Administrator. In the
event the dog is redeemed on a weekend, the redemptioner shall have until 9:00
a.m. the following Wednesday morning to comply with this requirement. Failure
to comply shall be cause for the Animal Control Officer or any law enforcement
officer to issue a ticket or notice to appear in court for violation of the dog
licensing ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004)
§ 90.032 DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS.
   The refusal or failure of the owner of any such impounded animal to pay the
fee and charges within 72 hours of notification shall be held to be an
abandonment of the animal by the owner. In the event that any impounded dog or
other animal is not redeemed by the owner, it may be disposed of by the Animal
Control Officer or any law enforcement officer in a humane manner. A dog or
other animal may be placed for adoption with a suitable person subject to
requirements that it be spayed or neutered as required by M.C.A. § 7-23-4204.
Any impounded dog or other animal suffering from an infectious disease shall
not be released, but shall be put to death unless the Chief of Police shall
otherwise order.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004)
§ 90.033 ALTERNATIVE TO DEATH OF ANIMAL; REMOVAL OF ANIMAL FROM MUNICIPALITY.
   (A)   Whenever an animal is to be put to death under this chapter, except
for infection with rabies, the owner or other person may apply to the City
Court for permission to remove the animal permanently from the municipality.
   (B)   Upon such person’s filing with the court his or her written agreement
to remove the animal from the municipality and be responsible for its remaining
out permanently, the City Judge may, in his or her discretion, make an order
allowing the animal to be removed from the municipality instead of being put to
death.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004)
CONTROL OF LIVESTOCK
§ 90.045 ANIMALS AND FOWLS TO BE KEPT IN ENCLOSURES.
   All animals, including cattle, horses, hogs, mules, sheep, goats, other
livestock and fowls must be kept within a fenced or similar enclosure and upon
the private premises of their owner or the person responsible for them at all
times.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.046 NUMBER OF ANIMALS ALLOWED BY WEIGHT.
   There can be no more than one animal with a live weight in excess of 50
pounds (except dogs) for each two acres of enclosed land upon which said animal
is kept.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.047 STAKING PROHIBITED.
   No animal shall be staked outside the enclosed premises on private property
required in §
90.045.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.048 PREMISES TO BE MAINTAINED.
   This chapter does not change the requirements of other ordinances and
chapters requiring premises upon which animals are kept to be maintained in a
sanitary and healthy condition.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004)
§ 90.049 APPLICATION.
   This chapter applies to any person owning, keeping or harboring any such
animal.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004)
§ 90.050 ENFORCEMENT.
   In addition to the members of the city police force, the City Animal Control
Officer shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004)
FOWL AT LARGE
§ 90.065 FOWL AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who may own or have the care
or custody of any chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys or any other domestic fowls
to allow or suffer the same to run at large outside the enclosure of such
person or persons.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.066 ENFORCEMENT.
   In addition to the members of the city police force, the City Animal Control
Officer shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004)
ANIMAL KENNELS
§ 90.080 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any dog or other animal over the age of six months.
   KENNEL. A building, enclosure or portion of any premises:
      (1)   Where dogs are boarded or kept for hire, sale or breeding;
      (2)   Where dogs are kept or maintained by any person other than the
owner thereof; or
      (3)   Where three or more dogs over the age of six months are kept or
maintained.
   OWNER. Any person owning, keeping or harboring any animal as defined in this
section.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-31-2009)
§ 90.081 LICENSE; FEE; ISSUANCE; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person maintaining a kennel within the city shall pay a yearly
license fee for maintaining such kennel.
   (B)   Issuance of any kennel license shall be subject to the right of
inspection of the kennel and premises by the Animal Control Officer, or any law
enforcement officer of the city.
   (C)   Application for such kennel license shall be made to the City Clerk
and initial application must be accompanied by the written consent of at least
75% of all persons in possession of premises within 100 feet of the proposed
kennel and accompanied by a deposit of a license fee as provided in this
chapter, which deposit shall be returned to the applicant if the license is not
issued.
   (D)   The application for license shall state:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner;
      (2)   The location of the proposed kennel;
      (3)   The number of animals therein;
      (4)   Verification from the property owner’s insurer that there is
sufficient liability insurance to cover any reasonably foreseeable occurrence
involving the animals kept on the premises; and
      (5)   The endorsement of the City Clerk, showing that the premises sought
to be licensed as a kennel does not violate any zoning ordinance or resolution.
   (E)   All applications for licenses shall be submitted to the City Council
for approval.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-31-2009)
§ 90.082 CLASSES ESTABLISHED; LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   There shall be three classes of kennels as follows.
      (1)   (a)   A Class One kennel shall be:
            1.   Where more than three but no more than five adult dogs are
kept; or
            2.   Where not more than three litters are bred annually.
         (b)   The annual license fee for the Class One kennel shall be $75.
      (2)   (a)   A Class Two kennel shall be:
            1.   Where no more than five adult dogs are kept; or
            2.   Where more than three but no more than five litters are bred
annually.
         (b)   The annual license fee for a Class Two kennel shall be $100.
         (c)   No Class Two license shall be issued until the premises to be
used for such purposes have been inspected and approved by the Animal Control
Officer or city law enforcement officer.
      (3)   (a)   A Class Three kennel shall be:
            1.   Where dogs are boarded for periods of no more than 30 days for
each dog; and
            2.   Where dogs are not bred.
         (b)   The annual license fee for a Class Three kennel shall be $100.
         (c)   No Class Three license shall be issued until the premises to be
used for such purposes have been inspected and approved by the Animal Control
Officer or city law enforcement officer.
   (B)   Every person, firm or corporation licensed under this chapter shall be
subject to regulation, inspection, control and supervision by the Animal
Control Officer or City Law Enforcement Officer.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-31-2009)
§ 90.083 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   Each license issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of the
year of its issuance.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004)
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any owner keeping such nuisance dog in violation of §
90.008(A) shall be punished by a fine of up to $500 and imprisonment for up to
six months.
   (C)   Any person responsible for maintaining a vicious animal as defined by
§
90.001 and
90.009 shall be fined not less than $50 for the first offense, and not less
than $200 or more than $500 for the second or subsequent offense. The court,
upon conviction of a second or subsequent offense, may, in its discretion,
order the killing or destruction, or permanent removal from the city limits, of
a vicious animal.
   (D)   A person violating the provisions of §
90.013 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine of up
to $500 and imprisonment for up to six months.
   (E)   (1)   Any dog which is impounded as a vicious dog may, at the
discretion of the impounding city officer, be impounded for a period of ten
days from the date of pickup.
      (2)   Any person responsible for maintaining a vicious dog, as defined by
this chapter, shall be fined not less than $100 for the first offense and not
less than $200 or more than $500 for the second or subsequent offense. The
court, upon conviction of a second or subsequent offense, may, in its
discretion, order the destruction of a vicious dog.
      (3)   Any person violating any other provisions of §§
90.030 through
90.033 not otherwise provided for shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine of up to $500 and
imprisonment for up to six months.
   (F)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §§
90.045 through
90.050 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine of up to
$500 and imprisonment for up to six months.
   (G)   Any person or persons found guilty of any violation of the provisions
of §§
90.065 or
90.066 shall be adjudged guilty of a nuisance and be fined not less than $20 or
more than $100.
   (H)   Any person violating any section of §§
90.080 through
90.083 shall be guilty of guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a
fine of up to $500 and imprisonment for up to six months.
(Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-8-2004)
CHAPTER 91: GARBAGE, REFUSE; BURNING
Section
   
91.01   Title
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Prevention of burning
   
91.04   Private responsibility
   
91.05   Ordinances or regulations
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Burning Ordinance of the City of
Boulder, Montana.”
(Ord. 91B, passed 10-8-1973)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. All putrescible wastes except sewage and body wastes, including all
meat, vegetable and fruit refuse and carcasses of dead animals and dead fowls
from or on any premises within the city limits.
   PREMISES. Business houses, boarding houses, rooming houses, offices,
theaters, hotels, tourist camps, apartments, restaurants, cafés, bars, eating
houses, hospitals, schools, public property, private residences, vacant lots or
other persons within the city limits of the city.
   REFUSE. All solid wastes, including garbage and rubbish.
   RUBBISH. Tin cans, bottles, papers, tree limbs, grass and weed cuttings,
paper boxes, small light wood or crafting materials and the like, from any
premises within the city limits.
   RUBBLE. Brushwood, card board boxes, discarded fence posts, old lumber and
other earthern, wooden or metal refuse-like materials longer, larger and/or
heavier than refuse.
(Ord. 91B, passed 10-8-1973)
§ 91.03 PREVENTION OF BURNING.
   The burning of any refuse, garbage, rubbish, rubble or petroleum product, at
any place within the city limits, is prohibited.
(Ord. 91B, passed 10-8-1973) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 PRIVATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The owner or his or her agents, or the occupant, of any premises within the
city, shall be responsible for the elimination of burning of the above-
mentioned substances within the city, and it shall be unlawful for any such
person to permit such burning on his or her premises.
(Ord. 91B, passed 10-8-1973) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 ORDINANCES OR REGULATIONS.
   This chapter shall be cumulative of all other sanitary ordinances or
regulations of the city, unless in conflict with the terms of said ordinances
and regulations, in which case the terms of this chapter shall prevail.
(Ord. 91B, passed 10-8-1973) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum
not more than $300, and each day that any such persons shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and may be
punishable as such.
(Ord. 91B, passed 10-8-1973)
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
   
92.01   Noisome substances
   
92.02   Offensive matter on premises
   
92.03   Liquids allowed to become nauseous
   
92.04   Cellars, drains, in offensive condition
   
92.05   Animal enclosures
   
92.06   Conditions which endanger safety or health
   
92.07   Unlawful conduct
   
92.08   Interference with public rights-of-way and waters
   
92.09   Structures or conditions creating a fire hazard
   
92.10   Dilapidated structures
   
92.11   Fallen wire fencing
   
92.12   Exemptions
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 NOISOME SUBSTANCES.
   It is a public nuisance to knowingly create, conduct or maintain the carcass
of any animal or any offal, filth or noisome substance to be collected or to
remain in any place in the municipality, to the prejudice of others.
(Ord. 168, passed 8-24-1998) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02 OFFENSIVE MATTER ON PREMISES.
   It is a public nuisance for any owner, lessee, occupant or resident of any
premises to knowingly create, conduct or maintain on such premises for 24 hours
or longer any unwholesome, decaying or putrid animal or vegetable matter which
contaminates the atmosphere or endangers or injures the health of any person,
or which is indecent or offensive to the senses, or interferes with the comfort
or enjoyment of any resident in the municipality.
(Ord. 168, passed 8-24-1998) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 LIQUIDS ALLOWED TO BECOME NAUSEOUS.
   It is a public nuisance for any person to knowingly create, conduct or
maintain any nauseous, foul or putrid liquor or other liquid substance to be
discharged, placed or thrown, or to flow from or out of any premises into or
upon any adjacent premises, or any public street, alley, road or sidewalk, or
into any channel or watercourse.
(Ord. 168, passed 8-24-1998) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 CELLARS. DRAINS, IN OFFENSIVE CONDITION.
   It is a public nuisance for any person to knowingly create, conduct or
maintain any cellar, vault, drain, pool or sewer belonging to or controlled by
him or her to become, from any cause, nauseous, foul, offensive or injurious to
the public health, or unpleasant and disagreeable to adjacent residents or
persons, within the limits of the municipality.
(Ord. 168, passed 8-24-1998) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 ANIMAL ENCLOSURES.
   It is a public nuisance for any person to knowingly create, conduct or
maintain any pen or enclosure, stable or building for animals in a filthy or
unwholesome condition as to be offensive to neighbors or passers-by, or
injurious to the health of the neighborhood.
(Ord. 168, passed 8-24-1998) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 CONDITIONS WHICH ENDANGER SAFETY OR HEALTH.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to knowingly create,
conduct or maintain a condition which endangers safety or health, is offensive
to the senses, or obstructs the free use of property so as to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or
neighborhood or by any considerable number of persons.
(Ord. 168, passed 8-24-1998) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07 UNLAWFUL CONDUCT.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to knowingly create,
conduct or maintain any premises where persons gather for the purpose of
engaging in unlawful conduct.
(Ord. 168, passed 8-24-1998) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND WATERS.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to knowingly create,
conduct or maintain a condition which renders dangerous for passage any public
highway or right-of-way or waters used by the public.
(Ord. 168, passed 8-24-1998) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 STRUCTURES OR CONDITIONS CREATING A FIRE HAZARD.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to knowingly create,
conduct or maintain any building or other structure that for want of proper
repair, by reason of age, dilapidated condition, defective or poorly installed
wiring and equipment, defective chimneys, defective gas connections, defective
heating apparatus, or the existence of any combustible materials, flammable
conditions or other fire hazards; or for any other cause or reason is
susceptible to fire or is dangerous to the safety of the building premises or
to the public or is so situated as to endanger other buildings, persons or
property in the vicinity.
(Ord. 168, passed 8-24-1998) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.10 DILAPIDATED STRUCTURES.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to knowingly create,
conduct or maintain any building or other structure that for want of proper
repair, by reason of age, or dilapidated condition is in such a condition as to
render it uninhabitable if it is a residential structure, or to render it
unsuitable to conduct business if it is a commercial structure.
(Ord. 168, passed 8-24-1998) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.11 FALLEN WIRE FENCING.
   It is a public nuisance for any person to knowingly create, conduct or
maintain barbed wire and other wire fencing which has sagged or fallen to the
ground so as to be ineffectual for the purpose of turning stock and a menace to
any person riding or walking over the same.
(Ord. 168, passed 8-24-1998) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.12 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No agricultural or farming operation, place, establishment or facility
or any of its appurtenances or the operation thereof is or becomes a public
nuisance because of the normal operation thereof as a result of changed
residential or commercial conditions in or around its locality if the
agricultural or farming operation, place, establishment or facility has been in
operation longer than the complaining resident has been in possession of his
and/or her property or the commercial establishment has been in operation.
   (B)   Noises resulting from the shooting activities at a shooting range
during established hours of operation are not considered a public nuisance.
(Ord. 168, passed 8-24-1998) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   A person convicted of maintaining a public nuisance shall be fined not to
exceed $500 or imprisoned in the county jail for a term not to exceed six
months, or both. Each day of such conduct constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 168, passed 8-24-1998)
CHAPTER 93: JUNK VEHICLES
Section
   
93.01   Public nuisance declared
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Applicability
   
93.04   Exclusive regulation
   
93.05   Enforcement
   
93.06   Enter private property
   
93.07   Administrative costs
   
93.08   Notice of hearing
   
93.09   Public hearing
   
93.10   Hearing before Chief of Police
   
93.11   Removal
   
93.12   Notice
   
93.13   Removal costs
   
93.14   Failure to remove
§ 93.01 PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED.
   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the state statutes to remove abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the
Council hereby makes the following findings and declarations:
   (A)   The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not
including highways is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the
value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite
plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance
creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for
rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general
welfare; and
   (B)   Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property not
including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby
declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 119, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HIGHWAY. A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to
the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular travel. HIGHWAY includes
STREET.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. The term does not include HIGHWAY.
   VEHICLE. A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or
drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. 119, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 93.03 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a
building or behind a solid fence six feet in height, in a lawful manner, where
it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or
      (2)   A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer or when such storage or
parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or
commercial enterprise.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or
private nuisance as defined under provisions of law.
(Ord. 119, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 93.04 EXCLUSIVE REGULATION.
   This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be
in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore
or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency
having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 119, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 93.05 ENFORCEMENT.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be
administered and enforced by the Chief of Police. In the enforcement of this
chapter, such officer and his or her deputies may enter upon private or public
property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the
identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part
thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 119, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 93.06 ENTER PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   When the Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or
persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private
property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or
parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 119, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 93.07 ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
   The Council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be
assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any
vehicle or part thereof) under this chapter.
(Ord. 119, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 93.08 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   Not less than ten days’ notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle
or part thereof as a public nuisance shall be given. Such notice shall contain
a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the
vehicle is located and the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include
notice to the property owner that he or she may appear in person at a hearing
or may present a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the
presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial,
in lieu of appearing. A notice of intention to abate shall be mailed, by
registered mail, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized
assessment role and to the last registered and legal owner of record unless the
vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to
determine ownership.
(Ord. 119, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 93.09 PUBLIC HEARING.
   A public hearing shall be held before the Chief of Police, upon request for
such a hearing by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which
such vehicle was located. This request shall be made to the Chief of Police
within ten days after the mailing of notice of intention to abate and remove
the vehicle. If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a
sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle
on his or her land within such time, this statement shall be construed as a
request for hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting
such request. If such a request is not received in such period, the Chief of
Police shall have the authority to remove the vehicle.
(Ord. 119, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 93.10 HEARING BEFORE CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the Chief of
Police who shall hear all facts and testimony he or she deems pertinent. Said
facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or
part thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private
property of public property. The Chief of Police shall not be limited by the
technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is
located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written sworn
statement, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land,
with his or her reasons for such denial.
   (B)   The Chief of Police may impose such conditions and take such other
action as he or she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the
purpose of this chapter. He or she may delay the time for removal of the
vehicle or part thereof if, in his or her opinion, the circumstances justify
it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Chief of Police may find that
a vehicle or part thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is
inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the
property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and
determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged
against the owner of the parcel of land on which the vehicle or part thereof is
located. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle
or part thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the
vehicle, if available at the site.
   (C)   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the
land without the consent of the landowner and that he or she has not
subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the Chief of Police shall not assess
costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon
which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from
such landowner.
   (D)   If an interested party makes a written presentation to the Chief of
Police but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the
decision.
   (E)   Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police
by filing a written notice of appeal with the Chief of Police within five days
after his or her decision.
   (F)   Such appeal shall be heard by the Council which may affirm, amend or
reverse the order or take any other action deemed appropriate.
   (G)   The Clerk shall give at least five days’ prior written notice of the
time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons set forth in §
93.08.
(Ord. 119, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 93.11 REMOVAL.
   (A)   Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts
thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice
of the decision if such notice is required by §
93.10, the vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap
yard or automobile dismantler’s year.
   (B)   After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be
reconstructed or made operable.
(Ord. 119, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 93.12 NOTICE.
   Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof,
notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the
vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to
the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available,
including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates.
If the Council determines that commercial channels are not suitable or are
inadequate, it may dispose of the vehicles by removal to any suitable site
operated by it. The city may make final disposition of such vehicles or parts
thereof or may transfer the same to another provided such disposal is only for
scrap.
(Ord. 119, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 93.13 REMOVAL COSTS.
   If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged
against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to §
93.10 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, or the final
disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the
parcel of land, and shall be transmitted to the Tax Collector for collection.
Said assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes.
(Ord. 119, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 93.14 FAILURE TO REMOVE.
   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to
remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof
or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the
abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such state law is
applicable.
(Ord. 119, passed 4-21-1980)
CHAPTER 94: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Regulations
   
94.01   Prohibiting the use of motor vehicles on city sidewalks
Community Decay, Beautification, and Upkeep
   
94.15   Definitions
   
94.16   Accumulations Upon Premises and in Streets
   
94.17   Depositing of Debris in Public Ways and Creeks and in Rivers Prohibited
   
94.18   Weeds, Grass and Other Vegetation
   
94.19   Abatement by the City
   
94.20   Shielding
   
94.21   Violations/Penalty
 
   
94.99   Penalty
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 94.01 PROHIBITING THE USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON CITY SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      VEHICLE. Includes:
         (a)   “Bus” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(3);
         (b)   “Custom vehicle” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(10);
         (c)   “Implement of husbandry” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(22);
         (d)   “Kit vehicle” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(23);
         (e)   “Motorcycle” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(31);
         (f)   “Motor-driven cycle” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(32);
         (g)   “Motor home” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(33);
         (h)   “Motorized nonstandard vehicle” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101
(34);
         (i)   “Motor vehicle” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(35);
         (j)   “Off-highway vehicle” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(39);
         (k)   “Quadricycle” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(46);
         (l)   Golf carts;
         (m)   “Recreational vehicle” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(49);
         (n)   “Snowmobile” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(58);
         (o)   “Special mobile equipment as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(59);
         (p)   “Specially constructed vehicle” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101
(60);
         (q)   “Trailer” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(68);
         (r)   “Travel trailer” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(70);
         (s)   “Truck” or “motortruck” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(71);
         (t)   “Truck tractor” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(72);
         (u)   “Van” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(75); and
         (v)   “Vehicle” as defined in M.C.A. § 61-1-101(76).
   (B)   A person shall not drive, stand, stop or park, a vehicle as defined
above on the sidewalks of the city.
   (C)   The foregoing provision does not apply to operation of:
      (1)   An authorized emergency service vehicle or police vehicle, as
defined in M.C.A. § 61-8-102(2):
         (a)   Equipped with audible and visual signals as required under
M.C.A. §§ 61-9-401 and 61-9-402; and
         (b)   Entitled to the exemptions granted under M.C.A. § 61-8-107.
      (2)   A vehicle operated for military purposes by active duty military
personnel, a member of the military reserves, a member of the National Guard on
active duty, including personnel on full-time National Guard duty, personnel in
part-time National Guard training, and National Guard military technicians, or
active duty United States Coast Guard personnel;
      (3)   An electric personal assistive mobility device as defined in M.C.A.
§ 61-1-101(17);
      (4)   A manually- or mechanically-propelled wheelchair or other low-
powered, mechanically propelled vehicle that is designed specifically for use
by a physically disabled person and that is used as a means of mobility for
that person; and
      (5)   A vehicle owned or operated by the city or the state or their
contractors for the purpose of maintaining or repairing city sidewalks, streets
or other infrastructures.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, the Mayor or City Council may
grant a temporary permit for a vehicle to drive, stand, stop or park, a vehicle
as defined above on the sidewalks of the city to service adjacent buildings or
for other specified purposes.
(Ord. 2006-03, passed 11-28-2005) Penalty, see §
94.99
COMMUNITY DECAY, BEAUTIFICATION, AND UPKEEP
§ 94.15 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms shall apply to this subchapter as written unless context
indicates or requires a different meaning:
   COMPONENT PART. Any identifiable part of a discarded, ruined, wrecked, or
dismantled motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, fenders doors, hoods,
engine blocks, motor parts, transmissions, frames, axles, wheels, tires, and
passenger compartment fixtures.
   INOPERATIVE. A motor vehicle, trailer, camper, boat or other water craft
which is not in operating condition, or which for a period of 30 days or longer
has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels,
the engine or other essential parts required for its operation, or, on which
there are displayed neither valid license plates or a valid tax decal.
   JUNK. Old appliances, equipment, or parts thereof, old iron or scrap metal,
automobile or truck tires, cardboard, old lumber or scrap wood, rags, rope,
paper, debris, rubble, batteries, rubber debris, mattresses, or any worn out,
cast off or discarded article or material which is ready for destruction or has
been collected or stored for salvage, for conversion to some other use or for
reduction into components and is not part of a commercial or public salvaging
or recycling operation.
   JUNK VEHICLE. A discarded, ruined, wrecked, or dismantled motor vehicle,
including component parts, that is not lawfully and validly licensed and
remains inoperative or incapable of being driven.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle designed to be propelled by its own power and
designed or used to transport persons or property upon public highways,
streets, or alleys.
   OFFENSE OF MAINTAINING A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
      (1)   A person commits the offense of maintaining a public nuisance if
such person knowingly creates, conducts or maintains a public nuisance. The
owner of a parcel of property and the occupant of the parcel of property are
jointly and severally liable for any violation of this section. There is a
rebuttable presumption that the person named as owner of the property on the
current assessment list of the state department of revenue is the owner of the
property for purposes of this chapter.
      (2)   Any act which affects an entire community or neighborhood or any
considerable number of persons (as specified in subsection (J)(l) of this
section) is no less a nuisance because the extent of the annoyance or damage
inflicted upon individuals is unequal.
      (3)   This section shall be applicable to and enforced on all
classifications of property listed pertaining to applicable zoning laws, rules,
and regulations.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, company, association,
corporation, governmental entity or other private entity, whether organized for
profit or not.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE.
      (1)   A condition which endangers safety or health, is offensive to the
senses, or obstructs the free use of property so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or
neighborhood or by any considerable number of persons, including but not
limited to, the following.
      (2)   The enumeration, below, shall not be deemed exclusive, but merely
illustrative, it being the intent and purpose of this subsection to include as
nuisances, all actions or things of the character described in subsection (J)
(l), above.
         (a)   Accumulating, maintaining or storing in public view on any lot
or other parcel of land, any abandoned, discarded, or unused furniture, stoves,
sinks, toilets, cabinets, household fixtures or equipment, or junk. If such
material is being accumulated as part of an ongoing, active salvage business
other than an approved licensed motor vehicle wrecking facility, the salvage
business must be located in a properly zoned area for such a business and shall
be fully shielded from public view;
         (b)   Accumulating, maintaining or storing in public view on any lot
or other parcel of land any junk vehicle, component part of a motor vehicle, or
any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative trailers, campers, boats or
other water craft. Any person possessing one or more junk vehicles, regardless
of ownership, shall shield the vehicles from public view or remove the vehicles
to a licensed motor vehicle wrecking facility, to a licensed motor vehicle
graveyard, as defined by MCA 75-10-501 annotated, to property outside city
limits, or to property within city limits that would comply with all mandates
of this chapter.
         (c)   Dumping, piling, or stacking of bricks, concrete blocks, waste
wood and similar material on any lot or other parcel of land, and said material
should be stacked in neat piles and all waste materials from the cleaning of
such items, such as mortar, wood splinters, broken and unusable bricks, are
removed;
         (d)   Accumulating, maintaining or storing of a significant amount of
cardboard boxes, broken packing boxes, paper, or other similar items on any lot
or other piece of land;
         (e)   Maintaining or accumulating on any lot or other parcel of land,
garbage, refuse, decaying vegetation, animal bedding, waste or feces, cesspool,
septic tank, water holes, unsealed water tanks, stagnant water, or any other
condition which is or may reasonably become infested or inhabited by rodents,
reptiles, vermin or wild animals or may furnish a breeding place for mosquitoes
or flies;
         (f)   Maintaining, or causing or permitting the same on any lot or
other parcel of land, any building, premises, or fence which is determined to
be dangerous or dilapidated. (See Boulder Municipal Code Title 7). Any building
or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter
described shall be deemed to be a dangerous or dilapidated building, if such
conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property,
value of property or safety of the occupants or the public are jeopardized:
            1.   Broken or missing window or windows which have remained in
such condition for a period exceeding 15 days.
            2.   Broken or missing exterior door or doors which have remained
in such condition for a period exceeding 15 days.
            3.   Holes in the roof or exterior walls, other than normal
construction, which have remained in such condition for a period exceeding 15
days.
            4.   Fire or other casualty damage in public view which remains
unrepaired for a period exceeding six months.
      (3)   Any premises where persons gather for the purpose of engaging in
unlawful conduct;
      (4)   A condition which renders dangerous for passage any public highway
or right-of-way or waters used by the public.
   PUBLIC VIEW. Any point six feet above the surface of the center of a public
road from which a condition of violation can be seen.
   SHIELDING. Fencing or other manmade banners to conceal community decay from
public view. It also refers to natural barriers. Any shielding barrier must
conform to all local, state, building, and protective covenant provisions. Any
shielding is to be sufficient height so that none of the violations on the
premises are visible to public view.
   WEEDS. Any weed listed on the Montana Noxious Weed List and/or those
contained in the Montana County Weed Act and Administrative Rules attached as
Appendix A.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 94.16 ACCUMULATIONS UPON PREMISES AND IN STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, within the limits of the City to
throw or deposit rubbish, debris or junk of any kind in any of the streets or
alleys, or upon the lots adjoining to any streets or alleys, or allow the same
to accumulate upon the premises occupied by any person so as to become
offensive, injurious or dangerous to health.
   (B)   Real property owners shall be responsible to maintain the same from
the centerline of the alley, if any, to the center of the adjoining right of
way.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 94.17 DEPOSITING OF DEBRIS IN PUBLIC WAYS AND CREEKS AND IN RIVERS
PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, to dump, deposit or otherwise place in
any public way creek or river, or in the bed thereof, within the City limits,
any waste matter, garbage, refuse, junk, dead animals, putrid or decaying
matter of any kind, or other discarded materials or substances.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 94.18 WEEDS, GRASS AND OTHER VEGETATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or property owner to knowingly permit
any grass or noxious or non-noxious weeds to grow that might create a fire
hazard, blight or public safety.
   (A)   Grass, weeds, and lawns which are not regularly cut and mowed and
maintained. Grass length shall not exceed six inches; weeds must be controlled
and not allowed to propagate so as to constitute a fire hazard, and grass
clippings must be properly disposed.
   (B)   Fallen leaves and branches that are allowed to accumulate upon the
premises to the point of creating a safety or fire hazard.
   (C)   Lots must be maintained free of excessive vegetative growth, debris,
piles and other unsightly accumulations.
   (D)   Any owner or occupant of any real property shall trim all trees
overhanging any public thoroughfare, so that the branches thereon will not
interfere with pedestrians or public travel and shall provide vertical
clearance of 8 feet over sidewalks and multiuse paths, and 14 feet over
streets.
   (E)   Any owner or occupant of any real property shall maintain all hedges
and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks or multiuse paths so that no part of
said hedges and/or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk or
multiuse paths.
   (F)   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, not the owner thereof,
or without lawful authority so to do, to injure willfully, deface, disfigure,
or destroy any tree or shrub, or to injure, destroy, cut or pick any flower or
plant located on any public place or thoroughfare.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 94.19 ABATEMENT BY THE CITY.
The abatement of conditions which constitute a public nuisance, or otherwise
prohibited by this subchapter, shall be accomplished under the provisions of
this section.
   (A)   All complaints shall be filed with the Chief of Police or his/her
designee. The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, shall then be responsible
for initiating abatement proceedings.
   (B)   When the City of Boulder receives a written, signed, complaint by two
or more people that a condition of community decay exists, the Chief of Police,
or his/her designee, shall inspect the property alleged to be in violation of
this subchapter to determine whether there is a violation of this subchapter.
   (C)   If it is determined that a violation as complained does exist, the
same shall be referred to the City Council for determination whether any
enforcement is necessary. If the Council determines that enforcement is
necessary, the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall notify the owner of
the property in writing of the violation by mail notice or personal service and
order its abatement within thirty (30) days. The notice of violation shall:
      (1)   Be sent by first class mail with post prepaid to property owner's
last known address, or personal service upon the property owner.
      (2)   Include a statement specifically describing the violation;
      (3)   Specify that the owner has ten days from receipt of such notice to
bring the property into compliance with this Ordinance by means or removal or
shielding of the conditions;
      (4)   Advise the owner that if the violation is not abated, the City may
undertake abatement and assess the costs of that abatement to the owner; and
      (5)   Be signed by the Chief of Police.
   (D)   (1)   The owner may, after receipt of the notice of violation, submit
a plan of abatement which shall include:
         (a)   The type of abatement to be undertaken, which may include
shielding as set forth herein;
         (b)   The date for commencement of action; and,
         (c)   The date for completion of the abatement.
      (2)   The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, may accept such plan and
defer further proceedings under this subchapter pending the date of completion
of the abatement.
   (E)   In the alternative, the Owner may, as an agenda item duly included in
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council, appeal the abatement.
If Owner makes no such request, then all right to appeal expires. At such
agenda item, if any, the Council shall hear the appeal, and thereafter, may
either:
      (1)   Determine that a violation exists and order abatement within 30
days of the date of the original notice, unless adjusted by the Council; or,
      (2)   Determine that no violation exists and dismiss the proceedings.
   (F)   In the event that the owner fails to comply with an abatement order,
either with or without appeal, the Chief of Police, and/or his/her agent(s) may
enter upon the owner's property with the specific purpose of abating or
shielding the violation, whichever the Chief of Police deems appropriate.
      (1)   The City may assess the property owner/user for the actual costs of
the abatement.
      (2)   If the assessment is not paid, it shall become a lien upon the
property and enforced as nonpayment of property taxes.
   (G)   if, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, the
nuisance is of such nature or character that immediate abatement is necessary
to avoid a serious potential for physical injury, the abatement may be
undertaken by the City and the Owner shall receive a certified bill of the
costs associated thereto, upon which appeal as earlier stated shall lie.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 94.20 SHIELDING.
The maintenance of materials that would be considered a public nuisance under
this subchapter shall be lawful if such materials are shielded from public view
in accordance with the following standards:
   (A)   When fences are used for shielding, the boards may be spaced and/or
slanted to reduce wind load. The space between boards when viewed from a
broadside may not be more than one half inches.
   (B)   No more than one of the approved shielding materials shall be used on
any one side of a shielding fence.
   (C)   The fencing is to be maintained by the property owner or occupant in a
neat and workmanlike manner and shall be replaced and/or repaired when
necessary.
   (D)   Screening with trees and shrubs must provide a similar degree of
shielding at all times of the year. Trees and shrubs may best be used in
conjunction with other shielding materials. A berm may also be used, provided
the slopes of the berm are covered and graded smooth, with not less than three
inches of top soil, and seeded with a weed free seed mix.
   (E)   Any shielding must conform to all local zoning, planning, building,
and protective covenant provisions and shall be of sufficient height that none
of the violation on the premises is visible to public view.
   (F)   The material being shielded may not present a threat to public health
and safety.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 94.21 VIOLATIONS/PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations of any of the above provisions will be subject to a fine
and other measures as follows:
Any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of this subchapter or
fails to comply with a duly authorized Order issued pursuant to this subchapter
shall be deemed to be responsible for a civil infraction which shall be
punishable as:
      (1)   The first occurrence in any calendar year of $50.00, in addition to
restitution to the City, if any, for its cost of remediation of such nuisance;
      (2)   In the event of a subsequent conviction within the same calendar
year, the fine shall be not less than $100.00, or more than $500.00, in
addition to any restitution for remediation.
   (B)   The violator shall pay costs which may include all expenses, direct
and indirect, which the City has incurred in connection with the infraction. In
addition, the City shall have the right to proceed in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an injunction, restraining order, or
other appropriate remedy to compel compliance with this subchapter. Each day
that a violation of this subchapter exists shall constitute a separate
violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
94.01 shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
shall be punished by a fine of up to $500 and imprisonment for up to six months
in the county jail.
(Ord. 2006-03, passed 11-28-2005)
CHAPTER 95: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
95.01   Skateboard park
   
95.02   Parks, Trails and Recreation Board
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 SKATEBOARD PARK.
   (A)   This section shall be known and may be cited as the “Skateboard Park
Ordinance of the City of Boulder, Montana.”
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use the city skateboard park
without complying with the conditions hereinafter set forth.
   (C)   All persons using the skateboard park must comply with the following
restrictions and requirements.
      (1)   The skateboard park is open from dawn to dusk.
      (2)   All persons within the skateboard park area must be alert and
exercise common sense and be considerate of other users. Know your abilities
and skate within them.
      (3)   Proper use of protective gear (helmets, wrist guards, elbow and
knee pads) is strongly recommended.
      (4)   Only skateboards and in-line skates are allowed. No bicycles,
scooters or motor vehicles are allowed.
      (5)   No food or drinks are allowed on or near the skateboard park.
      (6)   No alcohol, tobacco or unlawful drugs are allowed on or near the
skateboard park.
      (7)   The skateboard park surface is dangerous when wet. Do not use the
park in inclement weather.
      (8)   Spectators should watch from outside the facility to keep
themselves and the skaters safe.
      (9)   Keep the skateboard park clean. Do not litter.
      (10)   Be considerate of the surrounding neighbors by skating in the
designated area. Keep noise down.
      (11)   Keep pets out of the skateboard park.
      (12)   No additions or alterations shall be made to the skateboard park
such as benches, tables, wood materials or other objects, to be used as ramps
or jumps, or for other purposes.
      (13)   The skateboard park is not supervised.
   (D)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
section shall be held to be requirements adopted for the promotion of the
health, safety and welfare of the general public. Whenever the requirements of
this section are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the more restrictive or that imposing
the higher standards shall govern.
(Ord. 2010-02, passed 3-15-2010) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.02 PARKS, TRAILS AND RECREATION BOARD.
   (A)   The city establishes a Parks, Trails and Recreation Board, an advisory
board to the City Council whose duties may include, but are not limited to,
creating rules, establishing user fees, recommending project or maintenance
needs, and promoting activities associated with the city’s parks and trails.
   (B)   The Parks, Trails and Recreation Board shall consist of five citizen
voting members and one non-voting City Council member. Board members shall
reside within the city limits. Term length for the citizen members shall be
three years. The Board shall have a Chair and Vice-Chair which shall both be
elected from the Board membership each year. The Board shall meet on an as-
needed basis with meeting being properly noticed pursuant to state law and city
policies. A majority of the voting members shall constitute a quorum for action
items. Written minutes of all meetings shall be kept on file at City Hall and
shall include all motions taken and a roll call of the votes.
   (C)   It is in the best interests of the city and its residents that the
city’s Planning Board is hereby appointed as the City Parks, Trails and
Recreation Board to carry out its duties as an advisory board to the City
Council on matters related to activities associated with parks, trails and
recreation with the city limits.
(Res. 2019-23, passed 9-11-2019)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
95.01 may be immediately removed from the skateboard park, and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The following penalties
apply:
      (1)   A written warning and seizure of a bicycle or skateboard equipment
for 15 days for a first offense;
      (2)   A fine of $50 and seizure of a bicycle or skateboard equipment for
15 days for a second offense;
      (3)   A fine of $100 and seizure of a bicycle or skateboard equipment for
15 days for a third offense;
      (4)   A fine of up to $500 and seizure of skateboard equipment for 15
days for a fourth or subsequent offense; and
      (5)   A person may be banned from use of the skateboard park depending on
the nature and severity of an offense.
(Ord. 2010-02, passed 3-15-2010)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSING
      
111.   CONSIGNMENT AND THE LIKE
      
112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSING
Section
   
110.01   Obtain license
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Peddler or hawker transient license
   
110.04   General license
   
110.05   License due and payable
   
110.06   Expiration of license
   
110.07   City Administrator to withhold license
   
110.08   City Council to approve
   
110.09   License revoked
   
110.10   Cause for revocation
   
110.11   Council may revoke
   
110.12   City Administrator to serve notice
   
110.13   Interstate commerce
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 OBTAIN LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any persons, firms or corporations to engage in the
businesses, occupations, industries, trades and professions, hereinafter named,
within the corporate limits of the city, without first having obtained a
license so to do.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HAWKER. All persons, firms or corporations who shall hereafter sell or offer
to sell at retail any goods, wares or merchandise from a stand, wagon, railroad
car, motor vehicle or upon any street or upon any public or vacant ground
within the corporate limits of the city.
   PEDDLER. All persons, firms or corporations who travel from place to place
or from house to house selling or offering to sell any goods, wares, services
or merchandise within the corporate limits of the city, except in the regular
line of merchandising business within the city.
   RENTER. Any persons, firms or corporations renting or leasing more than one
apartment, house or building within the corporate limits of the city.
   RETAILER. Any person, firm or corporation who sells to the consumer.
   WHOLESALER. Any person, firm or corporation who sells to a retailer.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 110.03 PEDDLER OR HAWKER TRANSIENT LICENSE.
   (A)   Each peddler or hawker shall, before conducting any business as herein
defined within the corporate limits of the city, make application to the City
Administrator for a transient license, which transient license, when issued,
shall not be transferable. Said application shall include, but not be limited
to: name and residence; picture identification; Social Security number; the
number of days or the period of time he or she will be engaged in said city in
the conduct of said business; the article or articles to be sold or offered for
sale; the manner of conducting said employer or business that has authorized
him or her to sell or offer to sell their merchandise. For said license, the
hawker or peddler shall pay for said license $50 for the first three months and
$25 for every three months thereafter. A peddler or hawker who has obtained a
license previously from the city shall pay $25 for every three months.
Residents of the city, in lieu of this transient license, may obtain a general
license as set forth in §
110.04. The city shall have two business days following the day of application
to process the application. False information or non-verifiable information
shall be grounds, within the discretion of the city, to deny the application.
The city shall also have sole discretion to deny the application of the
background investigation on the applicant reveals information, whether true or
not, of there being a risk to health, safety or fair business dealings to the
residents of the city; provided further, that the license for sale, or
soliciting or order for the sale, of milk, dairy products, vegetables, poultry,
eggs and other farm and garden produce so far as the sale of the commodities
named herein is now authorized by law shall be for three days, and said hawker
or peddler shall pay $15 for each three-day license.
   (B)   Each hawker or peddler conducting such business within the corporate
limits of the city shall comply with all the ordinances of said city which may
be applicable, and shall conduct such business in a manner not offensive to the
peace, morals or welfare of the people of said city, and in such a manner as
not to create a nuisance; provided further, that every such peddler or hawker
conducting such business must, upon demand of any person, exhibit his or her
license and permit, the same to then and there be read by the person making
such demand, and any such peddler or hawker who shall willfully refuse or fail
to exhibit his or her license as above provided is guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined as provided herein.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 GENERAL LICENSE.
   Unless otherwise provided, every retailer or renter providing any service or
selling any product with intent to make a profit wherein the service or entire
sales transaction occurs within the corporate limits of city shall pay a
license fee of $35 per year for each business owned or operated. A maximum of
$50 shall be charged for multiple businesses or services provided by the same
person or legal entity. The license issued shall apply to the business and
those persons listed as employees of the business. For the purposes of this
section, independent or subcontractors shall be deemed a business and obligated
to have a separate license. All service organizations, non-profit
organizations, schools and fraternal organizations, residents having garage
sales, and government entities shall be exempt from this licensing law. Any
person, firm or corporation desiring to have a flea market or an occasional
sale may apply for an exemption before the Council which exemption will be
totally within the discretion of the Council to allow.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 110.05 LICENSE DUE AND PAYABLE.
   Hereafter, general licenses shall be due and payable upon July 1 of each and
every year. All licenses are payable in advance and are not transferable. Any
new license granted after January 1 of each year shall be pro-rated for the
period of six months and the fee for that six months shall be $17.50 or $25 for
a multiple business.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 110.06 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   If upon the expiration of any license, the licensee therein named is still
carrying on the business, occupation, trade or profession therein named, and in
the further event such licensee fails within ten days thereafter to obtain
another license therefor, it shall be the duty of the Administrator to
forthwith notify such person thereof, and if such person shall not have
obtained another license as-aforesaid within five days after the service of
such notice, it shall be the duty of the City Administrator to immediately
thereafter make complaint of such fact before the City Judge; and, in the case
of the expiration of any license issued for one or more days, if the licensee
therein named is still carrying on the business or occupation therein named and
such licensee fails within 24 hours thereafter to obtain another license
therefor, it shall be the duty of the Administrator to notify such person to
procure another license forthwith; and if such licensee shall not have obtained
another license within 12 hours after the service of such notice, it shall be
the duty of the City Administrator to immediately make complaint of such fact
before the City Judge.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 110.07 CITY ADMINISTRATOR TO WITHHOLD LICENSE.
   Whenever an application is made to the City Administrator for a license and
it appears to the Administrator, upon his or her own information or he or she
is notified by the Chief of Police, that either on account of the person making
the application for the license or on account of the place at which the
business is to be carried on the granting of such license would seem to be not
for the best interest of the public, it shall be the duty of the City
Administrator to withhold the license and refer the matter by written
communication to the City Council at its next regular meeting thereafter.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 110.08 CITY COUNCIL TO APPROVE.
   Whenever an application for license is referred to the City Council by the
City Administrator, as provided in §
110.12, no license shall be issued to the applicant, except upon the adoption
of a resolution providing therefor, by a majority vote of all the members of
the Council, approved by the Mayor and attested by the Administrator, and that
the Council may refuse to issue such license whenever it appears best for the
public interest so to do.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 110.09 LICENSE REVOKED.
   Whenever any person whose license has been heretofore revoked by the action
of the Council, or by operation of law, applies to the Administrator for a
license, the Administrator shall first refer the application by written
communication to the Council and no such license shall be is sued to such
person, except by resolution passed by the majority vote of all the members of
the Council and approved by the Mayor and attested by the Administrator.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 110.10 CAUSE FOR REVOCATION.
   The conviction of any person for violation of the state law or of any
ordinance of the city in relation to gambling or the sale of intoxicating
liquors is cause for the revocation of the license of such person.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 110.11 COUNCIL MAY REVOKE.
   Any license issued by the city may be revoked by resolution passed by an
affirmative vote of a majority of all the members of the Council and approved
by the Mayor; or, by the Mayor and by and with the consent of a majority of all
members of the Council.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 110.12 CITY ADMINISTRATOR TO SERVE NOTICE.
   When any license has been revoked, the Administrator shall give the holder
thereof written notice of such revocation.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 110.13 INTERSTATE COMMERCE.
   Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to operate so as to interfere
with the power of the Congress of the United States to regulate commerce
between the states, as such power is defined by the Supreme Court of the United
States.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Every person who commences any business, avocation or occupation for the
transaction or carrying on or conducting of which a license is required by any
ordinance of this city, without first taking out or procuring a license
prescribed by such law, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and any person, firm or
corporation who willfully or intentionally violates any of the provisions of
this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of said
misdemeanors, or either of them, shall be fined a sum of not to exceed $500 or
six months in jail, or both. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter
after an arrest or issuance of a citation shall be deemed a separate
misdemeanor offense for each separate day a violation or violations occur.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
CHAPTER 111: CONSIGNMENT AND THE LIKE
Section
   
111.01   License required
   
111.02   Records
   
111.03   Exclusions
   
111.04   Inspection by police; stolen articles
   
111.05   Business hours; prohibited transactions
   
111.06   Sale of articles
   
111.07   Stolen property to be reported
   
111.08   Proof of age and legal identification
   
111.09   Misdemeanor
§ 111.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of the following without first
obtaining a license therefrom from the City Administrator for a designated
specific location and all articles shall be held there and such business shall
be carried on under the regulations hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   Application shall be made in writing including the name and address of
every owner, partner or corporate officer and director:
      (1)   Buying, selling or dealing in secondhand merchandise, including
dealing in such merchandise on consignment; provided, however, that this
section shall apply only to persons who are principally engaged in the business
of buying, selling or dealing in secondhand merchandise. Such persons shall be
those who deal in such merchandise to a degree that 50% or more of the gross
income of the business is derived from buying, selling or dealing secondhand
merchandise; or, those businesses that devote more than 50% of their retail
floor space to selling or dealing in secondhand merchandise or articles.
However, nothing herein shall be construed to require a secondhand dealer’s
license from persons engaged in the selling of used vehicles; or
      (2)   Pawnbroking or taking or making loans or mortgages on articles or
dealing in pledging the same.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 111.02 RECORDS.
   (A)   The licensee shall keep or cause to be kept a record in triplicate on
a form numbered consecutively, written in ink without changes or erasing
showing the exact time of acceptance of any article in the course of business,
an accurate description of each and any article received so that same can be
easily identified by giving number, color, size, unusual marks, the make and
any other matter of identification, also the name and residence of the person
from whom such article is received together with his or her height, weight,
age, nationality, color, complexion, color of hair, eyes, sex and
distinguishing marks, also the rate of interest charged, amount allowed on each
article and all other terms of the transaction. A true copy of such record
shall be open to the inspection of the Chief of Police or other member of the
Police Department at all reasonable hours, and shall be kept for one year from
true exact date of receipt.
   (B)   A true exact copy shall be delivered immediately to the person from
whom such article was received and the original copy of such report shall be
mailed or delivered to the Chief of Police before 12:00 noon on the first
working day following the receipt of such article.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 111.03 EXCLUSIONS.
   Record-keeping requirements shall be excluded on all items offered on
consignment clearly of a value of less than $50.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 111.04 INSPECTION BY POLICE; STOLEN ARTICLES.
   All articles shall be produced for inspection on demand by the Chief of
Police or other police officer and any article designated by any police officer
as being by the description thereof stolen property shall not be offered for
sale, returned to the person from whom received, sold or otherwise disposed of
in any manner thereafter, except upon written permission of the Chief of Police
or order from a court of record.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.05 BUSINESS HOURS; PROHIBITED TRANSACTIONS.
   No licensee, or employee thereof, shall operate such business before 8:00
a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. No business shall be transacted with nor shall any
article be accepted from any minor without the written signed consent of his or
her parent or guardian unless the article is clearly of a value of less than
$10.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.06 SALE OF ARTICLES.
   No article received shall be sold, removed from the city or otherwise
disposed of until after the passing of one week after the article has been
reported to the Chief of Police as set forth in §
111.04, unless personally inspected by the Chief of Police or a member of the
Police Department and released by him or her and such article shall be kept
within the licensee’s place of business when not so inspected and released
during said period, grouped as to date received in a manner satisfactory to the
Chief of Police.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.07 STOLEN PROPERTY TO BE REPORTED.
   The licensee shall report immediately to the Chief of Police any article
coming into the possession of the licensee or his or her place of business
which has been reported or advertised as lost or stolen.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 111.08 PROOF OF AGE AND LEGAL IDENTIFICATION.
   Before a person can pawn an item with a duly licensed pawnbroker, that
person shall show to said pawnbroker a birth certificate or other satisfactory
evidence of age and identification.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991)
§ 111.09 MISDEMEANOR.
   Should a person use false identification to misrepresent the age or name or
false identification in order to pawn items in violation of §
111.08, the person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 157, passed 5-13-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Beer Regulations
   
112.01   Municipal license requirements, license fees
   
112.02   Application for license
   
112.03   Issuance of license endorsement
   
112.04   Displaying license
   
112.05   Hours of business
   
112.06   City Judge to report convictions
   
112.07   Revocation or suspension of license
   
112.08   Restrictions, sale of beer
   
112.09   Inspection and regulation for police power
   
112.10   Violations
Liquor Regulations
   
112.25   Definitions
   
112.26   License fees
   
112.27   Application
   
112.28   Nontransferable, exception
   
112.29   Qualifications
   
112.30   Restrictions
   
112.31   Exceptions
   
112.32   Renewal of suspended license
   
112.33   Compliance with state laws
   
112.34   Violations
BEER REGULATIONS
§ 112.01 MUNICIPAL LICENSE REQUIREMENTS, LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Any person who desires to engage in the business of selling beer and/
or wine in said city under the provisions of state law shall after acquiring a
state license for such activity then obtain a license therefor from the city
and shall pay therefor an annual license fee which will be adopted by City
Council by resolution and will adhere to M.C.A. § 16-4-503.
   (B)   All licenses issued in any year shall expire on December 31 at 12:00
midnight of such year, provided, in case the holder of any such license shall
be in default for the payment of such license fee, or any part thereof, said
license shall immediately terminate.
      (1)   A transfer of any such license may be made on application to the
city, accompanied by satisfactory evidence of an approval of the transfer of
the license issued by the State Department of Revenue of this state, for such
license.
      (2)   Where a license hereunder is issued for a period commencing
subsequent to the first of any current year for which such license may be
issued, the pro rata fee only shall be charged for the balance of such current
year, but nothing herein shall be construed to entitle any licensee hereunder
to a refund of any portion of the license fee in the event of his or her
discontinuing such business or the suspension or revocation of his or her
license prior to the expiration of such year.
(Ord. 164, passed 5-27-1995; Ord. 2021-01, passed 5-17-2021)
§ 112.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Every person required by this subchapter to obtain a license must, before
commencing such business, file with the City Clerk an application, in writing,
directed to the Council of the city. Such application shall be substantially
the same in form as shall be prescribed by the State Department of Revenue to
carry out the provisions of the State Alcoholic Beverage Code and must be
accompanied by satisfactory evidence that applicant is the owner and holder of
a subsisting license or permit issued by said Department under the provisions
of said code and at the same location for which application for license is
being made. Such application must be accompanied with the license fee specified
for the business applied for, and if such applicant is an agent, such applicant
must accompany such application with principal’s acknowledgment of such.
(Ord. 164, passed 5-27-1995)
§ 112.03 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE ENDORSEMENT.
   Upon the filing of the application prescribed herein, accompanied by the
evidence required, and upon payment of the required license fee, the City Clerk
shall issue and deliver to the applicant a license to carry on the business of
which the applicant owns and holds a subsisting license issued to such
applicant for such business at such location by said Department and the same
shall refer to this subchapter by its number and as the “Boulder Beer
Regulations.” The City Clerk shall endorse upon each application and
accompanying documents, if any, in his or her office, and shall keep an
appropriate index thereof, which shall show the date filed, the name of the
applicant and character and location of the business and an appropriate file
number, if any, by which said application and accompanying documents, if any,
may be found.
(Ord. 164, passed 5-27-1995)
§ 112.04 DISPLAYING LICENSE.
   Any and all licenses issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
at all times prominently displayed in the place of business of such business.
(Ord. 164, passed 5-27-1995)
§ 112.05 HOURS OF BUSINESS.
   The privileges granted by any and all licenses issued under this subchapter
are suspended and inoperative and shall remain suspended and inoperative
between the hour of 2:00 a.m. and the hour of 8:00 a.m. of the same day. It
shall be unlawful for any licensee under this subchapter, to sell and deliver
beer or permit the same to be drunk on his or her premises during said period;
provided, however, that such general suspension and inoperativeness shall not
apply to the mere drinking of beer in a room of a bona fide residence or a
hotel licensed hereunder.
(Ord. 164, passed 5-27-1995)
§ 112.06 CITY JUDGE TO REPORT CONVICTIONS.
   In the case of a conviction of any licensee hereunder of any violation of
this subchapter in the City Court, the City Judge shall, within ten days
thereafter, whether or not an appeal has been taken from the judgment of
conviction, transmit to the State Department of Revenue, a certified copy of
the record of conviction.
(Ord. 164, passed 5-27-1995)
§ 112.07 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   If any license issued by the State Department of Revenue under the
provisions of the State Alcoholic Beverage Code shall be revoked, or shall be
suspended under the provisions of said Code, the companion license issued under
the provisions of this subchapter, shall be automatically revoked or suspended
for the said period, and in the event such action by the State Department of
Revenue shall, on appeal, be modified or set aside, the suspension or
revocation of the license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall
likewise be automatically affected.
(Ord. 164, passed 5-27-1995)
§ 112.08 RESTRICTIONS, SALE OF BEER.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any other person, to sell, dispose
of or give away beer to any person who shall appear to be in an intoxicated or
disorderly condition, or to allow or permit any person under the age of 21
years or any intoxicated or disorderly person to congregate, be or remain in or
upon his or her premises, or to be employed therein.
(Ord. 164, passed 5-27-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.09 INSPECTION AND REGULATION FOR POLICE POWER.
   Every person shall be subject to regulation, inspection, control and
supervision under the general police power of the city and all laws in force,
or which may hereafter be adopted, in and of such police power and regulation
and each and every license shall be subject to suspension and revocation as
hereinbefore provided.
(Ord. 164, passed 5-27-1995)
§ 112.10 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this subchapter shall,
upon conviction, be punishable as set forth in §
10.99.
(Ord. 164, passed 5-27-1995)
LIQUOR REGULATIONS
§ 112.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All other
words and phrases used in this subchapter, the definitions of which are not
herein given, shall be given the ordinary meaning.
   CLUB. A national fraternal organization with permanent quarters or rooms,
except college fraternities, or associations of individuals organized for
social purposes and not for profit, with a permanent membership and in
existence for two years.
   COUNCIL. The Council of this city.
   INTERDICTED PERSON. A person to whom the sale of liquor is prohibited under
the law of the state.
   LICENSE. An all-beverage license issued by the city to a qualified person
under which it shall be lawful for the licensee to sell or dispense all
alcoholic beverages at retail as provided in this subchapter.
   STATE LIQUOR STORE. Stores operated by the State Department of Revenue
located in various cities, counties, villages and communities of the state in
which are sold all alcoholic beverages that are legal in the state.
   CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of the city.
(Ord. 165, passed 5-27-1995)
§ 112.26 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Licenses may be issued to qualified applicants, as herein provided,
whereby the licensee shall be authorized and permitted to sell alcoholic
beverages at retail in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
Qualified applicants shall include persons, hotels, clubs and fraternal
organizations.
   (B)   Where a license hereunder is issued for a period commencing subsequent
to the first of the current year a pro rata charge may be made therefor, but
nothing herein contained shall be construed to entitle any licensee hereunder
to any refund of any portion of the license fee in the event of the
discontinuing of such business, or the suspension or revocation of his or her
license, except that he or she shall be entitled to a pro rata refund in the
event that his or her business is discontinued by virtue of said State
Alcoholic Beverage Code being, by referendum petition, rendered inoperative and
awaiting such time as it may be passed upon at an election.
   (C)   The license fees herein provided for are exclusive of and in addition
to other license fees chargeable in this city for the sale of beer and malt
beverages.
(Ord. 165, passed 5-27-1995; Ord. 2021-01, passed 5-17-2021)
§ 112.27 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a license as herein provided, the applicant
shall file with the City Clerk an application in writing, signed by the
applicant, and directed to the Council, which application shall specify the
location by street and number of the premises where the business is to be
carried on under the license applied for, the names of the person or persons
conducting the business, of the name if a partnership, and if the same is a
fraternal order, such fact must therein be set forth. The application must be
accompanied by satisfactory evidence that the applicant has the licenses as
herein provided for.
   (B)   The application must be accompanied with the license fee in §
112.26 specified for the business applied for.
   (C)   Upon the filing of the application prescribed herein, accompanied by
the evidence required and upon payment of the required license fee, the City
Clerk shall issue and deliver to the applicant a license to carry on the
business of which the applicant owns and holds a subsisting license issued to
such applicant for such business at such location by said Department, and the
same shall refer to this subchapter by its number and as the “city liquor
regulations.” The City Clerk shall endorse upon each application and
accompanying documents, if any, in his or her office, and shall keep an
appropriate index thereof, which shall show the date filed, the name of the
applicant and character and location of the business and an appropriate file
number, if any, by which said application and accompanying documents, if any,
may be found.
(Ord. 165, passed 5-27-1995)
§ 112.28 NONTRANSFERABLE, EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Every license issued under this subchapter shall set forth the name of
the person to whom issued and the location by street and number of the premises
where the business is to be carried forth under such license. If it is a
partnership, it shall set forth further names of the persons conducting the
business.
   (B)   Such license shall be signed by the licensee and shall be
nontransferable; however, a transfer of any such license may be made on
application to the Council, accompanied by satisfactory evidence of the consent
of the State Department of Revenue to such transfer of the license by it issued
under said State Alcoholic Beverage Code.
   (C)   Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises in
respect to which it is issued and shall be exhibited to any member of the
Police Department.
   (D)   Every license issued under the provisions of this subchapter is
separate and distinct and no person, except the licensee named therein, shall
exercise any of the privileges granted thereunder and all licenses are
applicable only to the premises in respect to which they are issued.
   (E)   All licenses issued in any year shall expire on December 31 at 12:00
midnight of such year, provided, in case the holder of any such license shall
be in default for the payment of such license fee, or any part thereof, said
license shall immediately terminate.
(Ord. 165, passed 5-27-1995)
§ 112.29 QUALIFICATIONS.
   No person, club or fraternal organization shall be entitled to a license
under this subchapter unless such person, club or fraternal organization shall
have, in respect to the same premises for which a license under this subchapter
is sought: a subsisting license issued under said code.
(Ord. 165, passed 5-27-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.30 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No licensee shall sell, deliver or give away or cause or permit to be
sold, delivered or given away, any liquor to:
      (1)   Any minor actually under the age of 21 years;
      (2)   Any intoxicated person or any person actually, apparently or
obviously intoxicated;
      (3)   An habitual drunkard; and
      (4)   An interdicted person.
   (B)   No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale or given away upon any
premises licensed to sell liquor at retail during the following hours: on any
day between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee to sell or keep for sale and/or
have on his or her premises for any purpose whatever, any liquor except that
purchased from a state liquor store and any licensee found in possession of, or
selling or keeping for sale any liquor which was not purchased from a state
liquor store shall, upon conviction, be punished, and if the City Council shall
be satisfied that any such liquor was knowingly sold or kept for sale within
the licensed premises by such licensee, or by his or her agents, servants or
employees, it shall be mandatory that the Council immediately revoke the
license of such licensee.
(Ord. 165, passed 5-27-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.31 EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who has not been issued a license under
this subchapter to sell or keep for sale any alcoholic beverage; provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to apply to those
engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages at the various state liquor stores.
(Ord. 165, passed 5-27-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.32 RENEWAL OF SUSPENDED LICENSE.
   After suspension or revocation of a license, the Council shall have the
power to renew the same if, in its discretion, a proper showing therefor has
been made.
(Ord. 165, passed 5-27-1995)
§ 112.33 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAWS.
   It shall be the duty of each and every person having any connection
whatsoever with all beverage licenses issued under this subchapter to comply
fully with all state laws relating thereto.
(Ord. 165, passed 5-27-1995)
§ 112.34 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this subchapter shall,
upon conviction, be punishable as set forth in §
10.99.
(Ord. 165, passed 5-27-1995)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   CURFEW
CHAPTER 130: CURFEW
Section
   
130.01   Regulation of minors and curfew
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 REGULATION OF MINORS AND CURFEW.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian or other person having
the control or management of a boy or girl under the age of 18 years to
knowingly permit such boy or girl to be in or upon any alley or street within
the city limits, or in any place of business or pleasure resort in the city
limits, after the hour of 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and after the
hour of 12:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any boy or girl under the age of 18 years to
be in or upon any alley or street within the city limits, or in any place of
business or pleasure resort in the city limits, after the hour of 10:00 p.m.
Sunday through Thursday, and after the hour of 12:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday.
   (C)   The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any boy or girl
who is accompanied by parent or guardian or other person duly authorized to
care for said boy or girl; nor shall they apply to any boy or girl who is going
on or returning from some errand for his or her parent, or guardian, or such
other person as may have the control and management of him or her, and who does
not linger or loiter on the way.
(Ord. 112, passed 8-22-1977) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   The penalty for violations of §
130.01(A) and (B) shall be set by Council resolution.
(Ord. 2021-01, passed 5-17-2021)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   STREETS AND ROADWAYS; EXCAVATIONS
      
152.   FLOODPLAIN PROTECTION
      
153.   ZONING CODE
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
   
150.01   Uniform Building Code
   
150.02   Uniform Housing Code
   
150.03   Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
   
150.04   CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code
   
150.05   Building permit required
   
150.06   Model Energy Code
   
150.07   Numbering system
   
150.08   Mobile home placement
   
150.09   Mobile home regulation
 
   
150.99   Penalty
§ 150.01 UNIFORM BUILDING CODE.
   The city does hereby adopt by reference the 1988 edition of the State
Uniform Building Code and Appendix Chapters 7, 12, 23, 32, 49, 53 and 55, in
its entirety, a copy of which is on file and of record in the office of the
City Administrator.
(Ord. 151, passed 10-23-1989)
§ 150.02 UNIFORM HOUSING CODE.
   The city does hereby adopt by reference the 1988 edition of the State
Uniform Housing Code, in its entirety, a copy of which is on file and of record
in the office of the City Administrator.
(Ord. 151, passed 10-23-1989)
§ 150.03 UNIFORM CODE FOR ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.
   The city does hereby adopt by reference the 1988 edition of the State
Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, in its entirety, a copy of
which is on file and of record in the office of the City Administrator.
(Ord. 151, passed 10-23-1989)
§ 150.04 CABO ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING CODE.
   The city does hereby adopt by reference, the 1986 edition of the State CABO
One- and Two- Family Dwelling Code with 1987-1988 Amendments, in its entirety,
a copy of which is on file and of record in the office of the City
Administrator.
(Ord. 151, passed 10-23-1989)
§ 150.05 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Because of the wide dispersal of the buildings, both residential and
commercial, within the city, a system of building and zoning is necessary in
said city.
   (B)   In order to protect the property holders and the property values in
said city, no person, group of persons or corporation will erect a building or
buildings within said city without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
City Council for the fee of $1 per permit.
   (C)   All applications for permit will be made in person by the applicant,
or his or her duly authorized representative in writing, at one of the regular
meetings of the said Council, at which time the applicant will state the time
when and the place where and the purpose for which said proposed construction
will take place, and the type and size of the structure to be built together
with the general specifications of said structure or structures.
   (D)   No permit will be issued, if in the opinion of the said City Council,
acting as a board of building and zoning inspection, the proposed structure or
structures will create a nuisance to, or detract from the appearance or value
of, the property of adjoining property holders, either because of the type of
the proposed structure or structures or the proposed use thereof.
   (E)   No business of an industrial nature, which in the opinion of the said
City Council, will create a nuisance within the said city by reason of noise,
smoke or other gaseous elements, will be permitted within the corporate limits
of the said city, save and except that portion of the said city situated and
lying south of the Boulder River, or other portion of said city to be
designated by the said City Council upon proper application thereto.
   (F)   No business, which by way of process or otherwise creates: an
offensive or nauseating odor, will be allowed within the corporate limits of
the said city, nor within three miles thereof.
   (G)   No business in the nature of a store, hotel, garage, filling station,
machine shop or others of like nature and character will be carried on in the
said city, save and except on property facing on Main Street, and also
excepting on property facing streets intersecting with the said Main Street and
within the distance of one block thereof, and also excepting property facing on
Centennial Avenue, beginning on Main Street and continuing along said
Centennial Avenue westerly to the city limits without the express consent of
the City Council entered in the minutes of one of their meetings; providing,
however, that only certain types of business, to be approved by the said City
Council acting as a board of building and zoning inspection, may be carried on
or conducted along the course of the said Centennial Avenue as above described.
(Res. 14, passed 5-14-1952; Res. 14A, passed 7-25-1956)
§ 150.06 MODEL ENERGY CODE.
   The city does hereby adopt the 1986 Edition of the CABO Model Energy Code,
in its entirety, a copy of which is on file and of record in the office of the
City Administrator.
(Ord. 154, passed 2-12-1990)
§ 150.07 NUMBERING SYSTEM.
   The city does hereby authorize the City Administrator to implement a
numbering system for the city’s lots, buildings and trailers located within the
city and assign and require a number to be displayed on said lots, buildings
and/or trailers by the owners of said property in accordance with that system.
(Ord. 158, passed 9-9-1992)
§ 150.08 MOBILE HOME PLACEMENT.
   (A)   This section shall be known and may be cited as the “Mobile Home
Placement Ordinance of the city.”
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to move within or into the zoning
jurisdiction of the city, which includes the land within the corporate limits
of the city and within the one-mile extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction
boundaries, any mobile home or modular home without complying with the
conditions hereinafter set forth. This section is supplemental to and refers to
city’s zoning ordinance (Ord. 2007-03).
   (C)   All persons transporting a mobile home or modular home within or into
the zoning jurisdiction of the city must comply with the following restrictions
and requirements.
   (D)   All persons transporting a mobile home or modular home within or into
the zoning jurisdiction of the city must complete an application at City Hall
which will be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator for compliance with the
zoning ordinance and this section. Any person who intends to transport a mobile
home or modular home within or into the zoning jurisdiction of the city has the
burden of producing sufficient documentation that it will meet the requirements
of the zoning ordinance and this section.
   (E)   No mobile home or modular home may be moved within or into the zoning
jurisdiction of the city which is older than 20 years from the date of
manufacture, and which does not meet the standards specified in 42 U.S.C. §§
5401 (HUD Code) et seq., and regulations adopted thereunder.
   (F)   No mobile home or modular home may be moved within or into the zoning
jurisdiction of the city which is closer than 30 feet between homes. A deck or
other structure attached to a mobile home or modular home will be considered as
a part of each mobile home or modular home. The distance of 30 feet must be
maintained from the outermost extension of the deck or other structure to the
next mobile home or modular home.
   (G)   An independently standing structure such as a storage shed shall not
be closer than five feet from the mobile home or modular home to which it is
auxiliary. An independently standing structure such as a storage shed shall not
exceed 48 square feet in size.
   (H)   Parking for motor vehicles will be provided on the street side of a
mobile home or modular home lot off of the city right-of-way. No motor vehicles
shall be parked between mobile homes or modular homes.
(Res. 2016-08, passed 9-19-2016) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.09 MOBILE HOME REGULATION.
   (A)   This section shall be known and may be cited as the “Mobile Home
Regulation Ordinance of the City of Boulder, Montana.”
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to move into the zoning
jurisdiction of the city, which includes the land within the corporate limits
of the city and within the one mile extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction
boundaries, or maintain, any mobile home or modular home without complying with
the conditions hereinafter set forth. This section is supplemental to and
refers to the city’s zoning ordinance (Ord. 2007-03).
   (C)   All persons transporting a mobile home or modular home within or into
the zoning jurisdiction of the city, or maintaining the same, must comply with
the following restrictions and requirements.
   (D)   All persons transporting a mobile home or modular home within or into
the zoning jurisdiction of the city must complete an application at City Hall
which will be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator for compliance with the
zoning ordinance and this section. Any person who intends to transport a mobile
home or modular home into the zoning jurisdiction of the city, or maintaining
the same, has the burden of producing sufficient documentation that it will
meet the requirements of the zoning ordinance and this section.
   (E)   No mobile home or modular home may be moved into the zoning
jurisdiction of the City of Boulder which is older than 20 years from the date
of manufacture, and which does not meet the standards specified in 42 U.S.C. §§
5401 (HUD Code) et seq., and regulations adopted thereunder.
   (F)   No mobile home or modular home may be moved into a mobile home park in
the zoning jurisdiction of the city, which is closer than 30 feet between
homes. A deck six feet wide by 12 feet long is not included in the measurement
of the distance between mobile home. A deck should not be placed parallel with
a storage shed or other building between mobile homes. Attachment A, attached
to the ordinance codified herein, is incorporated herein to provide a diagram
of proper layouts.
   (G)   An independently standing structure in a trailer park such as a
storage shed shall not be closer than five feet from the mobile home or modular
home to which it is auxiliary. An independently standing structure such as a
storage shed shall not exceed eight feet in width by 12 feet in length. A deck
should not be placed parallel with a storage shed or other building between
mobile homes. Attachment A is incorporated herein to provide a diagram of
proper layouts.
   (H)   Parking for motor vehicles in a mobile home park will be provided on
the street side of a mobile home or modular home lot off of the city right-of-
way. No motor vehicles shall be parked between mobile homes or modular homes.
No motor vehicles shall be parked in alleys.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed - -) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, corporation or group of persons, upon being convicted for
a violation of the provisions of §
150.05, will be subject to a penalty of not more than $500 and not less than
$25, and subject also to having any property violating the provisions of §
150.05 condemned and destroyed after due process in the proper courts of law.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §
150.08 may be ordered to correct the violation, and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to a fine of up to $500
and imprisonment in the county jail for up to six months for each offense.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of §
150.09 may be ordered to correct the violation, and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to a fine of up to $500
and imprisonment in the county jail for up to six months for each offense. The
city may seek an injunction in court to prevent ongoing violations.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed - -; Res. 14, passed 5-14-1952; Res. 14A, passed 7-25-
1956; Res. 2016-08, passed 9-19-2016)
CHAPTER 151: STREETS AND ROADWAYS; EXCAVATIONS
Section
   
151.01   Title
   
151.02   Compliance required
   
151.03   Application for excavation
   
151.04   Bond; insurance; deposit
   
151.05   Work zones and work zone traffic control
   
151.06   Fees for excavations
   
151.07   Tunneling
   
151.08   Protection of mains
   
151.09   Time limit to be specified
   
151.10   Backfilling
   
151.11   Restoration of surfaces
   
151.12   Temporary repairs
   
151.13   Warranty period
   
151.14   Administration
   
151.15   Interpretation; conflict with other laws
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Excavation Ordinance of
the City of Boulder, Montana.”
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009)
§ 151.02 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut through or tear open the surface
of any street, alley or other roadway in the city, without first complying with
the conditions hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.03 APPLICATION FOR EXCAVATION.
   (A)   Any person who wants to cut through or tear open the surface of any
street, alley or other roadway within the city shall first file a written
application with the City Clerk for an opening permit. The application shall
state what the applicant wants to do, the purpose for which said street is to
be cut through or broken open, the proposed area of such opening, the time
needed to accomplish the proposed work, and the exact location thereof. The
City Clerk shall notify the Public Works Department of the application.
   (B)   The Mayor or City Administrator or their designee may, after approval
from the Public Works Department, grant or refuse to grant such application for
an opening permit. If the opening permit is granted, the applicant shall
accomplish the proposed work within the time allowed by the permit, and shall
backfill any such excavation with proper compaction.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009)
§ 151.04 BOND; INSURANCE; DEPOSIT.
   (A)   Any applicant applying for permission to open any city street, alley
or other roadway must post with the City Clerk an indemnity and performance
security bond in the sum of $2,000 payable to the city, to protect the city
from any liability of any kind or character whatsoever, which may arise as a
result of said applicant’s opening any such street, alley or other roadway, or
which may in any way or manner be connected therewith, or related thereto and
to guaranty that the replacement and repair of the opened street or alley
surface and subsurface are installed in accordance with city street
construction standards and the terms of the opening permit.
   (B)   Any person, before making any opening in any street, alley or other
roadway within the city, must first obtain an opening permit and file with the
City Clerk a certificate of insurance or its equivalent providing for public
liability coverage in the sum of $750,000 for each person, and an aggregate sum
of $1,500,000 for more than one person on account of any one accident, and
$50,000 for property damage, to protect the parties and indemnify, hold
harmless and defend the city from any expense, cost, damage and any liability
of any kind or character whatsoever resulting from or which may arise as a
result of said applicant’s opening any such street, alley or other roadway, or
which may in any way be connected therewith, or relating thereto.
   (C)   A public utility which is regulated by the Public Service Commission
of the state may not be required to provide an indemnity and performance
security bond. A public utility which is regulated by the Public Service
Commission may file with the City Clerk annually a certificate of insurance
which provides public liability coverage in at least the minimum sums indicated
in division (B) above.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009)
§ 151.05 WORK ZONES AND WORK ZONE TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Work zones are areas where workers and equipment occupy portions of
the street and street right-of-way for maintenance, utility work, construction,
deliveries, moving or other purposes that cannot be accomplished without
impacting the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   (B)   All work being done in the city right-of-way must be protected by
signing, barricading or other means in accordance with city policy. Motorists
approaching street work zones must reduce their speed in these areas to no
faster than the posted speed in the work zone, and shall drive with utmost
caution so that they can examine the area for their own safety, the safety of
passengers and the safety of the workers, before proceeding through or past
work zones.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009)
§ 151.06 FEES FOR EXCAVATIONS.
   The charges to be made for street and alley openings of any kind or
character whatsoever shall be as follows.
   (A)   There shall be a charge of $40 for the cost of issuing the permit.
   (B)   There shall be a charge of $30 for the cost of inspection.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009)
§ 151.07 TUNNELING.
   No tunneling is allowed in or under the right-of-way of any street or alley
section, including curb and gutter or sidewalk. Boring and jacking is allowed
under the right-of-way.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.08 PROTECTION OF MAINS.
   (A)   All water and sewer mains must be uncovered by hand digging. As the
opening is being made, a person must be provided for the purpose of watching
the operations as the bucket approaches the pipe so that the hand digging is
provided in time to protect the city mains.
   (B)   The owner of the property for which the opening is done and the person
performing the opening or digging are jointly and severally liable and
chargeable for any damage or loss suffered by the city because of the breaking
of a water or sewer main with a power shovel or ditcher and shall also pay the
entire cost of replacing and repairing same. The Public Works Director is
authorized and directed to stop the operations at or on any opening or digging
until the costs mentioned above are paid to the city, or any other required fee
is paid, or until any other requirement set forth in this chapter has been
complied with.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.09 TIME LIMIT TO BE SPECIFIED.
   Before an opening permit is granted, the applicant must specify the time
limit within which the work will be completed and the opening refilled. All
openings must be refilled within eight working hours after the work of opening
is commenced except in extraordinary cases and conditions for which a special
permit must be granted by the Public Works Director specifying the period of
time necessary to complete the work.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.10 BACKFILLING.
   All spaces excavated and not occupied by abutments, piers or other permanent
work must be refilled with non-shrink backfill up to the surface of the
surrounding ground. Where the backfill is to carry the roadway embankment or
any part thereof, the backfill shall be made in continuous horizontal layers
not greater than eight inches in thickness, and each layer shall be thoroughly
compacted by tamping by a method approved by the city before the succeeding
layer is placed and the same for an approach to embankment to bridges and
culverts. All other backfill shall be thoroughly compacted and its top surface
shall be neatly graded. All material used for backfill shall be of a quality
acceptable to the public works director and shall be free from large or frozen
lumps, wood or other extraneous material. In general, this material shall be
selected from the material excavated in connection with the substructure
involved. Jetting or ponding of the backfill will not be permitted unless
specifically authorized by the Public Works Director, in which case mechanical
tamping will be required. All aspects of backfilling must comply with city
street construction standards.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.11 RESTORATION OF SURFACES.
   The cut surface of a street or alley opening must be restored with the same
type and quality of material and at the depth as existed prior to the opening.
Asphalt surface repairs or replacements must have a minimum depth of three
inches of compacted hot mix asphalt. To repair asphalt surfaces on existing
street sections with an asphalt depth greater than three inches, the surface
must be restored with hot mix asphalt to an equal depth up to six inches and
compacted in no less than two separate lifts, each lift being no less than two
inches or more than three inches thick.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.12 TEMPORARY REPAIRS.
   When permanent repairs or replacement of asphalt surfaces are not feasible
because hot asphalt mix is not readily available, the surface must be
temporarily restored with an approved all-weather patch. The person responsible
for the temporary restoration shall maintain the temporary patch until final
restoration is completed and shall make final restoration with hot asphalt mix
when it is available.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009)
§ 151.13 WARRANTY PERIOD.
   (A)   Any person making a street or alley opening that requires subsequent
restoration of the surface, curb and gutter, or sidewalk, shall warrant the
quality and durability of the restoration for one year after acceptance by the
Public Works Department of the completed restoration to all portions of the
right-of-way disturbed by the opening, including the road surface, curb and
gutter, and sidewalk, and the proper disposal of all waste material.
   (B)   Upon failure of a right-of-way restoration during the warranty period,
the Public Works Director will notify the person who provided the warranty of
the failure. A restoration failure has occurred when any part of the restored
surface has fallen or heaved by more than one-half inch above or below the
adjacent surface, or the restored surface has internal or external cracking or
deterioration to the extent the structural integrity of the restoration is
compromised. Immediately upon receiving notice, the person who provided the
warranty shall secure the failed site and provide adequate barricading and
warning signs to protect the public. That person shall then commence repair to
the failed site by the next working day. If the repair is not timely made, the
Public Works Department may make the necessary repairs and the person failing
to do the repair shall reimburse the city for all material and direct and
indirect labor costs expended in making the repair. If the person fails to
reimburse the city for the material and labor costs within 30 days of the date
of the notice requesting payment, that person may be barred from receiving
future street and alley opening permits.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009)
§ 151.14 ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Public Works Department is hereby designated and charged with the
duty of administering and enforcing the regulations herein prescribed.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009)
§ 151.15 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be requirements adopted for the promotion of the
health, safety and welfare of the general public.
   (B)   Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances,
the more restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine of
up to $500 and imprisonment for up to six months in the county jail. Each day
the infraction exists constitutes a separate violation. A civil action may also
be filed against a person violating the provisions of this chapter to obtain an
injunction preventing such actions in violation hereof.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 8-31-2009)
CHAPTER 152: FLOODPLAIN PROTECTION
Section
   
152.01   Title, purpose, authority and general provisions
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Forms and fees
   
152.04   Regulated flood hazard areas
   
152.05   Uses allowed without a permit within the regulated flood hazard area
   
152.06   Prohibited uses, activities and structures within the regulated flood
hazard area
   
152.07   Floodplain permit application requirements
   
152.08   Application evaluation
   
152.09   Development requirements in the floodway
   
152.10   Development requirements in the flood fringe or regulated flood hazard
area with no floodway
   
152.11   Emergencies
   
152.12   Variances
   
152.13   Administrative appeals
   
152.14   Enforcement
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Floodplain hazard management regulations. These regulations are known
and may be cited as the “Floodplain Hazard Management Regulations,” hereinafter
referred to as “these regulations.”
   (B)   Statutory authority.
      (1)   Floodplain and floodway management is incorporated in M.C.A. Title
76, Chapter 5 and describes the authority, procedures and minimum standards for
local regulations and is further described in Montana Administrative Rule (ARM)
36, Chapter 15.
      (2)   The authority to regulate development in specifically identified
flood hazard areas has been accepted pursuant to M.C.A. § 76-5-301.
   (C)   Findings of fact.
      (1)   Flood hazard areas specifically adopted herein as regulated flood
hazard areas have been delineated and designated by order or determination of
the Department of Natural Resources and Conservation (DNRC) pursuant to M.C.A.
§§ 76-5-201 et seq.
      (2)   These regulations have been reviewed by State Department of Natural
Resources and Conservation and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The
State Department of Natural Resources and Conservation has found the
regulations acceptable in meeting the Department minimum standards. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency finds that these regulations are adequate and
consistent with the comprehensive criteria for land management and use pursuant
to the standards established in 44 C.F.R. § 60.3.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-302, ARM 36.15.202, 44 C.F.R. § 60.1(b), 42 U.S.C. § 4022)
   (D)   Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to promote public health,
safety and general welfare of the residents and minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in regulated flood hazard areas. These
regulations are intended to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health;
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business and public service interruptions;
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges;
      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
disruptions; and
      (7)   Ensure compliance with the minimum standards for the continued
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program for the benefit of the
residents.
   (E)   Methods to reduce losses. In accordance with M.C.A. § 76-5-102, these
regulations are intended to reduce flood losses through the following methods:
      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flooding or that may cause excessive increases in flood
heights or velocities;
      (2)   Require that uses of land vulnerable to floods, including public
facilities, be developed or constructed to at least minimum standards or to
otherwise minimize flood damage;
      (3)   Regulate the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are needed to accommodate floodwaters;
      (4)   Regulate filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
impact other land, flood water depth or velocity of floodwaters;
      (6)   Distinguish between the land use regulations applied to the
floodway within the regulated flood hazard area and those applied to that
portion of the regulated flood hazard area not contained in the floodway;
      (7)   Apply more restrictive land use regulations within the floodway of
the regulated flood hazard area; and
      (8)   Ensure that regulations and minimum standards balance the greatest
public good with the least private injury.
   (F)   Regulated area.
      (1)   These regulations apply only to the flood hazard areas specifically
adopted herein as regulated flood hazard areas which are more fully and
specifically described in §
153.04. Requirements and approvals for alterations to the regulated flood
hazard area are specified in §
153.04. The regulated flood hazard area includes areas specifically identified,
labeled and illustrated on maps such as floodplain, floodway or flood fringe
that have differing uses allowed and minimum building standards that apply. The
regulated flood hazard area is the geographic area inundated by the flood of
100-year frequency illustrated and depicted in the referenced studies and maps.
      (2)   The regulated flood hazard area supporting study and maps
illustrating the regulatory area are based on studies and maps that have been
specifically adopted pursuant to M.C.A. §§ 76-5-201 et seq. The maps and
accompanying study become the regulated flood hazard area only when formally
adopted by DNRC and subsequently by the political subdivision by these
regulations. The original source of studies and data may be from a flood
insurance study by FEMA, or other studies by Corps of Engineers, Soil
Conservation, United States Geological Service or other federal or state
agency.
   (G)   Floodplain Administrator. A Floodplain Administrator is hereby
officially appointed and is the responsibility of the Mayor and City Council.
The Floodplain Administrator’s duty is to administer and implement the
provisions of these regulations. The Floodplain Administrator must serve to
meet and maintain the commitments pursuant to 44 C.F.R. § 59.22(a) to FEMA to
remain eligible for National Flood Insurance for individuals and business
within the political subdivision.
(44 C.F.R. § 59.22(b)(1)) (ARM 36.15.204(2)(h))
   (H)   Compliance. Development, new construction, alteration or substantial
improvement may not commence without full compliance with the provisions of
these regulations.
   (I)   Abrogation and greater responsibility. It is not intended by these
regulations to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants,
deed restrictions, zoning or other regulations in effect. However, where these
regulations impose greater restrictions, the provision of these regulations
must prevail.
(44 C.F.R. § 60.1(d))
   (J)   Regulation interpretation. In the interpretation and application of
these regulations, all provisions shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(44 C.F.R. § 60.1)
   (K)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. These regulations do not imply
that land outside the regulated flood hazard areas or uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. These regulations shall
not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on these regulations or
any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
   (L)   Disclosure provision. All property owners or their agents in the
regulated flood hazard areas shall notify potential buyers or their agents that
such property, including any permitted uses transferred, is located within the
regulated flood hazard area and is subject to regulation and any permitted uses
that are transferred. Information regarding regulated flood hazard area and the
repository for floodplain maps is available in the Floodplain Administrator’s
office.
(ARM 36.15.204(2)(g))
   (M)   Amendment of regulations. These regulations may be amended after
notice and public hearing in regard to the amendments to these regulations. The
amendments must be found adequate and acceptable by DNRC and FEMA to be
effective and must be submitted for review at least 30 days prior to official
adoption.
   (N)   Public records. Records, including permits and applications, elevation
and floodproofing certificates, certificates of compliance, fee receipts and
other matters relating to these regulations must be maintained by the
Floodplain Administrator and are public records and must be made available for
inspection and for copies upon reasonable request. A reasonable copying cost
for copying documents for members of the public may be charged and may require
payments of the costs before providing the copies.
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(5)(iii)) (44 C.F.R. § 59.22(a)(9)(iii))
   (O)   Subdivision review. Within the regulated flood hazard area,
subdivisions including new or expansion of existing manufactured home parks,
must be designed to meet the following criteria:
      (1)   The base flood elevations and boundary of the regulated flood
hazard area must be determined and considered during lot layout and building
location design;
      (2)   Locations for future structures and development must be reasonably
safe from flooding;
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(4))
      (3)   Adequate surface water drainage must be provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards;
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3 (a)(4)(iii))
      (4)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems must be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(4)(ii))
      (5)   Floodplain permits must be obtained according to these regulations
before development occurs that is within the regulated flood hazard area.
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b))
   (P)   Disaster recovery.
      (1)   In the event of a natural or human-made disaster, the Floodplain
Administrator should participate in the coordination of assistance and provide
information to structure owners concerning hazard mitigation and recovery
measures with the Federal Emergency Management Agency, State Disaster Emergency
Services, State Department of Natural Resources and Conservation and other
state, local and private emergency service organizations.
      (2)   Upon completion of cursory street view structure condition survey
within the regulated flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator shall
notify owners that a permit may be necessary for an alteration or substantial
improvement before repair or reconstruction commences on damaged structures
because of damages caused by natural or human-made disasters such as floods,
fires or winds.
      (3)   Owners should be advised that structures that have suffered
substantial damage and will undergo substantial improvements require a
floodplain application and permit and must be upgraded to meet the minimum
building standards herein during repair or reconstruction.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-404(3)(b)) (ARM 36.15.702) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(2) and (3))
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Unless
specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these regulations shall be
interpreted as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and the most
reasonable application.
   100-YEAR FLOOD. One percent annual chance flood. See BASE FLOOD.
   ALTERATION. Any change or addition to an artificial obstruction that either
increases its external dimensions or increases its potential flood hazard.
(ARM 36.15.101(2))
   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure in which the use is incidental or
accessory to the use of a principal structure.
(44 C.F.R. § 59.1)
   ARTIFICIAL OBSTRUCTION. Any obstruction which is not natural and includes
any development, dam, diversion, wall, riprap, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, revetment, excavation, channel rectification, road,
bridge, conduit, culvert, building, refuse, automobile body, fill or other
analogous structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any
regulated flood hazard area that may impede, retard or change the direction of
the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried
by the water, or that is placed where the natural flow of the water would carry
the same downstream to the damage or detriment of either life or property. See
also DEVELOPMENT.
(ARM 36.15.101(3)) (M.C.A. § 76-5-103(1))
   BASE FLOOD (FLOOD OF 100 YEAR FREQUENCY). A flood having a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
(ARM 36.15.101(4)) (44 C.F.R. § 59.1)
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation above sea level of the base flood
in relation to the National Geodic Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American
Vertical Datum of 1988 or unless otherwise specified.
(ARM 36.15.101(5))
   BASEMENT. Any area of a building, except a crawl space, as having its lowest
floor below ground level on all sides.
(44 C.F.R. § 59.1) (NFIP Insurance Manual, Rev. May 2013)
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
(44 C.F.R. § 59.1)
   CHANNEL. The geographical area within either the natural or artificial banks
of a watercourse or drain way.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-103(2))
   CRAWL SPACE. An enclosure that has its interior floor area no more than five
feet below the top of the next highest floor. See ENCLOSURE and SUBGRADE
CRAWLSPACE.
(NFIP Insurance Manual, Rev. May 2013)
   DNRC.  Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredginsg,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials. See also ARTIFICIAL OBSTRUCTION.
(44 C.F.R. § 59.1)
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A building that has no basement and that has it lowest
elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls,
posts, piers, pilings or columns. A building on a crawlspace is considered an
ELEVATED BUILDING.
(NFIP Insurance Manual, Rev. May 2013)
   ENCLOSURE. The portion below the lowest elevated floor of an elevated
building that is either partially or fully shut in by rigid walls including a
crawlspace, subgrade crawlspace, stairwell, elevator or a garage below or
attached.
   ENCROACHMENT. Activities or construction within the regulated flood hazard
area including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
development.
   ENCROACHMENT ANALYSIS. A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed by an
engineer to assess the effects of the proposed artificial obstruction or
nonconforming use on base flood elevation, flood flows and flood velocities.
   ESTABLISH. To construct, place, insert or excavate.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-103(7) (ARM 36.15.101(9))
   EXISTING ARTIFICIAL OBSTRUCTION OR NONCONFORMING USE. An artificial
obstruction or nonconforming use that was established before land use
regulations were adopted pursuant to M.C.A. § 76-5-301(1).
(M.C.A. § 76-5-404(3))
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The identified portion of the floodplain of the regulated
flood hazard area outside the limits of the floodway.
(ARM 36.15.101(10))
   FLOOD OF 100 YEAR FREQUENCY (BASE FLOOD). A flood magnitude expected to
recur on the average of once every 100-years or a flood magnitude that has a 1%
chance of occurring in any given year.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-103(9)) (44 C.F.R. § 59.1)
   FLOODPLAIN. The area of the regulated flood hazard area including and
adjoining the watercourse or drainway that would be covered by the floodwater
of a base flood. The area is partitioned into a flood fringe and floodway where
specifically designated. See REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREA.
   FLOODWAY. The identified portion of the floodplain of the regulated flood
hazard area that is the channel and the area adjoining the channel that is
reasonably required to carry the discharge of the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface by more than one-half foot.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-103(11)) (M.C.A. § 76-5-103(5))
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. Community official or representative appointed to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
electrical, plumbing, HVAC systems, structures and their contents. The term
includes WET FLOODPROOFING, DRY FLOODPROOFING and ELEVATION OF STRUCTURES.
(44 C.F.R. § 59.1)
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official response from FEMA that amends or
revises the FEMA special flood hazard area and FEMA flood insurance study for
flood insurance purposes and/or flood risk hazard. FEMA letters of map change
specific to an amendment or revision include the following:
      (1)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A FEMA letter of
approval for a proposed physical change that when completed would propose to
change the flood zones, delineation or elevations on the FEMA flood insurance
rate map or FEMA flood boundary map and may amend the FEMA flood insurance
study through a subsequent LOMR. The CLOMR may be considered in an evaluation
by DNRC and the Floodplain Administrator during consideration of a proposed
alteration to the regulated flood hazard area.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A letter of determination from FEMA
issued in response to a request that a property or structure is not subject to
the mandatory flood insurance requirement because it was inadvertently located
in the effective FEMA special flood hazard area. The material submitted and
response from FEMA may be considered by the Floodplain Administrator for
determining if a property or structure is within the regulated flood hazard
area and subject to these regulations.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). A letter of approval
from FEMA removing the mandatory requirement for flood insurance on property
based on placement of fill or an addition. Placement of fill or an addition
must be preceded by a permit pursuant to these regulations. Placement of fill
does not remove the development from the regulated flood hazard area or these
regulations.
      (4)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official FEMA amendment to the
currently effective FEMA flood insurance rate map or FEMA flood boundary map
based on a physical change to the floodplain of the special flood hazard area.
It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones, delineations and elevations on
the FEMA flood insurance rate map or FEMA flood boundary map and may amend the
FEMA flood insurance study. It must be preceded by an approved alteration of
the designated floodplain from DNRC and subsequently an amendment to the
regulated flood hazard area.
   LOWEST FLOOR. Any floor of a building including a basement used for living
purposes, storage or recreation. This includes any floor that could be
converted to such a use.
(ARM 36.15.101(14)) (44 C.F.R. § 59.1)
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. Includes the construction of
facilities for servicing the manufactured home lots and at a minimum includes
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
(44 C.F.R. § 59.1)
   MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME. A building that may be residential or non-
residential, is transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities and includes park trailers, travel trailers
and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive
days.
(ARM 36.15.101(15))
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the commencement of clearing,
grading, filling or excavating to prepare a site for construction occurs on or
after the effective date of these regulations and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
(ARM 36.15.101(20)) (44 C.F.R. § 59.1)
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed includes at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads and is completed on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
(44 C.F.R. § 59.1)
   NON-RESIDENTIAL. Buildings including manufactured homes that are not
residential including commercial, agricultural, industrial buildings and
accessory buildings. See RESIDENTIAL.
   OWNER. Any person who has dominion over, control of or title to an
artificial obstruction.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-103(13))
   PERSON. Includes any individual, or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association or any other entity, including state and local
governments and agencies.
(44 C.F.R. § 59.1)
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A park trailer, travel trailer or other similar
vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motorized
vehicle; and
      (4)   Designed primarily for use as temporary living quarters for
recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use, not for use as a permanent
dwelling.
(44 C.F.R. § 59.1)
   REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  A floodplain whose limits have been designated
pursuant to M.C.A. Part 2, Chapter 5 of Title 76, and is determined to be the
area adjoining the watercourse that would be covered by the floodwater of a
base flood. The REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREA consists of the floodway and flood
fringe where specifically designated.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-103(4)) (M.C.A. § 76-5-103(10)) (ARM 36-15-101(11))
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. A dwelling or building for living purposes or place of
assembly or permanent use by human beings and including any mixed use of
residential and nonresidential use. All other buildings are non-residential.
   RIPRAP. Stone, rocks, concrete blocks or analogous materials that are placed
along the bed or banks of a watercourse or drainway for the purpose of
preventing or alleviating erosion.
(ARM 36.15.101(18))
   SCOUR DEPTH. The maximum depth of streambed scour caused by erosive forces
of the base flood.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Land area which has been specifically identified
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is useful
for the purposes of identifying flood hazards by local subdivisions of
government for regulatory purposes as well as use by the National Flood
Insurance Program for establishing risk zones and flood insurance premium
rates. The FEMA flood hazard area zone designation or flood risk potential is
as illustrated on FEMA’s flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map.
   STRUCTURE. Any artificial obstruction.
   SUBGRADE CRAWLSPACE. A Crawlspace foundation enclosure that has its interior
floor no more than five feet below the top of the next higher floor and no more
than two feet below the lowest adjacent grade on all sides. A foundation
exceeding either dimension is a basement.
(NFIP Insurance Manual, Rev. May 2013)
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would
exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
(44 C.F.R. § 59.1)
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure where the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure either before the improvement or repair is started or if the
structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
      (1)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
construction of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the
building commences.
      (2)   The term does not include:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or state inventory of historic places.
(ARM 36.15.101(21)) (44 C.F.R. § 59.1))
   SUITABLE FILL. Fill material which is stable, compacted, well graded and
pervious, not adversely affected by water and frost, devoid of trash or similar
foreign matter, tree stumps or other organic material; and is fitting for the
purpose of supporting the intended use and/or permanent structure.
(ARM 36.15.101(22))
   VARIANCE.  A grant or relief from the development requirements of these
regulations which would permit construction in a manner that would be otherwise
prohibited by these regulations by an approval pursuant §
152.12.
(ARM 36.15.101(23))
   VIOLATION. A finding and order pursuant to the regulations against the owner
or responsible party of the failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with these regulations.
(44 C.F.R. § 59.1)
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-21-2018)
§ 152.03 FORMS AND FEES.
   (A)   Forms. The following forms may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator:
      (1)   Floodplain permit application form. The “Joint Application for
Proposed Work in Montana’s Steams, Wetlands, Regulated Flood Hazard Areas, and
Other Waterbodies,” or other designated application form. A completed FEMA MT-
1 form may be required to accompany the application when required by the
Floodplain Administrator;
      (2)   Floodplain permit compliance report. A report required to be
submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator once the permitted
project in the regulated flood hazard area is completed or within the
designated time stipulated on the floodplain permit. A compliance report
including an elevation and or floodproofing certificate may be required where
specified for the purpose of documenting compliance with the requirements of
the permit;
      (3)   Floodplain variance application form. An application submitted by
the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator to initiate a proposed variance
from the requirements of these regulations as described in §
152.12;
      (4)   Floodplain appeal notice form. A form submitted by the Applicant or
an aggrieved party to initiate the appeal process described in §
152.13;
      (5)   Floodplain emergency notification form. A written notification form
required pursuant to §
152.11; and
      (6)   Official complaint form. A form that may be used by any person to
notify the Floodplain Administrator of an activity taking place that appears to
be noncompliant with the requirements of these regulations.
   (B)   Fees. A reasonable application fee for processing of permit
applications may be imposed. Fees may be adopted for costs of permit
applications, notices, variances, inspections, certifications or other
administrative actions required by these regulations.
(ARM 36.15.204(3)(b))
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 152.04 REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   (A)   Regulated flood hazard areas. The regulated flood hazard areas are the
100-year floodplains illustrated and referenced in the following specific
studies and reports described as follows:
      (1)   April 15, 1986 FEMA flood insurance rate map for the city.
(Attached to the ordinance codified herein as Appendix A.);
      (2)   The regulated flood hazard areas specifically described or
illustrated in the above referenced studies and maps of the 100-year floodplain
have been delineated, designated and established by order or determination by
the DNRC pursuant to M.C.A. §§ 76-5-201 et seq.; and
      (3)   Use allowances, design and construction requirements specifically
in §§
152.05,
152.06,
152.09 and
152.10 in these regulations vary by the specific floodplain areas including
areas identified as floodway and flood fringe within the regulated flood hazard
area.
   (B)   Interpretation of regulated flood hazard area boundaries.
      (1)   The mapped boundaries of the floodplain illustrated in the
referenced studies and maps in this section are a guide for determining whether
property is within the regulated flood hazard area.
      (2)   A determination of the outer limits and boundaries of the regulated
flood hazard area or the flood fringe and floodway within the regulated flood
hazard area includes an evaluation of the maps as well as the particular study
data referenced in this section. Supporting study material for base flood
elevations takes precedence over any map illustrations if it exists.
      (3)   The regulated flood hazard area boundary is delineated by the base
flood elevation. The physical field regulatory boundary of the regulated flood
hazard area is the actual intersection of the applicable study base flood
elevation with the existing adjacent terrain of the watercourse or drainway.
(ARM 36.15.501(6))
      (4)   The floodway boundary where identified within the floodplain is as
illustrated on the referenced maps and studies. Since the floodway boundary is
a study feature, the location of the boundary may be physically located by
referencing the study data to a ground feature. The Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of the boundary and decision may be appealed as set forth in §
152.13.
      (5)   The Floodplain Administrator may request additional information
described below to determine whether or not the proposed development is within
the regulated flood hazard area.
         (a)   Where base flood elevations exist, the property owner may
provide additional information which may include elevation information provided
by an engineer or land surveyor in order to determine if the proposed
development is subject to these regulations. (ARM 36.15.501(6))
         (b)   Where base flood elevations do not exist, the property owner may
provide additional information to be considered to determine the location of
the regulatory boundary or alternatively provide a computed base flood
elevation provided by an engineer.
         (c)   The Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of the boundaries
and decision may be appealed as set forth in §
153.13.
      (6)   Any owner or lessee of property who believes his or her property
has been inadvertently included in the regulated flood hazard area including
the floodway or flood fringe may submit scientific and/or technical information
to the Floodplain Administrator for a determination if the property is
appropriately located. Scientific or technical information submitted to FEMA by
an owner to affect the insurance rating for insurance purposes may be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator. A determination by the Floodplain
Administrator is independent of any determination by FEMA for insurance
purposes.
   (C)   Alteration of regulated flood hazard area.
      (1)   Revisions or updates to the specific maps and data that alter the
established floodplains or floodway of the regulated flood hazard area requires
DNRC approval pursuant to M.C.A. § 75-5-203. An alteration of the regulated
flood hazard area is a DNRC approved amendment to the DNRC order that
originally delineated and designated the 100-year floodplain and is the basis
of the regulated flood hazard area referenced in division (A)(2) above. A DNRC
approved alteration consists of revisions or updates to the specific maps and
data of the referenced studies in this section and forms the basis for an
amendment to the regulated flood hazard area in these regulations;
(ARM 36.15.505)
      (2)   Any change to the regulated flood hazard area as a result of a DNRC
alteration is effective upon amendment to the regulated flood hazard area
described in division (A)(1) above;
      (3)   Substantial natural physical change or new technical or scientific
flood data showing that the base flood elevation has or may be changed or was
erroneously established shall be brought to the attention of DNRC and FEMA;
(ARM 36.15.505(1)(a)) (44 C.F.R. § 65.3)
      (4)   Any floodplain permit application for a proposed development or
artificial obstruction must be denied until a DNRC alteration pursuant to
M.C.A. § 76-5-203 is approved if it causes an increase of 0.5 feet or more to
the base flood elevation of a regulated flood hazard area without a floodway or
an increase of more than 0.00 feet to the base flood elevation of a floodway;
      (5)   To propose an alteration a petition must be submitted to DNRC and
must include the following information:
         (a)   Certification that no buildings are located in the areas which
would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
(44 C.F.R. § 65.12(a)(5))
         (b)   Evidence of notice to all property and land owners of the
proposed impacts to their properties explaining the proposed impact on their
property;
(44 C.F.R. § 65.12(a)(3))
         (c)   Information that demonstrates that alternatives are not
feasible;
(44 C.F.R. § 65.12(2))
         (d)   Information that demonstrates that development is for a public
use or benefit; and
         (e)   Any other supporting information and data as needed for
approvals.
(ARM 36.15.505) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(10)) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(d)(3)) (44 C.F.R. §
65.7(3)) (44 C.F.R. § 65.12))
      (6)   The Floodplain Administrator may represent the permit authority for
any necessary applications, approvals or endorsements such as the FEMA
community acknowledgment form to FEMA where affecting the FEMA special flood
hazard area;
      (7)   A determination by the Floodplain Administrator that land areas
located within the regulated flood hazard area are above the base flood
elevation as proven by a certified elevation survey does not constitute or
require an alteration or an amendment of the regulated flood hazard area and
may be maintained as a public record that more explicitly defines the regulated
flood hazard area boundary;
      (8)   Elevating with suitable fill as permitted does not alter the
regulated flood hazard area or remove the elevated area from the regulated
flood hazard area; and
(ARM 36.15.505(2))
      (9)   A floodplain permit implementing the physical change cannot be
approved until a CLOMR has been issued by FEMA.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 152.05 USES ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT WITHIN THE REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREA.
   (A)   General. Existing artificial obstructions or nonconforming uses
established before land use regulations pursuant to M.C.A. § 76-5-301 were
effective, are allowed without a permit. However, alteration or substantial
improvement of an existing artificial obstruction or nonconforming use requires
a floodplain permit. Maintenance of an existing artificial obstruction or
nonconforming use does not require a floodplain permit if it does not cause an
alteration or substantial improvement.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-404(3))
   (B)   Open space uses. The following open space uses shall be allowed
without a permit in the regulated flood hazard area, provided that such uses
are not prohibited by any other regulation or statute, do not require
structures, and do not require fill, grading, excavation or storage of
materials or equipment:
(ARM 36.15.601) (ARM 36.15.701)(1) (M.C.A. § 76-5-401) (M.C.A. § 76-5-404(3))
      (1)   Agricultural uses, not including related structures, such as
tilling, farming, irrigation, ranching, harvesting, grazing and the like;
(ARM 36.15.601(1)(a)) (M.C.A. § 76-5-401(1))
      (2)   Accessory uses, not including structures, such as loading and
parking areas, or emergency landing strips associated with industrial or
commercial facilities;
(ARM 36.15.601(1)(b)) (M.C.A. § 76-5-401(2))
      (3)   Forestry, including processing of forest products with portable
equipment;
(ARM 36.15.601(1)(d)) (M.C.A. § 76-5-401(4))
      (4)   Recreational vehicle use provided that the vehicle is on the site
for fewer than 180 consecutive days and the vehicle is fully licensed and ready
for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on
its wheels or jacking system with wheels intact, is attached to the site only
by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions;
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(14))
      (5)   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play
areas;
(ARM 36.15.601(1)(e)) (M.C.A. § 76-5-401(5))
      (6)   Maintenance of the existing state of an existing open space uses
including preventive maintenance activities such as bridge deck rehabilitation
and roadway pavement preservation activities. Maintenance cannot increase the
external size or increase the hazard potential of the existing open space use;
(M.C.A. § 76-5-404(3)(b))
      (7)   Public or private recreational uses not requiring structures such
as picnic grounds, swimming areas, boat ramps, parks, campgrounds, golf
courses, driving ranges, archery ranges, wildlife management and natural areas,
alternative livestock ranches (game farms), fish hatcheries, shooting
preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and
hiking and horseback riding trails;
(ARM 36.15.601(a)(c)) (M.C.A. § 76-5-401)
      (8)   Fences that have a low impact to the flow of water such as barbed
wire fences and wood rail fences, and not including permanent fences crossing
channels. Fences that have the potential to stop or impede flow or debris such
as a chain link or privacy fence requires a floodplain permit and meet the
requirements of §
152.09(K);
(ARM 36.15.601(2)(b)) (M.C.A. § 76-5-401))
      (9)   Addition of highway guard rail, signing and utility poles that have
a low impact to the flow of water along an existing roadway; and
      (10)   Irrigation and livestock supply wells, provided that they are
located at least 500 feet from domestic water supply wells and with the top of
casing 18 inches above the base flood elevation.
(ARM 36.15.601(2)(a)) (M.C.A. § 76-5-401) (ARM 36.21.647)) (Ord. 2018-01,
passed 5-21-2008)
§ 152.06 PROHIBITED USES, ACTIVITIES AND STRUCTURES WITHIN THE REGULATED FLOOD
HAZARD AREA.
   (A)   Floodway. The following artificial obstructions and nonconforming uses
are prohibited in the floodway of the regulated flood hazard area, except for
those established before land use regulations pursuant to M.C.A. § 76-5-301
have been adopted:
(M.C.A. § 76-5-404(3))
      (1)   A building for residential or non-residential purposes;
(M.C.A. § 76-5-403(1), (ARM 36.15.605)(1)(a)), (ARM 36.15.605(2b), (ARM
36.15.605(2)(a))
      (2)   A structure, fill or excavation that would cause water to be
diverted from the floodway, cause erosion, obstruct the natural flow of waters
or reduce the carrying capacity of the floodway. Notwithstanding these
requirements, excavation or fill may be allowed when it is a component to a
permitted use allowed in these regulations;
(M.C.A. § 76-5-403(2))
      (3)   The construction or storage of an object (artificial obstruction)
subject to flotation or movement during flood level periods;
(M.C.A. § 76-5-403(3) and ARM 36.15.605(1)(c))
      (4)   Solid and hazardous waste disposal and individual and multiple-
family sewage disposal systems unless the systems meet the local health and
sanitation regulations and when permitted pursuant to these regulations and are
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters and avoid
impairment or contamination;
(ARM 36-15-605(2c)) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(3))
      (5)   Storage of toxic, flammable, hazardous or explosive materials; and
(ARM 36.15.605(2d))
      (6)   Cemeteries, mausoleums or any other burial grounds (higher
standard).
   (B)   Flood fringe or regulated flood hazard area without a floodway. The
following artificial obstructions and nonconforming uses are prohibited in the
flood fringe or regulated flood hazard area without a floodway, except for
those established before land use regulations have been adopted:
(M.C.A. § 76-5-404(3))
      (1)   Solid and hazardous waste disposal and individual and multiple-
family sewage disposal systems unless the systems meet the local health and
sanitation regulations and when permitted pursuant to these regulations and are
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters and avoid
impairment or contamination;
(ARM 36-15-703(1)) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(3))
      (2)   Storage of toxic, flammable, hazardous or explosive materials;
(ARM 36-15-703(2))
      (3)   The construction or storage of an artificial obstruction subject to
flotation or movement during flood level periods (higher standard);
      (4)   Cemeteries, mausoleums or any other burial grounds (higher
standard); and
      (5)   Critical facilities, including buildings and associated structures
that provide essential community care and emergency operation functions such as
schools, hospitals, nursing home facilities, fire stations and police stations
(higher standard).
(44 C.F.R. § 60.22(a)(2)) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 152.07 FLOODPLAIN PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   A floodplain permit is required for a person to establish, alter or
substantially improve an artificial obstruction, nonconforming use or
development within the regulated flood hazard area;
(44 C.F.R. 60.1) (M.C.A. § 76-5-404) (ARM 36.15.204(2)(a)))
      (2)   A floodplain permit is required for artificial obstructions,
developments and uses not specifically listed in §§
152.09 and
152.10, except as allowed without a floodplain permit in §
152.05, or as prohibited as specified in §
152.06, within the regulated flood hazard area;
      (3)   Artificial obstructions and nonconforming uses in a regulated flood
hazard area not exempt under §
152.05 are public nuisances unless a floodplain permit has been obtained;
(M.C.A. § 76-5-404(1))
      (4)   A floodplain permit is required for an alteration of an existing
artificial obstruction or nonconforming use that increases the external size or
increases its potential flood hazard and not exempt under §
152.05;
(M.C.A. § 76-5-404(3)(b)) (ARM 36.15.204(2)(a))
      (5)   A floodplain permit is required to reconstruct or repair an
existing artificial obstruction that has experienced substantial damage and
will undergo substantial improvement; and
      (6)   Maintenance of an existing artificial obstruction or use that is a
substantial improvement or an alteration requires a floodplain permit.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-404(3)(b))
   (B)   Required floodplain permit application information. A floodplain
permit application shall include, but is not limited to the following:
      (1)   A completed and signed floodplain permit application;
      (2)   The required review fee;
      (3)   Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions
and elevation of the proposed project including landscape alterations, existing
and proposed structures, and the location of the foregoing in relation to the
regulated flood hazard areas and if applicable the floodway boundary; (M.C.A. §
76-5-405) (ARM 36.15.216)
      (4)   A copy of other applicable permits or pending applications required
by federal or state law as submitted which may include but are not limited to a
310 permit, SPA 124 permit, § 404 permit, 318 Authorization, 401 Certification
or a Navigable Rivers land use license or easement for the proposed project;
and the applicant must show that the floodplain permit application is not in
conflict with the relevant and applicable permits; and
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(2))
      (5)   Additional information related to the specific use or activity that
demonstrates the design criteria and construction standards are met or exceeded
as specified in §§
152.09 and
152.10.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-405) (ARM 36.15.216) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 152.08 APPLICATION EVALUATION.
   (A)   Floodplain permit application review.
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review and evaluate the
floodplain permit application and shall approve, approve with conditions or
deny the application within (180 days or a time specified) of receipt of a
correct and complete application.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-405(2))
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall determine whether the floodplain
permit application contains the applicable elements required in these
regulations and shall notify the applicant of the Floodplain Administrator’s
determination.
      (3)   If the floodplain permit application is found to be missing the
required elements and if the applicant corrects the identified deficiencies and
resubmits the floodplain application, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify
the applicant whether the resubmitted floodplain application contains all the
elements required by these regulations, as applicable.
      (4)   This process shall be repeated until the applicant submits a
completed floodplain permit application containing all the elements required by
these regulations, or the application is withdrawn.
      (5)   If after a reasonable effort the Floodplain Administrator
determines that the floodplain application remains incomplete, the Floodplain
Administrator shall deny the floodplain permit application and notify the
applicant of missing elements. No further action shall be taken on the
floodplain permit application by the Floodplain Administrator until the
floodplain permit application is resubmitted.
      (6)   A determination that a floodplain permit application is correct and
complete for review does not ensure that the floodplain permit application will
be approved or conditionally approved and does not limit the ability of the
Floodplain Administrator to request additional information during the review
process.
   (B)   Notice requirements for floodplain permit applications. 
      (1)   Upon receipt of a complete application for a floodplain permit, the
Floodplain Administrator shall prepare a notice containing the facts pertinent
to the floodplain permit application and shall:
         (a)   Publish the notice at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the area;
(ARM 36.15.204(2)(c))
         (b)   Serve notice by first-class mail upon adjacent property owners;
(ARM 36.15.204(2)(c))
         (c)   Serve notice to the State National Flood Insurance Program
Coordinator located in DNRC by the most efficient method. Notice to other
permitting agencies or other impacted property owners may be provided; and
         (d)   Prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse in the
regulated flood hazard area, additionally provide notice to FEMA and adjacent
communities.
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(6))
      (2)   The notice shall provide a reasonable period of time, not less than
15 days, for interested parties to submit comments on the proposed activity.
(ARM 36.15.204(2)(c))
   (C)   Floodplain permit criteria.
      (1)   Floodplain permit applications shall be approved provided the
proposed new construction, substantial improvement or alteration of an
artificial obstruction meets the requirements of the minimum standards and
criteria in §§
152.09 and
152.10 and other requirements of these regulations.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-406) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3))
      (2)   A floodplain permit application for a development that will cause
an increase of more than zero feet to the base flood elevation of the floodway
or more than one-half foot to the base flood elevation of the regulated flood
hazard area without a floodway shall not be approved until approval for an
alteration pursuant to §
152.04(C) has been approved, the regulated flood hazard area is amended and a
FEMA CLOMR where required is issued.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall determine that all necessary
permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval
is required by federal or state law, including § 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, 36 U.S.C. § 1334.
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(2))
   (D)   Decision.
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator shall approve, conditionally approve
or deny the proposed floodplain permit application. The Floodplain
Administrator shall notify the applicant of his or her action and the reasons
thereof within (180 days or time specified) of receipt of a correct and
complete floodplain permit application unless otherwise specified. A copy of
the approved floodplain permit must be provided to DNRC.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-405(2)) (ARM 36.15.204(2)(e))
      (2)   The approval of a floodplain permit application does not affect any
other type of approval required by any other statute or ordinance of the state
or any political subdivision or the United States, but is an added requirement.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-108)
   (E)   Floodplain permit conditions and requirements. Upon approval or
conditional approval of the floodplain permit application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall provide the applicant with a floodplain permit with
applicable specific requirements and conditions including but not limited to
the following:
      (1)   The floodplain permit will become valid when all other necessary
permits required by federal or state law are in place;
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(2))
      (2)   Completion of the development pursuant to the floodplain permit
shall be completed within one year from the date of floodplain permit issuance
or a time limit commensurate with the project construction time line for
completion of the project or development. The applicant may request an
extension for up to an additional year. The request must be made at least 30
days prior to the permitted completion deadline;
      (3)   The applicant shall notify subsequent property owners and their
agents and potential buyers of the floodplain development permit issued on the
property and that such property is located within a regulated flood hazard area
and shall record the notice with the Floodplain Administrator;
(ARM 36.15.204(2)(g))
      (4)   The applicant shall maintain the artificial obstruction or use to
comply with the conditions and specifications of the permit;
      (5)   The applicant shall allow the Floodplain Administrator to perform
on site inspections at select intervals during construction or completion;
      (6)   The applicant shall provide periodic engineering oversight and/or
interim reports during the construction period to be submitted to the
Floodplain Administrator to confirm constructed elevations and other project
elements;
      (7)   The applicant shall submit a compliance report including
certifications where required and applicable including floodproofing,
elevation, surface drainage, proper enclosure openings and materials to the
Floodplain Administrator within 30 days of completion or other time as
specified;
      (8)   The applicant shall submit an annual performance and maintenance
report on bank stabilization or other projects utilizing maturing vegetative
components to the Floodplain Administrator for a period of five years or a time
specified in the permit; or
      (9)   The applicant shall submit evidence of a submittal of a FEMA letter
of map revision (LOMR) to FEMA and applicable fees within six months of project
completion and proceed with due diligence for acceptance of the document and
necessary supporting materials by FEMA.
(44 C.F.R. § 65.3) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 152.09 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS IN THE FLOODWAY.
   (A)   Uses requiring permits. Artificial obstructions including alterations
and substantial improvements specifically listed in divisions (C) through (O)
below may be allowed by permit within the floodway, provided the general
requirements in division (B) below and the applicable requirements in divisions
(C) through (O) below are met.
   (B)   General requirements. An application for a permit shall meet the
following requirements:
      (1)   All projects shall be designed and constructed to ensure that they
do not adversely affect the flood hazard on other properties and are reasonably
safe from flooding;
      (2)   All projects shall assure that the carrying capacity of the
floodway is not reduced. All projects in the floodway shall meet the following:
         (a)   Demonstrate that the project does not increase the base flood
elevation by conducting an encroachment analysis certified by an engineer. A
minimal or qualitative encroachment analysis may be accepted when the project
or development does not require a structure, alteration of the floodway,
involve fill, grading, excavation or storage of materials or equipment but is
also certified by an engineer to not exceed the allowable encroachment to the
base flood elevation; and
         (b)   The allowable encroachment to the base flood elevation is zero
feet, and no significant increase to the velocity or flow of the stream or
water course unless approval of an alteration of the regulated flood hazard
area pursuant to division (C) above, and an approved FEMA conditional letter of
map revision occurs before permit issuance; and
(ARM 36.15.604) (ARM 36.15.505) (ARM 36.15.605(b)) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(3) and
(4)) (44 C.F.R. § 65.12(a))
      (3)   An application for a floodplain permit must also demonstrate the
following factors are considered and incorporated into the design of the use or
artificial obstruction in the floodway:
         (a)   The danger to life and property due to backwater or diverted
flow caused by the obstruction or use;
(M.C.A. § 76-5-406(1)) (ARM 36.15.216(2)(a)))
         (b)   The danger that the obstruction or use may be swept downstream
to the injury of others;
(M.C.A. § 76-5-406(2)) (ARM 36.15.216(2)(b))
         (c)   The availability of alternative locations;
(M.C.A. § 76-5-406(3)) (ARM 36.15.216(2)(c))
         (d)   Construct or alter the obstruction or use in such manner as to
lessen the flooding danger;
(M.C.A. § 76-5-406(4)) (ARM 36.15.216(2)(d))
         (e)   The permanence of the obstruction or use and is reasonably safe
from flooding;
(M.C.A. § 76-5-406(5) (ARM 36.15.216(2e))
         (f)   The anticipated development in the foreseeable future of the
area which may be affected by the obstruction or use;
(M.C.A. § 76-5-406(6)) (ARM 36.15.216(20))
         (g)   Relevant and related permits for the project have been obtained;
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(2))
         (h)   Such other factors as are in harmony with the purposes of these
regulations, the State Floodplain and Floodway Management Act, and the
accompanying Administrative Rules of the State; and
(M.C.A. § 76-5-406(7)) (ARM 36.15.216(2)(g))
         (i)   The safety of access to property in times of flooding for
ordinary and emergency services.
(44 C.F.R. § 60.22(c)(7)) (higher standard)
   (C)   Mining of material requiring excavation from pits or pools. Provided,
in addition to the requirements of division (B) above, that:
      (1)   A buffer strip of undisturbed land of sufficient width as
determined by an engineer to prevent flood flows from channeling into the
excavation is left between the edge of the channel and the edge of the
excavation;
(ARM 36.15.602(1)(a))
      (2)   The excavation meets all applicable laws and regulations of other
local and state agencies; and
(ARM 36.15.602(1)(b))
      (3)   Excavated material may be processed on site but is stockpiled
outside the floodway.
(ARM 36.15.602(1)(c))
   (D)   Railroad, highway and street stream crossings. Railroad, highway and
street stream crossings, including other transportation related crossings
provided, in addition to the requirements of division (B) above, that:
      (1)   Crossings are designed to offer minimal obstructions to the flood
flow; and
(ARM 36.15.602(2))
      (2)   Where failure or interruption of public transportation facilities
would result in danger to public health or safety and where practicable and in
consideration of FHWA Federal-Aid Policy Guide 23 C.F.R. § 650A:
         (a)   Bridge lower chords shall have freeboard to at least two feet
above the base flood elevation to help pass ice flows, the base flood discharge
and any debris associated with the discharge; and
         (b)   Culverts shall be designed to pass the base flood discharge and
maintain at least two feet freeboard on the crossing surface;
         (c)   Normal overflow channels, if possible are preserved to allow
passage of sediments to prevent aggradations; and
         (d)   Mid stream supports for bridges, if necessary, have footings
buried below the maximum scour depth.
   (E)   Limited filling for road and railroad embankments. Limited filling for
road and railroad embankments, including other transportation related
embankments not associated with stream crossings and bridges provided, in
addition to the requirements of division (B) above, that:
      (1)   The fill is suitable fill;
      (2)   Reasonable alternate transportation routes outside the floodway are
not available; and
(ARM 36.15.602(3))
      (3)   The encroachment is located as far from the stream channel as
possible.
(ARM 36.15.602(3))
   (F)   Buried or suspended utility transmission lines. Provided, in addition
to the requirements of division (B) above, that:
      (1)   Suspended utility transmission lines are designed such that the
lowest point of the suspended line is at least six feet higher than the base
flood elevation; (ARM 36.15.602(4))
      (2)   Towers and other appurtenant structures are designed and placed to
withstand and offer minimal obstruction to flood flows; (ARM 36.15.602(4))
      (3)   Alternatives such as alternative routes, directional drilling and
aerial crossings are considered when technically feasible; and
      (4)   Utility transmission lines carrying toxic or flammable materials
are buried to a depth of at least twice the calculated maximum scour depth
determined by an engineer for the base flood.
(ARM 36.15.602(4))
   (G)   Storage of materials and equipment. Provided, in addition to the
requirements of division (B) above, that:
      (1)   The material or equipment is not subject to major damage by
flooding and is properly anchored to prevent flotation or downstream movement;
or
(ARM 36.15.602(5)(a))
      (2)   The material or equipment is readily removable within the limited
time available after flood warning. Storage of flammable, toxic or explosive
materials shall not be permitted.
(ARM 36.15.602(5)(b))
   (H)   Domestic water supply wells. Provided, in addition to the requirements
of division (B) above, that:
      (1)   They are driven or drilled wells located on ground higher than
surrounding ground to assure positive drainage from the well;
(ARM 36.15.602(6))
      (2)   They require no other structures (e.g., a well house);
(ARM 36.15.602(6))
      (3)   Well casings are water tight to a distance of at least 25 feet
below the ground surface and the well casing height is a minimum of two feet
above the base flood elevation or capped with a watertight seal and vented two
feet above the base flood elevation;
(ARM 36.15.602(6))
      (4)   Water supply lines have a water-tight seal where the lines enter
the casing;
(ARM 36.15.602(6))
      (5)   All pumps and electrical lines and equipment are either of the
submersible type or are adequately floodproofed; and
(ARM 36.15.602(6))
      (6)   Check valves are installed on main water lines at wells and at all
building entry locations.
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(5)) (ARM 36.15.602(6))
   (I)   Buried and sealed vaults for sewage disposal in campgrounds and
recreational areas. Provided, in addition to the requirements of division (B)
above, demonstrate approval by State Department of Environmental Quality and
local health and sanitation permits or approvals.
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(6)) (ARM 36.15.602(7)))
   (J)   Public and private campgrounds. Provided, in addition to the
requirements of division (B) above, that:
      (1)   Access roads require only limited fill and do not obstruct or
divert flood waters;
(ARM 36.15.602(8))
      (2)   The project meets the accessory structures requirements in this
section;
      (3)   No dwellings or permanent mobile homes are allowed;
(ARM 36.15.602(8))
      (4)   Recreational vehicles and travel trailers are ready for highway use
with wheels intact, with only quick disconnect type utilities and securing
devices, and have no permanently attached additions; and
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(14))
      (5)   There is no large-scale clearing of riparian vegetation within 50
feet of the mean annual high water mark (higher standard).
   (K)   Structures accessory or appurtenant. To permitted uses such as boat
docks, loading and parking areas, marinas, sheds, emergency airstrips,
permanent fences crossing channels that may impede or stop flows or debris,
picnic shelters and tables and lavatories, that are incidental to a principal
structure or use, provided in addition to the requirements of division (B)
above, that:
      (1)   The structures are not intended for human habitation or supportive
of human habitation; (ARM 36.15.602(9))
      (2)   The structures will have low flood damage potential;
(ARM 36.15.602(9))
      (3)   The structures will, insofar as possible, be located on ground
higher than the surrounding ground and as far from the channel as possible;
(ARM 36.15.602(9))
      (4)   The structures will be constructed and placed so as to offer a
minimal obstruction to flood flows;
(ARM 36.15.602(9))
      (5)   Only those wastewater disposal systems that are approved under
health and sanitation regulations are allowed;
      (6)   Service facilities within these structures such as electrical,
heating and plumbing are floodproofed according to the requirements in §
152.10;
(ARM 36.15.602(9))
      (7)   The structures are firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
(ARM 36.15.602(9))
      (8)   The structures do not require fill and/or substantial excavation;
      (9)   The structures or use cannot be changed or altered without permit
approval; and
      (10)   There is no clearing of riparian vegetation within 50 feet of the
mean annual high water mark (higher standard).
   (L)   Construction of or modifications to surface water diversions.
Provided, in addition to the requirements of division (B) above, that the
design is reviewed and approved by an engineer and includes:
      (1)   Measures to minimize potential erosion from a base flood; and
(ARM 36.15.603(3)(b))
      (2)   Designs and plans that demonstrate any permanent structure in the
stream is designed to safely withstand up to the base flood considering the
forces associated with hydrodynamic and hydrostatic pressures including flood
depths, velocities, impact, ice buoyancy and uplift forces associated with the
base flood.
(ARM 36.15.603(3)(c)) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(3) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(d)(3))
   (M)   Flood control and stream bank stabilization measures. Provided, in
addition to the requirements of division (B) above, that the design is reviewed
and approved by an engineer and constructed to substantially resist or
withstand the forces associated with hydrodynamic and hydrostatic pressures,
including flood depths, velocities, impact, ice, buoyancy and uplift associated
with the base flood. The design must also show compliance with the following
applicable criteria:
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(3) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(d)(3)) (ARM 36.15.606))
      (1)   Levee and floodwall construction or alteration:
         (a)   Must be designed and constructed with suitable fill and be
designed to safely convey a base flood;
(ARM 36.15.606(1)(a))
         (b)   Must be constructed at least three feet higher than the
elevation of the base flood unless the levee or floodwall protects agricultural
land only;
(ARM 36.15.606(2)(a))
         (c)   Must meet state and federal levee engineering and construction
standards and be publically owned and maintained if it protects structures of
more than one landowner; and
(ARM 36.15.505(1)(c)(ii) and (iii))
         (d)   For any increase in the elevation of the base flood, an
alteration of the regulated flood hazard area requires approvals pursuant to
division (C) above.
      (2)   Stream bank stabilization, pier and abutment protection projects:
         (a)   Must be designed and constructed using methods and materials
that are the least environmentally damaging yet practicable, and should be
designed to withstand a base flood once the project’s vegetative components are
mature within a period of up to five years or other time as required by the
Floodplain Administrator. Once vegetation is mature and established, it should
not require substantial yearly maintenance after the initial period;
         (b)   Materials for the project may be designed to erode over time but
not fail catastrophically and impact others. Erosion, sedimentation and
transport of the materials may be designed to be at least similar in amount and
rate of existing stable natural stream banks during the base flood;
         (c)   Must not increase erosion upstream, downstream, across from or
adjacent to the site in excess of the existing stable natural stream bank
during the base flood; and
(ARM 36.15.606(1)(b))
         (d)   Materials for the project may include but are not limited to
riprap, root wads, brush mattresses, willow wattles, natural woody debris or
combinations of analogous materials.
      (3)   Channelization projects where the excavation and/or construction of
an channel is for the purpose of diverting the entire or a portion of the flow
of a stream from its established course, the project must:
         (a)   Not increase the magnitude, velocity or elevation of the base
flood; and
         (b)   Meet the requirements of division (L) above.
(ARM 36.15.101(7)) (ARM 36.15.606(1)(c))
      (4)   Dams:
         (a)   The design and construction shall be in accordance with the
State Dam Safety Act and applicable safety standards; and
         (b)   The project shall not increase flood hazards downstream either
through operational procedures or improper hydrologic/hydraulic design.
(ARM 36.15.606(1)(d))
   (N)   Stream and bank restoration. Stream and bank restoration projects
intended to reestablish the terrestrial and aquatic attributes of a natural
stream and not for protection of a structure or development provided, in
addition to the requirements of division (B) above, that:
      (1)   The project will not increase velocity or erosion upstream,
downstream, across from or adjacent to the site;
(ARM 36.15.606(1)(b))
      (2)   Materials may include but are not limited to boulders, rock cobble,
gravel, native stream bed materials, root wads, brush mattresses, willow
wattles, natural woody debris or combinations of analogous materials and that
reasonably replicates the bed and bank of the natural stream;
      (3)   Erosion, sedimentation and transport of the materials are not more
than the amount and rate of existing natural stream banks during the base
flood; and
      (4)   The project may be designed to allow vegetative materials to mature
within a period up to five years or other time as required by the Floodplain
Administrator. Once vegetation is mature and established, it should not require
substantial yearly maintenance after the initial period.
   (O)   Existing residential and non-residential buildings in the floodway.
Any alteration or substantial improvement to an existing building must meet the
requirements of division (B) above and the applicable requirements in §
152.10 for residential or non-residential buildings.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-404(3)(b)) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 152.10 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS IN THE FLOOD FRINGE OR REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD
AREA WITH NO FLOODWAY.
   (A)   Uses requiring permits. 
      (1)   All uses allowed by permit in the floodway shall also be allowed by
permit within the flood fringe or regulated flood hazard area with no floodway
Such uses are subject to the requirements in §
152.09, with the exception of the encroachment limit of §
152.09(B)(2). Instead, such uses are subject to the encroachment limits of this
division (B)(9) below.
      (2)   Except for prohibited artificial obstructions in §
152.06(B), all other artificial obstructions including new construction,
substantial improvements, alterations to residential, and nonresidential
structures including manufactured homes, and related suitable fill or
excavation shall be allowed by permit and are subject to the requirements in
this section and general requirements of §
152.09(B), with the exception of the encroachment limit of §
152.09(B)(2).
(ARM 36.15.701(2))
   (B)   General requirements. An application for a floodplain permit must
demonstrate or meet the following applicable requirements:
      (1)   Base flood elevation Where necessary to meet the appropriate
elevation requirement in these regulations, the base flood elevation(s) must be
determined by an engineer and utilized in the design and layout of the project
demonstrating the design and construction criteria herein are met. For
regulated flood hazard areas that do not have computed and published base flood
elevations in the adopted flood hazard study referenced in §
152.04, a base flood elevation must be determined or obtained from a reliable
source, utilizing appropriate engineering methods and analyses;
      (2)   Flood damage structures must be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage and structures must be reasonably safe
from flooding;
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(3)(iii))
      (3)   Surface drainage: adequate surface drainage must be provided around
structures;
      (4)   Materials: structures must be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(3)(ii))
      (5)   Artificial obstructions: structures, excavation or fill must not be
prohibited by any other statute, regulation, ordinance or resolution; and must
be compatible with subdivision, zoning and any other land use regulations, if
any;
(ARM 36.15.701(3)(a)) (ARM 36.15.701(3)(b))
      (6)   Anchoring All construction and substantial improvements must be
designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(3))
      (7)   Certification by an engineer, architect, land surveyor or other
qualified person must accompany the application where required including for an
encroachment analysis, adequacy of structural elevations, base flood elevation
determinations, flood-proofing, enclosure flood openings and design and
construction to withstand the hydrodynamic forces and hydrostatic pressures of
flood depths, velocities, impact, buoyancy, uplift forces associated with the
base flood and surface drainage. A certification is not intended to constitute
a warranty or guarantee of performance, expressed or implied;
(ARM 36.15.606(1) (ARM 36.15.702(2)(c)) (ARM 36.15.801(3)(b)) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3
(c)(3) and (4)) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(d)(3))
      (8)   Access structures must have safe access during times of flooding up
to the base flood for ordinary and emergency services provided there are no
reasonable alternate locations for structures; (Higher Standard)
      (9)   Encroachment analysis:
         (a)   All applications in the regulated flood hazard area without a
floodway must be supported by an encroachment analysis of the proposed use, a
thorough hydrologic and hydraulic analysis except as provided in division (B)
(9)(d) below, prepared by an engineer to demonstrate the effect of the
structure on flood flows, velocities and the base flood elevation;
(ARM 36.15.604) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(3))
         (b)   The maximum allowable encroachment is certified to be at or less
than one- half feet increase to the base flood elevation unless approval of an
alteration of the regulated flood hazard area pursuant to §
152.04 and an approved FEMA conditional letter of map revision occurs before
permit issuance;
(ARM 36.15.604) (ARM 36.15.505) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(13))
         (c)   An encroachment analysis is not required for any development in
the flood fringe where an accompanying floodway has been designated within the
regulated flood hazard area; and
         (d)   Although all other development standards herein apply, a minimal
or qualitative encroachment analysis may be accepted when the project or
development does not require a structure, alteration of the floodplain, involve
fill, grading, excavation or storage of materials or equipment and also is
certified by an engineer to not exceed the allowable encroachment.
      (10)   Electrical systems floodproofing: all electrical service
materials, equipment and installation for uses in a regulated flood hazard area
must be certified to meet the following requirements:
         (a)   All incoming power service equipment including all metering
equipment, control centers, transformers, distribution and lighting panels and
all other stationary equipment must be located at least two feet above the base
flood elevation;
(ARM 36.15.901(1)(a))
         (b)   Portable and movable electrical equipment may be placed below
the base flood elevation, provided that the equipment can be disconnected by a
single plug and socket assembly of the submersible type;
(ARM 36.15.901(1)(b))
         (c)   The main power service lines must have automatically operated
electrical disconnect equipment or manually operated electrical disconnect
equipment located at an accessible remote location outside the regulated flood
hazard area or two feet above the base flood elevation; and
(ARM 36.15.901 (1)(c))
         (d)   All electrical wiring systems installed below the base flood
elevation must be suitable for continuous submergence and may not contain
fibrous components.
(ARM 36.15.901(1)(d))
      (11)   Heating and cooling systems floodproofing heating and cooling
systems for uses in a regulated flood hazard area must be certified to meet the
following requirements:
         (a)   Float-operated automatic control valves must be installed so
that fuel supply is automatically shut off when flood waters reach the floor
level where the heating and cooling systems are located;
(ARM 36.15.902(1)(a))
         (b)   Manually-operated gate valves must be installed in gas supply
lines. The gate valves must be operable from a location above the base flood
elevation;
(ARM 36.15.902(1)(b))
         (c)   Electrical systems floodproofing must be met; and
(ARM 36.15.902(1)(c))
         (d)   Furnaces and cooling units must be installed at least two feet
above the base flood elevation and the ductwork installed above the base flood
elevation.
      (12)   Plumbing systems: floodproofing plumbing systems for uses in the
regulated flood hazard area must be certified to meet the following
requirements:
         (a)   Sewer lines, except those to a buried and sealed vault, must
have check valves installed to prevent sewage backup into permitted structures;
and
(ARM 36.15.903(1)(a))
         (b)   All toilets, stools, sinks, urinals, vaults and drains must be
located so the lowest point of possible flood water entry is at least two feet
above the base flood elevation.
(ARM 36.15.903(1)(b))
      (13)   Structural fill floodproofing fill used to elevate structures,
including, but not limited to, residential and non-residential buildings must
be certified to meet the following requirements:
         (a)   The filled area must be at or above the base flood elevation and
extend at least 15 feet beyond the structure in all directions;
         (b)   Fill material must be suitable fill, that is stable, compacted,
well graded and pervious, not adversely affected by water and frost, devoid of
trash or similar foreign matter, tree stumps or other organic material; and is
fitting for the purpose of supporting the intended use and/or permanent
structure. (ARM 36.15.101(22))
         (c)   The fill must be compacted to minimize settlement and compacted
to 95% of the maximum density. Compaction of earthen fill must be certified by
a engineer;
         (d)   No portion of the fill is allowed within the floodway;
         (e)   The fill slope must not be steeper than one and one-half
horizontal to one vertical, unless substantiating data justifying a steeper
slope is provided and adequate erosion protection is provided for fill slopes
exposed to floodwaters; and
         (f)   The fill must be a minimum of one-half feet above the base flood
elevation and extend at least 15 feet beyond the structure in all directions
(higher standard—replace sentence number 1. above).
      (14)   Wet floodproofing: building designs with an enclosure below the
lowest floor must be certified to meet the following:
         (a)   Materials used for walls and floors are resistant to flooding to
an elevation two feet or more above the base flood elevation; and
(ARM 36.15.702(2)(a))
         (b)   The enclosure must be designed to equalize hydrostatic forces on
walls by allowing for entry and exit of floodwaters. Opening designs must
either be certified by an engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following:
            1.   Automatically allow entry and exit of floodwaters through
screens, louvers, valves and other coverings or devices;
            2.   Have two or more openings with a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area below the
lowest floor, except if the enclosure is partially subgrade, a minimum of two
openings may be provided on a single wall; and
            3.   Have the bottom of all openings no higher than one foot above
the higher of the exterior or interior adjacent grade or floor immediately
below the openings.
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(5)) (NFIP Insurance Manual, Rev. May 2013)
      (15)   Dry floodproofing building designs that do not allow internal
flooding must be certified according to these regulations to meet the
following:
         (a)   Building use must be for non-residential use only and does not
include mixed residential and non-residential use;
         (b)   Be floodproofed to an elevation no lower than two feet above the
base flood elevation;
         (c)   Be constructed of impermeable membranes or materials for floors
and walls and have water tight enclosures for all windows, doors and other
openings; and
         (d)   Be designed to withstand the hydrostatic pressures and
hydrodynamic forces resulting from the base flood and the effects of buoyancy.
(ARM 36.15.702(2)(b)) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(3))
      (16)   Elevation of the lowest floor elevating the lowest floor may be by
either suitable fill, foundation wall enclosure, stem walls, pilings, posts,
piers, columns or other acceptable means;
(M.C.A. § 76-5-402(2)(b)) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(8)) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(6))
      (17)   Crawl space foundation enclosures including subgrade crawlspace
enclosures below the lowest floor must meet the wet floodproofing requirements
and be designed so that the crawl space floor is at or above the base flood
elevation. Crawl space foundations must have an inside dimension of not more
than five feet from the ground to the top of the living floor level and a
subgrade crawlspace must also have the interior ground surface no more than two
feet below the exterior lowest adjacent ground surface on all sides. A subgrade
foundation exceeding either dimension is a basement;
      (18)   Manufactured home anchors: for new placement, substantial
improvement or replacement of manufactured homes for residential or
nonresidential use including additions, the chassis must be secure and must
resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by anchoring with anchoring
components capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds and as follows:
         (a)   For manufactured homes less than 50 feet long, over-the-top ties
to ground anchors are required at each of the four corners of the home, with
two additional ties per side at intermediate locations; or
         (b)   For manufactured homes more than 50 feet long, frame ties to
ground anchors are required at each corner of the home with five additional
ties per side at intermediate points; and
(C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(8)) (C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(6))
      (19)   Access for emergency vehicles is provided. For manufactured homes,
access for a manufactured home hauler is also provided (higher standard).
   (C)   Residential building, exceptions or additional requirements. New
construction, alterations and substantial improvements of residential
dwellings, manufactured homes, including replacement of manufactured homes,
must be constructed such that:
      (1)   Elevation of the lowest floor. The lowest floor of the building
including an attached garage or basement must be two feet or more above the
base flood elevation;
(ARM 36.15.701(3))
      (2)   Enclosure. Enclosures of elevated buildings cannot be dry
floodproofed. Use for an enclosure is limited to facilitating building
component access. The enclosure including a crawlspace must be wet floodproofed
and the enclosure floor must be at or above the base flood elevation. An
attached garage floor must be two or more feet above the base flood elevation;
and
      (3)   Recreation vehicles. Recreational vehicles on site for more than
180 days or not ready for highway use must meet the requirements for
manufactured homes for residential use.
   (D)   Non-residential building, exceptions or additional requirements. New
construction, alterations and substantial improvements of non-residential
including agricultural, commercial and industrial buildings and residential and
non-residential accessory buildings must be constructed such that:
      (1)   Elevation of the lowest floor. The lowest floor of the building
must be elevated two feet above the base flood elevation or adequately dry
floodproofed according to this section. The lowest floor may be wet proofed
provided the use is limited to only parking, loading and storage of equipment
or materials not appreciably affected by floodwater;
(ARM 36.15.702(2)) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(3)(H) (44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(3) and (4))
      (2)   Enclosure. Enclosures below the lowest floor on elevated buildings
must be wet floodproofed and the use must be limited to parking, access or
storage or must be adequately dry floodproofed according to this section;
      (3)   Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes proposed for use as non-
residential buildings cannot be dry floodproofed; and
      (4)   Agricultural structures. Agricultural structures not intended to be
insurable, used solely for agricultural purposes, having low flood damage
potential, used exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting,
storage, drying or raising of agricultural commodities including raising of
livestock, and not intended for human habitation are exempt from the elevation
requirement, dry or wet floodproofing, but shall:
         (a)   Be located on higher ground and as far from the channel as
possible;
         (b)   Offer minimal obstruction to flood flows;
         (c)   Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or collapse;
         (d)   Where electrical, heating and plumbing systems are installed,
meet the floodproofing requirements in divisions (B)(10), (B)(11) and (B)(12)
above; and
         (e)   Meet the elevation or dry floodproofing requirements if the
structure is an animal confinement facility.
(ARM 36.15.602(9) (ARM 36.15.701(3)(e)) (ARM 36.15.702(2)) (Ord. 2018-01,
passed 5-21-2008)
§ 152.11 EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Emergency repair and replacement of severely damaged artificial
obstructions and development in the regulated flood hazard area, including
public transportation facilities, public water and sewer facilities, flood
control works and private projects are subject to the permitting requirements
of these regulations.
(ARM 36.15.217)
      (2)   The provisions of these regulations are not intended to affect
other actions that are necessary to safeguard life or structures during periods
of emergency.
   (B)   Emergency notification and application requirements.
      (1)   The property owner and or the person responsible for taking
emergency action must notify the Floodplain Administrator prior to initiating
any emergency action in a regulated flood hazard area normally requiring a
floodplain permit. An emergency notification form must be submitted to the
Floodplain Administrator within five days of the action taken as a result of an
emergency.
      (2)   Unless otherwise specified by the Floodplain Administrator, within
30 days of initiating the emergency action, a person who has undertaken an
emergency action must submit a floodplain permit application that describes
what action has taken place during the emergency and describe any additional
work that may be required to bring the project in compliance with these
regulations.
      (3)   A person who has undertaken an emergency action may be required to
modify or remove the project in order to meet the permit requirements.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 152.12 VARIANCES.
   (A)   General. A variance from the minimum development standards of these
regulations may be allowed. An approved variance would permit construction in a
manner otherwise as required or prohibited by these regulations.
(44 C.F.R. § 59.1) (ARM 36.15.218))
   (B)   Variance application requirements.
      (1)   Prior to any consideration of a variance from any development
standard in these regulations, a completed floodplain permit application and
required supporting material must be submitted.
      (2)   Additionally, supporting materials in a variance application
specific to the variance request including facts and information addressing the
criteria in this section must be submitted.
      (3)   If the floodplain permit application and variance application is
deemed not correct and complete, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify the
applicant of deficiencies within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days. Under
no circumstances should it be assumed that the variance is automatically
granted.
   (C)   Notice requirements for floodplain variance application. Public notice
of the floodplain permit application and variance application shall be given
pursuant to §
152.08(B).
   (D)   Evaluation of variance application.
      (1)   A floodplain permit and variance shall only be issued upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum allowance necessary, considering
the flood hazard, to afford relief from these regulations and provided all of
the following criteria are met:
         (a)   There is a good and sufficient cause. Financial hardship is not
a good and sufficient cause;
(44 C.F.R. § 60.6(a)(3))
         (b)   Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant;
(44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(3)) and ARM 36.15.218(b))
         (c)   Residential and nonresidential buildings are not in the
floodway, except for alterations or substantial improvement to existing
buildings, Residential dwellings including basements and attached garages do
not have the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation;
         (d)   Any enclosure including a crawl space must meet the requirements
of §
152.10(B)(14), wet floodproofing, if the enclosure interior grade is at or
below the base flood elevation;
         (e)   Granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights to existing buildings, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with other existing local laws or ordinances;
(44 C.F.R. § 60.6 (a)(3)) (ARM 36.15.218(a))
         (f)   The proposed use is adequately floodproofed;
(ARM 36.15.218(c))
         (g)   The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief; (44 C.F.R. § 60.6(a)(4))
         (h)   Reasonable alternative locations are not available;
(M.C.A. § 76-5-406(3) (ARM 36.15.218(d))
         (i)   An encroachment does not cause an increase to the base flood
elevation that is beyond that allowed in these regulations; and
(44 C.F.R. § 60.6(a)(1))
         (j)   All other criteria for a floodplain permit besides the specific
development standard requested by variance are met.
      (2)   An exception to the variance criteria may be allowed as follows.
         (a)   For either new construction of a structure outside of the
floodway only or for substantial improvements or an alteration of a structure,
on a lot of one-half acres or less that is contiguous to and surrounded by lots
with existing structures constructed below the base flood elevation; or
(44 C.F.R. § 60.6(a).
         (b)   For historic structures, variances may be issued for the repair
or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum relief
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
         (c)   The historic nature of the building must be designated as a
preliminary or historic structure by U.S. Secretary of Interior or an approved
state or local government historic preservation program.
(44 C.F.R. 60.6(a))
   (E)   Decision. The Board of Adjustments of the city shall:
      (1)   Evaluate the floodplain permit application and variance application
using the criteria in division (D) above, and the application requirements and
minimum development standards in §§
152.09 and
152.10;
      (2)   Make findings and approve, conditionally approve or deny a
floodplain permit and variance within 180 days of a complete application;
      (3)   If approved, attach conditions to the approval of floodplain permit
and variance, including a project completion date and inspections during and
after construction;
      (4)   Notify the applicant that the issuance of a floodplain permit and
variance to construct a structure not meeting the minimum building requirements
in these regulations may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance
and that flood insurance premiums are determined by actuarial risk and will not
be modified by the granting of a variance; and
(44 C.F.R. 60.6(a))
      (5)   Submit to the Floodplain Administrator a record of all actions
involving a floodplain permit and variance, including the findings and decision
and send a copy of each variance granted to DNRC.
(44 C.F.R. § 60.6(a)(6) (M.C.A. § 76-5-405)
   (F)   Judicial review. Any person or persons aggrieved by the floodplain
permit and variance decision may appeal such decision to the District Court for
the county.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 152.13 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS.
   (A)   General. An administrative appeal may be brought before the City
Council for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s order, decision to grant,
condition or deny a floodplain permit or interpretation of the regulated flood
hazard area boundary.
   (B)   Appeals requirements. The following provisions apply to administrative
appeals:
      (1)   An appeal shall include the basis of the appeal and supporting
information including specific findings and conclusions of the Floodplain
Administrator’s decision being appealed;
      (2)   An appeal may be submitted by an applicant and/or anyone who may be
aggrieved by the Floodplain Administrator’s decision or order;
      (3)   Appeals must be received within 30 days of the date of the decision
or order of the Floodplain Administrator; and
      (4)   Additional information specific to the appeal request may be
requested by the review panel.
   (C)   Notice and hearing.
      (1)   Notice of the pending appeal and hearing shall be provided pursuant
to §
152.08(B). The Floodplain Administrator may notify DNRC and FEMA of pending
appeals.
      (2)   A public hearing on the appeal must be held within 30 days of the
notice unless set otherwise.
   (D)   Decision. A judgment on an appeal shall be made within 30 days of the
hearing unless set otherwise. The decision may affirm, modify or overturn the
Floodplain Administrator’s decision. A decision on an appeal of a permit cannot
grant or issue a variance. A decision may support, reverse or remand an order
or determination of a boundary of the regulated flood hazard area by the
Floodplain Administrator.
   (E)   Judicial review. Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision on an
administrative appeal may appeal such decision to the District Court for the
county.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 152.14 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Investigation request. An investigation to determine compliance with
these regulations for an artificial obstruction or nonconforming use within the
regulated flood hazard area may be made either on the initiative of the
Floodplain Administrator or on the written request of three titleholders of
land which may be affected by the activity. The names and addresses of the
persons requesting the investigation shall be released if requested.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-105)(2)
   (B)   Notice to enter and investigate lands or waters. The Floodplain
Administrator may make reasonable entry upon any lands and waters for the
purpose of making an investigation, inspection or survey to verify compliance
with these regulations.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-105(1))
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator shall provide notice of entry by mail,
electronic mail, phone call or personal delivery to the owner, owner’s agent,
lessee or lessee’s agent whose lands will be entered.
      (2)   If none of these persons can be found, the Floodplain Administrator
shall affix a copy of the notice to one or more conspicuous places on the
property.
      (3)   If the owners do not respond, cannot be located or refuse entry to
the Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain Administrator may initiate a
search warrant (higher standard).
   (C)   Notice to respond and order to take corrective action. When the
Floodplain Administrator determines that a violation may have occurred, the
Floodplain Administrator may issue written notice to the owner or an agent of
the owner, either personally or by certified mail. Such notice shall cite the
regulatory offense and include an order to take corrective action within a
reasonable time or to respond by requesting an administrative review by the
Floodplain Administrator.
   (D)   Administrative review. The order to take corrective action is final,
unless within five working days or any granted extension, after the order is
received, the owner submits a written request for an administrative review by
the Floodplain Administrator. A request for an administrative review does not
stay the order.
   (E)   Appeal of administrative decision. Within ten working days or any
granted extension of receipt of the Floodplain Administrator’s decision
concluding the administrative review, the property owner or owner’s agent may
appeal the decision pursuant to §
152.13.
   (F)   Failure to comply with order to take corrective action. If the owner
fails to comply with the order for corrective action, remedies may include
administrative or legal actions, or penalties through court.
   (G)   Other remedies. This section does not prevent efforts to obtain
voluntary compliance through warning, conference or any other appropriate
means. Action under this section shall not bar enforcement of these regulations
by injunction or other appropriate remedy.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Misdemeanor.
      (1)   Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to
comply with any of the requirements, including failure to obtain permit
approval prior to development in the regulated flood hazard area, except for an
emergency, shall constitute a misdemeanor and may be treated as a public
nuisance.
      (2)   Any person who violates these regulations or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than
$100 or imprisoned for not more than ten days or both. Each day’s continuance
of a violation shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
(M.C.A. § 76-5-110)
   (B)   Declaration to the Federal Flood Insurance Administrator.
      (1)   Upon finding of a violation and failure of the owner to take
corrective action as ordered, the Floodplain Administrator may submit notice
and request a § 1316 violation declaration to the Federal Insurance
Administrator. The Federal Insurance Administrator has the authority to. deny
new and renewal flood insurance for a structure upon finding a valid violation
declaration.
(44 C.F.R. § 73.3)
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall provide the Federal Insurance
Administrator the following:
         (a)   The name(s) of the property owner(s) and address or legal
description of the property sufficient to confirm its identity and location;
         (b)   A clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in
violation of a cited state or local law, regulation or ordinance;
         (c)   A clear statement that the public body making the declaration
has authority to do so and a citation to that authority;
         (d)   Evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the
violation and the prospective denial of insurance; and
         (e)   A clear statement that the declaration is being submitted
pursuant to § 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-21-2008)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING CODE
Section
Administration and Enforcement
   
153.01   Title
   
153.02   Authority
   
153.03   Purpose and intent of chapter
   
153.04   Jurisdictional area
   
153.05   Permit required
   
153.06   Incorporation of official zoning map
   
153.07   Definitions
   
153.08   Zoning Administrator; duties
   
153.09   Zoning Commission; responsibilities
   
153.10   Procedures for application, reviewing and granting permits
   
153.11   Conditional use permits
   
153.12   Board of Adjustment
   
153.13   Amendments
   
153.14   Violation
General Requirements
   
153.30   Applicability
   
153.31   Nonconforming lots, uses and structures
   
153.32   Home occupations
   
153.33   Flood hazard areas
   
153.34   Supplemental district regulations
   
153.35   Off-street loading
   
153.36   Signs
   
153.37   Screening and buffering
   
153.38   Yard measurements
   
153.39   Planned unit developments (PUD)
Districts Established
   
153.50   General provisions; interpretation of district boundaries
   
153.51   Low Density Residential District (R-1)
   
153.52   Medium Density Residential District (R-2)
   
153.53   Central Business District (CBD)
   
153.54   General Commercial District (GC)
   
153.55   Mobile home parks
   
153.56   Historic preservation overlay district
 
   
153.99   Penalty
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Boulder, Montana.”
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.02 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Municipal Zoning Enabling
Act (M.C.A. §§ 76-2-301 through 76-2-328).
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.03 PURPOSE AND INTENT OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   The purpose of this zoning code is to promulgate and adopt such
regulations that:
      (1)   Are designed in accordance with the growth policy;
      (2)   Are designed to lessen congestion in the streets;
      (3)   Will secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
      (4)   Will promote the health and the general welfare of the public;
      (5)   Will provide adequate light and air;
      (6)   Will prevent the overcrowding of land;
      (7)   Will avoid undue concentration of population;
      (8)   Will facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks and such other public requirements;
      (9)   Give reasonable consideration to the character of the district;
      (10)   Give reasonable consideration to the district’s peculiar
suitability for particular uses;
      (11)   Give reasonable consideration to conserving the value of
buildings; and
      (12)   Will encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the
jurisdictional area.
   (B)   Further, the intent of this zoning code is to:
      (1)   Ensure that the land uses of a community are properly situated in
relation to one another, providing adequate space for each type of development,
and preventing problems associated with incompatible uses;
      (2)   Control the density of development in each area of the community so
that property can be adequately serviced by such public facilities as streets,
schools, recreation and utility systems;
      (3)   Direct new growth into appropriate areas;
      (4)   Protect existing property by requiring that development affords
adequate light, air and privacy for persons living and working within the
municipality;
      (5)   Improve the quality of the physical environment of the community;
      (6)   Protect and maintain property values;
      (7)   Preserve and develop the economic base of the community; and
      (8)   Encourage the provision of affordable housing for families of all
income levels.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.04 JURISDICTIONAL AREA.
   The zoning jurisdiction of the city shall include the land within the
corporate limits of the city and within the one mile extraterritorial zoning
jurisdiction boundaries established and shown on the “Official Zoning Map,
Boulder, Montana.”
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.05 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Zoning permit. A zoning permit must be obtained from the City
Administrator before any building, structure or land may be used or occupied,
or before any building or structure permitted under this chapter may be
erected, placed, moved, expanded or structurally altered. A zoning permit may
be issued only when the proposed building, structure, parcel or use will meet
the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Conditional use permit. A conditional use permit must be obtained
before those uses specified as conditional uses within certain zoning districts
may be established. A conditional use permit may be issued only when the
proposed use will meet both the requirements of the particular district
involved and the conditions specified for the use.
   (C)   Zoning requirements operate in addition to other municipal codes. The
requirements of this chapter operate in addition to those requirements
established under other city municipal codes, except that where conflicts with
other city municipal codes may occur these zoning requirements shall govern.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.06 INCORPORATION OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   (A)   Official zoning map a part of zoning code. The “Official Zoning Map of
Boulder, Montana,” and all notations, references and other information shown on
the map are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter.
   (B)   Maintaining and changing the official zoning map.
      (1)   The official zoning map shall be kept in City Hall, and shall be
the final authority as to the current status of zoning districts in the city
zoning jurisdictional area.
      (2)   The official zoning map shall bear the signature of the Mayor,
attested by the City Administrator, and the date of adoption of this chapter.
      (3)   The official zoning map shall bear the seal of the city under the
following words, “This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of
Boulder, Montana, referred to in Section B, subsection 1 of Ordinance Number
2007-03 of the City of Boulder, Montana.”
      (4)   Whenever any changes are made to district boundaries in accordance
with the procedures of this chapter, those changes approved by the City Council
shall be promptly entered on the official zoning map, and a signed and dated
certification attached to the map. No amendment to district boundaries shall
become effective until those changes are presented to the City Council by the
City Administrator, on behalf of the Planning Board. If the City Council
approves the changes, the changes shall be entered on the official zoning map.
      (5)   No changes of any nature shall be made to the official zoning map,
except in conformity with the procedures specified in this chapter.
      (6)   A copy of the official zoning map, duly certified by the City
Administrator, shall be filed in the office of the Clerk and Recorder. Each
change to the official zoning map adopted by the City Council, duly certified
by the City Administrator, shall likewise be filed in the office of the Clerk
and Recorder. Any changes adopted by the City Council to the official zoning
map must be approved by resolution of the City Council in accordance with the
amendment procedures specified in §
153.13.
   (C)   Loss, damage or destruction of official zoning map. In the event that
the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to
interpret, the City Council may by resolution adopt a new official zoning map
which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning
map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior map, but no
such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning
map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new map shall be certified in the
same manner as the original official zoning map, noting that it supersedes the
prior map.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.07 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Interpretation of certain words. For purposes of this chapter, the
following conditions and interpretations apply.
      (1)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
      (2)   Words used in the singular number include the plural; words used in
the plural include the singular, unless the natural construction of the wording
indicates otherwise.
      (3)   The word “person” includes a firm, association, corporation, trust,
organization, partnership or company, as well as an individual.
      (4)   The word “lot” includes the words “parcel” or “tract.”
      (5)   The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is permissive.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE. The use or structure on the same lot with,
and customarily secondary or subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
      AUTOMOBILE WRECKING.  The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles
or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping or dismantling, of partially
dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
      BOARDING HOUSE. A building, or portion thereof, where lodging for five or
more persons is provided for compensation whether or not meals are provided.
      BUILDING. Any structure erected for support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals or property of any kind.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the highest point of
a structure to the finished grade of the ground.
      CARETAKER’S RESIDENCE. A single-family dwelling located in conjunction
with a residential, commercial or industrial land use that requires 24-hour
care in order to protect or operate the use.
      CHURCH.  A building designed and used for public worship by a recognized
religious body.
      COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL FACILITY.
         (a)   A community group home for developmentally, mentally or severely
disabled persons which does not provide skilled or intermediate nursing care;
         (b)   A youth foster home or youth group home as defined in M.C.A. §
41-3-1102;
         (c)   A halfway house operated in accordance with regulations of the
department of health and environmental sciences for the rehabilitation of
alcoholics or drug dependent persons; or
         (d)   A licensed adult foster family care home.
(M.C.A. § 76-2-411)
      CONDITIONAL USE. A use that is allowed in a specific district if the use
meets certain requirements in order to maintain and assure the health and
safety of the community and to maintain the character of the district.
      DISTRICT, ZONING. A geographical area designated in the zoning ordinance
and delineated on the zoning map for which requirements for the use of land and
structures and development standards are prescribed.
      DRIVE-UP EATING ESTABLISHMENT. A building or structure from which persons
are served food or beverages in their vehicles or at curbside, including
establishments that serve customers outside of their vehicles.
      DWELLING. A building or portion thereof that is used for occupancy by one
or more families.
      DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.  A building or portion thereof designed for
residential occupancy by two or more families living separately.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building designed for residential occupancy by
one family. A variation will not be acceptable if it lowers the character of
the neighborhood or results in the development of conditions of blight or which
accelerate obsolescence. A trailer, camp car, trailer house (as defined in city
ordinance Section 11.04.020) or a building moved in for use as a dwelling are
considered to be unacceptable variations.
      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed for residential occupancy by
two families living separately.
      DWELLING UNIT. A building, or portion thereof that provides separate
cooking, eating, sleeping and living facilities for one family.
      FAMILY.  
         (a)   One or more biologically related persons living together as a
single housekeeping unit and occupying a dwelling unit as a family, including
resident domestic employees; or
         (b)   One or more biologically unrelated persons living together as a
single housekeeping unit and occupying a dwelling unit as the factual or
functional equivalent of a traditional family, including resident domestic
employees, as may be evidenced by:
            1.   A single housekeeping unit;
            2.   A permanent living arrangement;
            3.   Stable, rather than transient, living arrangements; or
            4.   A group headed by a householder caring for a reasonable number
of children as one would be likely to find in a biologically unitary family.
      GRADE. The point of elevation of the finished surface of ground at the
exterior wall of the building.
      HOME OCCUPATION. The use of a portion of a dwelling unit or accessory
building for occupations at home by one or more persons residing in the
dwelling unit. The activity must be clearly incidental and subordinate to the
use of the building as a dwelling.
      HOTEL/MOTEL. A building, or buildings, containing six or more rooms
designed and rented for sleeping purposes for transient visitors, and where
only a general kitchen and dining room may be provided within the building or
in an accessory building.
      LIVESTOCK. Horses, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, donkeys, mules and other
commonly domesticated hoofed animals.
      LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET. An off-street space conveniently located at a
building to allow service pickups and deliveries by commercial vehicles.
      LOT. A parcel or tract of land shown as an individual unit of ownership
on a certificate of survey, subdivision plat, deed or other instrument of
record.
      LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
      LOT DEPTH. The mean distance between the front and rear lot lines.
      LOT FRONTAGE. The portion of a lot nearest the street. For corner lots,
the front of a lot shall be the narrowest part of the lot having street
frontage.
      LOT, INTERIOR. A lot with only one frontage on a street.
      LOT, LINES. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
      LOT WIDTH. The mean width of the lot measured at right angles to its
depth, as measured at the building set back line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9f44937c21b6e548e4fc9b388fe480499534a454/
IMAGES/0-0-0-799.png]
 
   MOBILE HOME.  A detached residential dwelling unit fabricated at a factory,
not in accordance with the standards of the Uniform Building Code, and designed
for transportation on its own chassis to a building site for occupation as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation. This definition conforms to
the definition of MOBILE HOME in M.C.A. § 61-1-501.
      MOBILE HOME, CLASS A. A mobile home fabricated after July 1, 1976, in
compliance with the standards specified in 42 U.S.C. § 5401 (HUD Code), and
that satisfies each of the following additional criteria.
      (1)   The length does not exceed four times its width.
      (2)   The pitch of the roof has a minimum vertical rise of three feet per
12 feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished with a type of shingle
commonly used in standard residential construction.
      (3)   The exterior siding consists of wood, hardboard, vinyl or aluminum
siding, or other materials comparable in composition, appearance and durability
to the exterior materials used in standard residential construction.
      (4)   The dwelling unit is secured to a permanent, continuous masonry
foundation.
      (5)   The tongue, axles, transporting lights and removable towing
apparatus are removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy.
      MOBILE HOME, CLASS B. A mobile home fabricated after July 1, 1976, in
compliance with the standards specified in 42 U.S.C. § 5401 (HUD Code), but
that does not meet the additional criteria necessary to qualify as a Class A
mobile home.
      MOBILE HOME, CLASS C. A mobile home constructed prior to July 1, 1976,
and not meeting the HUD CODE.
      MOBILE HOME PARK. A tract of land providing two or more spaces for lease
or rent to the general public for the placement of mobile homes.
      MODULAR HOME. A dwelling constructed at a factory in accordance with the
Uniform Building Code applicable to site-built homes, and transported to the
site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. This definition conforms
with the definitions of “manufactured home” and “manufactured housing” in
M.C.A. §§ 61-1-513 and 76-2-302(4).
      NURSING HOME. A building used to house and care for ambulatory, aged or
infirm persons under the care and supervision of a professional staff.
      OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL, BUSINESS, ADMINISTRATIVE AND GOVERNMENT. Offices
occupied by accountants, architects, dentists, doctors, engineers, attorneys,
insurance agents, real estate agents, public employees and other professions.
      PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. A space located off any public right-of-way
that is available for parking a motor vehicle.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A land development project designed and planned
as a single entity under a plan that offers a variety of land uses, housing
types and densities, and design features in addition to those allowed by right
or condition in the zoning district.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A premises used for public camping where
persons can rent space to park individual camping trailers, pick-up campers,
motor homes, travel trailers.
      RESTAURANT. A public eating facility that does not provide curbside or
drive-up automobile service.
      RETAIL SALES. An establishment, whose purpose is to sell goods, wares or
merchandise directly to a consumer.
      SETBACK. The horizontal distance required between any structure and a lot
line, measured at right angles to the lot line.
      SHOPPING CENTER. One or more buildings containing at least three separate
retail businesses that are planned developed and managed as a unit, with off-
street parking provided on the property.
      SIGN.  Any lettered or pictorial device or structure designed to inform
or attract attention.
      STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. The modification of a building that changes its
exterior dimensions or its roof line(s).
      STRUCTURE.  That which is constructed or erected at a fixed location on
the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.
STRUCTURES include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences and billboards or
signs.
      USE. Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of
land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied in any legal
activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or intended to be
carried on in a building or other structure or on a tract of land.
      VARIANCE. The approved relaxation of the strict application of the terms
of these regulations, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement
of the provisions of these regulations will result in an unnecessary hardship,
where it will not be contrary to the public interest, and where the spirit of
this chapter will be observed and substantial justice done.
      WHOLESALE. The sale of goods and merchandise for resale rather than for
direct consumption.
      YARD, FRONT. A required open space unoccupied by any structure or portion
of a structure and extending across the full width of the lot between the front
building line and the front lot line.
      YARD, REAR.  A required open space unoccupied by any structure or portion
of a structure and extending across the full width of the lot between the rear
building line of the principal building and the rear lot line.
      YARD, SIDE. A required open space unoccupied by any structure or portion
of a structure and extending from the side building line to a side lot line
running from the front to the rear of the lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9f44937c21b6e548e4fc9b388fe480499534a454/
IMAGES/0-0-0-801.png]
 
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1- 14-2008)
§ 153.08 ZONING ADMINI STRATOR; DUTIES.
   (A)     Designati on of City Administr ator as Zoning Administr ator. The
City Council shall designate the City Administrator, or other designee, to
administer and enforce this chapter. In these ordinances, references to the
City Administrator shall include such other designee by definition. The City
Council may direct city personnel or departments to provide assistance as
appropriate.
   (B)   Duties of the City Administrator in respect to zoning.
      (1)   The City Administrator shall receive applications for zoning
permits, conditional use permits and variance requests; review applications and
plans; issue zoning permits; and coordinate inspection of premises and
properties.
      (2)   Where the City Administrator finds that any of the provisions of
this chapter are being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person
responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it. He or she shall order
discontinuance of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions,
alterations or structural changes; or shall take any other action authorized by
this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions.
      (3)   The City Administrator shall:
         (a)   Serve as an advisor to the Planning Commission, Board of
Adjustment and City Council on matters relating to administration and
enforcement of this chapter;
         (b)   Prepare staff reports as required under this chapter; and
         (c)   Prepare and maintain records of all proceedings required or
authorized under this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.09 ZONING COMMISSION; RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The City Council shall establish a Zoning Commission and appoint
members to the Commission.
   (B)   The Zoning Commission shall have the following duties:
      (1)   Review proposals and make recommendations to the City Council
regarding proposals for the amendment of this chapter and the official zoning
map; and
      (2)   Review and approve applications for conditional use permits under
the procedures set forth in §
153.11, Conditional use permits.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.10 PROCEDURES FOR APPLICATION, REVIEWING AND GRANTING PERMITS.
   (A)   Procedures for applying for a zoning permit.
      (1)   A zoning permit must be obtained from the City Administrator before
any building, other structure, or land may be used or occupied, or before any
building or other structure permitted under this chapter may be erected,
placed, moved, expanded or structurally altered. The City Administrator may
issue a zoning permit only when the proposed building, structure, parcel or use
will meet the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Before conducting a use, or constructing, erecting, expanding,
altering or modifying a building or structure, a person must submit a completed
zoning application form to the Zoning Administrator, with all of the required
information, including plans drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and
shape of the lot, the exact sizes and location of existing and proposed
buildings and other structures. The application shall include such other
information as may be required by the City Administrator, including uses of
buildings and land; the number of families, dwelling units or rental units
proposed; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be
necessary to determine conformance with this chapter.
   (B)   Reviewing and issuing a zoning permit.
      (1)   The City Administrator shall review the application to ensure the
required information is submitted and is complete. When the application and
submitted information are complete, the City Administrator shall determine
whether the proposed building, structure, alteration or use is permitted at the
proposed location, and whether the proposal will comply with the requirements
of the applicable district and these regulations.
      (2)   Should the City Administrator find that the proposal is permitted
in the applicable district and will conform to all requirements, he or she
shall issue the applicant a zoning permit.
      (3)   Should the City Administrator find that the proposal either is not
permitted in the applicable district or will not conform to ail requirements of
this chapter, he or she shall deny the application and state in writing that
the application is denied, and explain the reasons for denial. The statement
accompanied by one copy of the application shall be sent to the applicant.
      (4)   Construction, installation, alteration, placement or use must
comply with the plans approved by the City Administrator.
      (5)   A zoning permit shall be in effect for one year from the date of
approval.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.11 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of conditional use permits is to provide for
specific uses, other than those specifically permitted in each district, which
may be appropriate in the district under certain safeguards or conditions. The
conditional use permitting process is intended to provide a detailed and
comprehensive review of proposed developments that potentially could have
significant adverse impacts on the community.
   (B)   Conditional uses; requirements.
      (1)   No structure or land may be used for any purpose in any district
where the use is not permitted, unless the use is listed as a conditional use
within that district and the approval for the use is obtained through these
procedures.
      (2)   Conditional uses and the required conditions are listed as part of
the requirements for each district.
      (3)   Conditional uses also must comply with any additional conditions
prescribed by the Zoning Commission relating to the following:
         (a)   Adequate ingress and egress to property and proposed structures
with particular concern for automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience,
traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or other emergency;
         (b)   Adequate off-street parking and loading areas, where required,
with particular attention to access, traffic flow and vehicular and pedestrian
safety;
         (c)   Location of garbage containers and garbage pickup with respect
to traffic flow and access, odor and vehicular and pedestrian safety;
         (d)   Availability and compatibility of utilities in suitable
locations;
         (e)   Adequate screening and buffering, with attention to type,
dimensions and character;
         (f)   Signs, with attention to preventing glare and promoting traffic
safety and harmony with adjacent properties;
         (g)   Required yards and open space; and
         (h)   General compatibility with adjacent and other properties.
   (C)   Procedures for a conditional use permit. The following procedures must
be followed before the Commission may grant a conditional use permit.
      (1)   The applicant must submit an accurate and complete written
application for a conditional use to the Zoning Commission through the City
Administrator. All applications for conditional use permits must be accompanied
by plans drawn to approximate scale, showing the approximate dimensions and
shape of the lot to be built upon; the approximate sizes and locations on the
lot of buildings already existing, if any; the location and dimensions of the
proposed buildings or alterations; and information which clearly states how the
conditions for the use will be met.
      (2)   The application must include any other information as may be
required by the City Administrator, including descriptions of proposed
buildings and alterations; existing or proposed uses of land and buildings; the
number of families, dwelling units or rental units the building is designed to
accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be
necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of
this chapter.
      (3)   Notice shall be published at least seven days in advance of a
public hearing before the City Council. The owner of the property for which a
conditional use is sought or his or her agent shall be notified of the hearing
by mail.
      (4)   At the public hearing, any party may appear in person, or through
an agent or attorney.
      (5)   Before granting a conditional use permit, the Zoning Commission
shall make a written finding that the proposed use will comply with the
specific conditions governing the use and the other requirements of this
chapter, and that the conditional use will not adversely affect the character
of the district.
      (6)   Where the proposed conditional use is subject to review as a
subdivision under the State Subdivision and Platting Act (M.C.A. §§ 76-3-101 et
seq.), the Zoning Commission and Planning Board shall hold joint and concurrent
review, including a joint public hearing(s). Notice of each hearing shall be
given in the manner prescribed by this chapter and the municipality’s
subdivision regulations.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.12 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Board of Adjustment established, (76-2-321 & 76-2-322, MCA). A board
of adjustment (herein after referred as "the Board") is hereby established in
accordance with M.C.A. §§ 76-2-321 through 76-2-328. The City Council shall
appoint five members to the Board, each for a term of three years except that
in the initial appointment, one member shall be appointed for a term of one
year, two members for a term of two years, and two members for a term of three
years. Members of the Board may be removed from office by the City Council for
cause upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies on the Board
shall be filled by resolution of the City Council for the unexpired term of the
member affected.
   (B)   Powers of the Board of Adjustment, (76-2-323, MCA). The Board shall
have the following powers:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter or of any ordinance
adopted pursuant thereto;
      (2)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance
upon which such board is required to pass under such ordinance.
      (3)   To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the
terms of the ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where,
owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the
ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of the
ordinance shall be observed, and substantial justice done.
         (a)   HARDSHIP refers to circumstances peculiar to the particular
property. Financial or economic difficulties or consequences of actions by the
property owner(s) are not HARDSHIPS for zoning purposes.
      (4)   In exercising the above-mentioned powers, such board may in
conformity with the provisions of this part, reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed
from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought
to be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom
the appeal is taken.
   (C)   Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment.
      (1)   The Board shall select one of its members as Chairperson and shall
adopt bydaws necessary to conduct its affairs in keeping with the provisions of
this chapter. Meetings shall be held on the call of the chairperson and at such
other times as the Board may determine. The Chairperson, or in his or her
absence, the acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses. Meetings shall be open to the public.
      (2)   The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary
to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any such
administrative official; to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon
which it is required to pass under any such ordinance; or to effect any
variation in such ordinance. (76-2-324, MCA).
      (3)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, and immediately filed in the office of the Board. The Board shall make
its records and minutes available for public inspection. (76-2-325, MCA).
   (D)   Submission of variance requests.
      (1)   Any person may apply for a variance to the board of adjustment as
provided by the-by-laws of the Board by filing a variance application with the
City Zoning Administrator or an assigned designee.
      (2)   The application for variance must be complete, and specifically set
forth the grounds for requesting the variance.
      (3)   When the Zoning Administrator deems the application is complete,
the Board will be notified and shall then fix a reasonable time for the hearing
on the variance request, publish notice of the hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation twice, with at least 6 days separating each publication,
and containing all information as required under 7-1-4127 (8)(a) through (d),
MCA and notify, by mail or electronic mail, the person requesting the variance.
   (E)   Requirements governing granting of variances.
      (1)   To grant a variance, the Board must make a finding that the
granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent
of this chapter, will not be injurious to the neighborhood, is the minimum
variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or
structure, and will not be detrimental to the public welfare.
      (2)   In addition, the Board must determine that:
         (a)   Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to
the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other
lands, structures or buildings in the same district;
         (b)   Literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this chapter;
         (c)   The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
action of the applicant; and
         (d)   Granting the requested variance will not confer on the applicant
any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands,
structures, or buildings in the same district.
      (3)   Neither the nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or
buildings in the same district, nor the permitted or nonconforming use of
lands, structures or buildings in other districts are grounds for the issuance
of a variance.
   (F)   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment, (76-2-326, MCA).
      (1)   The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by any administrative official or body in the enforcement of
this chapter
      (2)   Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality
affected by any decision of the administrative officer. The appeal must be
taken within a reasonable time, as determined in the board of adjustment by-
laws, by filing the appeal with the Zoning Administrator or assigned designee
The Notice of Appeal must specify the grounds of the appeal.
      (3)   The City Zoning Administrator or assigned designee shall in a
timely manner, transmit to the board of adjustment the notice of appeal and all
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken.
      (4)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
board of adjustment after the notice of appeal has been filed with the officer
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the
officer's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case,
proceedings may not be stayed except by a restraining order, which may be
granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application, on
notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
      (5)   The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing
of the appeal, give public notice as stated in (D)(3) of this chapter, and
notify the provide notice to parties of interest, defined by the board as those
living within 150 feet of the property in question, and decide the appeal
within a reasonable time.
      (6)   At the hearing, any party may appear in person or be represented by
agent or attorney.
   (H)   Appeals from Decisions of the Board of Adjustment to a Court of
Record, (76-2- 327, MCA).
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008; Ord. 2022-02, passed 1-17-2023)
§ 153.13 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Initiation. Proposals to amend, supplement, modify or repeal any of
the provisions or the district boundaries established by this chapter or
hereafter established may be initiated by the City Council, the Zoning
Commission, or by petition of any interested resident or property owner. Such a
petition shall be submitted to the City Council through the Zoning Commission,
which shall review the petition, consider its merits and make a recommendation
to the City Council.
   (B)   Requirements for map amendments.
      (1)   In addition to an accurate and completed amendment application, any
petition to amend a zoning classification shall include a current map drawn to
scale showing all parcels of land included in the petition and the name of the
owner of each parcel certified by the County Tax Assessor from the records of
his or her office.
      (2)   A legal description of the property for which a petition to amend a
zoning classification is requested shall be included in such petition.
   (C)   Public hearings required.
      (1)   The Zoning Commission shall hold public hearings on proposed
amendments, and interested parties and citizens shall have an opportunity to
comment at the hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
published in the local newspaper at least 15 days prior to the hearing.
      (2)   If the proposed change involves an amendment to the official zoning
map, notice of the hearing shall be mailed to all property owners within the
affected area and all owners of property within 150 feet of the affected area.
      (3)   After the hearing(s), the Zoning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the City Council.
      (4)   After the Zoning Commission makes its recommendation, the City
Council shall hold a public hearing on the issue after giving notice in
accordance with the procedures above.
      (5)   When a proposed amendment affects the zoning classification of
property, and a protest against such change is signed by the owners of 20% or
more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of
those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending 150 feet there from,
or of those directly opposite thereto extending 150 feet from the street
frontage of such opposite lots, then such amendments may not become effective
except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the City Council.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.14 VIOLATION.
   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a written complaint. The complaint, stating fully the
causes and basis of the violation, shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. He or she shall properly record the complaint and immediately
investigate and take action as provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.30 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all lands, uses and
structures subject to this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.31 NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   Within the districts established by this chapter, lots, structures
and uses of land and structures may exist which were lawful at the time this
chapter was adopted or amended, but which would be prohibited or regulated
under the terms of this chapter or future amendment. The intent of this section
is to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not
to encourage their survival. This chapter further intends that nonconformities
shall not be enlarged, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding
other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
      (2)   Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the same district. However, to avoid undue hardship,
nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans,
construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was
lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter and which actual building construction has been carried on diligently.
Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction
materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where
excavation, demolition or removal of an existing building has substantially
begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shad
be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on
diligently.
   (B)   Nonconforming lots of record.
      (1)   In any district, notwithstanding other limitations imposed by this
chapter, structures permitted in a district may be established on any single
lot of record on the effective date of this chapter. The lot must be in
separate ownership and not of contiguous frontage with other lots of the same
ownership. A lot of record that does not meet lot area or lot width
requirements must meet all other requirements of the district.
      (2)   If two or more nonconforming lots with contiguous frontage in
single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this
chapter, and if any of the lots do not meet the requirements established for
lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided
parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and no portion of this parcel shall be
used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance; nor shall any division of
any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area that fails to meet
the requirements stated in this chapter.
   (C)   Nonconforming uses of land and structures. Where, at the time of
passage of this chapter, a lawful use of land or a structure exists which would
not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, the use may be
continued where it remains otherwise lawful, provided:
      (1)   A nonconforming use may not be enlarged or increased, nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land or structure than was occupied on the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
      (2)   No nonconforming use may be moved in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use on the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
      (3)   Should any nonconforming use cease for any reason for a period of
more than one year, any subsequent use of the land or structure shall conform
to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such
land is located; and
      (4)   No additional nonconforming structure shall be erected in
connection with such nonconforming use of land or structures.
   (D)   Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists on the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter but becomes
nonconforming under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on
area, lot coverage, height, yards, location on the lot or other requirements
concerning the structure, such structure may be continued, provided it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   A nonconforming structure may not be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be
altered to decrease its nonconformity.
      (2)   Should a nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of
structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50% of its
replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed
except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Should a nonconforming structure be moved for any reason for any
distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
district in which it is located after it is moved.
      (4)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the routine
repair and maintenance of a nonconforming structure.
      (5)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof
declared to be unsafe by any officials charged with protecting the public
safety, upon order of such official.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.32 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Requirements for permitted home occupations. A home occupation may be
conducted as a secondary use in a dwelling, provided that:
      (1)   The use of the dwelling for the home occupation clearly must be
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes, and not more
than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling may be used in the conduct of the
home occupation.
      (2)   There may be no change in the outside appearance of the building or
premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation other
than one sign, not exceeding six square feet in area, non-illuminated and
mounted flat against the wall of the principal structure.
      (3)   No traffic may be generated by a home occupation in greater volumes
than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for
parking generated by the conduct of the home occupation shall be met off the
street. No home occupation, or any required parking for the home occupation,
shall use the parking space required for the residence.
      (4)   No vehicles, except those normally used as passenger vehicles, will
be used for the home occupation unless stored or parked elsewhere.
      (5)   No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectable by normal senses off the lot.
      (6)   Any equipment or materials used in connection with a home
occupation shall be stored within the principal structure or in an enclosed
space outside of the principal structure.
   (B)   Procedures for permitting a home occupation. Any person considering
the establishment of a home occupation must submit an application to the Zoning
Administrator under the procedures specified in §
153.10.
   (C)   Home occupations allowed as conditional uses. Where a proposed home
occupation would not conform to any one of the conditions specified in division
(A) above, the home occupation must be reviewed as a conditional use under the
procedures of §
153.11.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.33 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   No building or structure may be built or located within any area identified
by the City Council as presenting a flood hazard. Any construction or location
of buildings or other structures within a 100-year floodplain officially
designated by the State Department of Natural Resources and Conservation must
conform to the city or county floodplain management regulations.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.34 SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. Supplementary district regulations are intended to govern
miscellaneous issues related to uses or conditions that occur in more than one
zoning district.
   (B)   Visibility at intersections. On a corner lot in any district, for a
distance of 30 feet back from the property line along each street, nothing may
be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in a manner that would impede
the visibility of vehicles entering the intersection.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9f44937c21b6e548e4fc9b388fe480499534a454/
IMAGES/0-0-0-803.png]
 
(above diagram should indicate 30' each direction)
   (C)   Fences, walls and hedges. Unless other provisions of this chapter
specify otherwise, fences, walls and hedges are permitted in any required yard,
provided that no fence, wall or hedge in or along the edge of a front yard
shall be no more than six feet in height, subject, however to the restrictions
of division (B) above.
   (D)   Structures to have legal and physical access. Every principal building
erected or placed on a lot shall have legal and physical access to a public
street, other than an alley, or an approved private street, and all structures
shall be so located on lots as to provide required off-street parking and safe
and convenient access for emergency vehicles.
   (E)   Exceptions to height regulations. The height limitations contained in
the district regulations do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas,
water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances not intended for
human occupancy and usually required to be placed above the roof level.
   (F)   Number of principal structures on lot. In any district, more than one
structure housing a permitted or conditional principal use may be erected on a
single lot, provided that minimum yard areas and other requirements of this
chapter are met for each structure as though it were located on an individual
lot.
   (G)   Parking or storage of certain vehicles. No more than one automotive
vehicle without current license plates may be parked or stored on any
residentially zoned property, except those in completely enclosed buildings.
   (H)   Fire hazards. 
      (1)   Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive
materials must be entirely enclosed with protective fencing at least six feet
in height and be protected by adequate fire-fighting and fire prevention
equipment and by normal safety devices. The activities must be set back not
less than 100 feet from all lot lines. Such activities will be subject to the
fire safety standards prescribed by the City Fire Marshal or other appropriate
authority.
      (2)   Provided that, this section shall not prohibit the storage of
flammable liquids such as gasoline, oil, paints, paint solvents and similar
substances commonly stored for household use. Such substances shall be stored
in approved safety containers and handled in accordance with the Life Safety
Code and Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code of the National Fire Protection
Association. No storage of flammable liquids or gases shall be permitted in any
location where such storage would jeopardize egress from a structure or the
spread of fire or explosion to an adjoining structure.
      (3)   Further provided that, any activity involving the transfer of
liquefied petroleum gas (propane gas) from one container to another shall be
subject to the fire safety standards and regulations prescribed by the State
Fire Marshal, or other appropriate authority. Any person, business or other
entity which intends to transfer liquefied petroleum gas (propane gas) from one
container to another shall obtain inspection and approval of the State Fire
Marshal before commencing such activities.
   (I)   Livestock. Livestock, as defined in §
153.07, shall not be maintained in any district within the corporate boundaries
of the municipality.
   (J)   Bars, taverns, lounges, night clubs. No building, structure or
premises shall be used as a bar, tavern, lounge, night club or any commercial
establishment that serves alcoholic beverages within 600 feet, and on the same
street, of any building used exclusively as a school, church, synagogue or
other place of worship. The distance shall be measured in a straight line from
the center of the nearest entrance of the place of worship or school to the
nearest entrance of the proposed establishment. This distance restriction does
not apply to establishments where sale of table wine and beer is solely in the
original package for off-premises consumption.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008; Ord. 2012-01, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 153.35 OFF-STREET LOADING.
   (A)   Purpose. The intent of off-street loading requirements is to avoid
traffic hazards and minimize congestion of streets by requiring that off-street
loading areas be provided on the same lot as the building served by delivery
trucks, and that such areas be adequate in size and number to provide the
service needed without affecting adjacent properties.
   (B)   Design of loading spaces.
      (1)   Off-street loading spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the
use they serve, and shall not occupy the front yard of the lot.
      (2)   Each loading space shall be designed to have access to a street or
alley in a manner that does not interfere with traffic movement.
      (3)   Each loading space shall be at least ten feet by 25 feet in size or
designed to accommodate the largest service trucks expected to serve the use.
      (4)   All or part of the off-street loading requirements may be met by
loading facilities within buildings.
   (C)   Number of off-street loading spaces. One off-street loading space
shall be provided for every industrial, institutional and commercial use having
a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet, plus one additional loading space for
each additional 10,000 square feet of floor space.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.36 SIGNS.
   (A)   Purpose. Sign regulations are intended to promote and protect the
public safety and welfare by regulating existing and proposed outdoor
advertising signs and signs of all types. The purpose of this section is to
protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business
climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community, and
preserve the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas by regulating
existing and proposed outdoor advertising signs, and outdoor signs of all
types. It is further intended to reduce sign or advertising distraction and
obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may
be caused by signs overhanging or projecting over public rights-of-way, provide
more open space, curb the deterioration of the natural environment and enhance
community development. Nothing in this regulation is intended to interfere with
constitutional rights related to free speech.
   (B)   Signs permitted in all districts without a permit. The following signs
are permitted in all zoning districts and do not require a permit:
      (1)   Signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of the premises upon
which the sign is located, or for special events or sales, and which do not
exceed 12 square feet in area, except in ail residential districts where the
area of the sign shall not be more than six square feet;
      (2)   Signs bearing only property numbers, post box numbers, names of
occupants of premises or other identification of premises not having commercial
connotations;
      (3)   Flags and insignia of any government except when displayed in
connection with commercial promotion;
      (4)   Legal notices; identification, information or directional signs
erected or required by governmental bodies;
      (5)   Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except
letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights;
      (6)   Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private
property, but bearing no advertising matter;
      (7)   Bulletin boards for churches, schools or other public, religious or
educational institution provided the sign is located a minimum of ten feet from
the established right-of-way line of any street or highway and does not
obstruct traffic visibility at street or highway intersections; and
      (8)   Political or campaign signs erected temporarily and removed no
later than 15 days following the election.
   (C)   Regulations for on-site signs requiring a permit. All on-site signs
permitted as accessory uses in business and industrial districts require a
permit and are subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   Projection. Projection of wall signs may not exceed two feet
measured from the face of the building. No wall sign may project above the
highest point of the roof structure of the building to which it is attached.
      (2)   Setback. No on-site free standing sign may be set closer to the lot
line adjacent to a street than the required minimum set back for the principal
uses permitted in the district. No sign may be erected or placed closer than 50
feet from a side or rear lot line abutting a residential district.
      (3)   Roof signs. No sign may be placed on the roof of any building.
      (4)   Moving devices. No sign or part thereof may contain or consist of
banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners or other similar
moving devices. Devices such as strings of lights may not be used for the
purpose of advertising or attracting attention.
      (5)   Lighting. An illuminated sign or lighting device may emit only
light of constant intensity, and no sign may be illuminated by or contain
flashing, intermittent, rotating or moving lights. An illuminated sign or
lighting device may not be placed or directed so that the beams and
illumination there from cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic
hazard or nuisance. All wiring, fittings and materials used in the
construction, connection and operation of electrically illuminated signs shall
be in accordance with the provisions of the State Electrical Code.
      (6)   Height. No freestanding sign shall exceed 30 feet in height.
      (7)   Height clearance. Signs that extend over a sidewalk or walkway
shall have a vertical clearance of at least eight feet.
      (8)   Number of signs permitted. In business and industrial districts,
each use is permitted one wall sign. In addition, one free standing sign is
permitted for each building, regardless of the number of businesses or
industrial uses conducted in the building.
      (9)   Permitted surface area. The total surface area of all signs is
limited to two square feet of sign for each lineal foot of front width of the
business or industrial building, provided that the maximum total surface area
for all signs does not exceed 100 square feet.
   (D)   Regulation of off-site signs requiring a permit.
      (1)   Setback. No off-site free standing sign may be set closer to the
lot line adjacent to a street than the required minimum set back for the
principal uses permitted in the district. No sign may be erected or placed
closer than 50 feet from a side or rear lot line abutting a residential
district.
      (2)   Lighting. Any illuminated sign or lighting device may employ only
light emitting a light of constant intensity, and no sign may be illuminated by
or contain flashing, intermittent, rotating or moving lights. An illuminated
sign or lighting device may not be placed or directed so that the beams and
illumination there from cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic
hazard or nuisance. All wiring, fittings and materials used in the
construction, connection and operation of electrically illuminated signs shall
be in accordance with the provisions of the State Electrical Code.
      (3)   Area. No off-site sign may exceed 32 square feet in area.
      (4)   Height. No off-site sign shall exceed 35 feet in height as measured
from the normal grade at the sign.
   (E)   Regulations for temporary signs requiring a permit. Temporary signs
may not exceed 50 square feet in area and may be erected for a period of 60
days plus the construction period, without a permit.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.37 SCREENING AND BUFFERING.
   Whenever a non-residential use or off-street parking area abuts a
residential use, the use shall be effectively screened at the property line on
all sides which adjoin or face the residential district or institutional use by
an acceptably designed, sight obscuring wall, fence or planting screen. The
fence, wall or planting screen shall be not less than four feet nor more than
six feet in height and shall be maintained in good condition. Where terrain or
other natural features effectively serve as a screen, no wall, fence or
planting screen is required.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.38 YARD MEASUREMENTS.
   (A)   Front yard. Depth of required front yards is measured at right angles
to a straight line joining the foremost points of the side lot lines. The
foremost point of the side lot line, in the case of rounded property corners at
street intersections, will be assumed to be the point at which the side and
front lot lines would have met without such rounding. Front and rear yard lines
will be parallel.
   (B)   Side yard. Width of a required side yard is measured in such a manner
that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by the
district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the side lot line.
   (C)   Rear yard. Depth of a required rear yard is measured in such a manner
that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by district
regulations with its inner edge parallel with the rear lot line.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.39 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD).
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow, with adequate
review, flexibility in design of developments that do at least several of the
following:
      (1)   Encourage development with mixed uses, particularly a variety of
housing types and densities;
      (2)   Create or preserve usable open space and recreation areas;
      (3)   Preserve the natural characteristics of the land including
topography, native vegetation and scenic views;
      (4)   Avoid construction in unsuitable areas;
      (5)   Encourage creativity in design, including flexibility in
residential siting to achieve energy conservation;
      (6)   Allow efficient provision of streets, utilities and other services;
and
      (7)   Provide lower-cost housing affordable by low- and moderate-income
families within the community.
   (B)   Definition. A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) is a land development
project designed and planned as a single entity under a plan that offers a
variety of land uses, housing types and densities, and design features in
addition to those allowed by right or condition in the zoning district.
   (C)   Application and review.
      (1)   Any person requesting approval of a planned unit development shall
submit an application for conditional use under the provisions of §
153.11. The application shall be accompanied by the required review fees and a
PUD plan, described below.
      (2)   The PUD plan shall provide the following:
         (a)   A vicinity map showing the location of the site in relationship
to surrounding areas and showing the existing land uses and zoning of the site
and surrounding properties;
         (b)   A map drawn to approximate scale showing:
            1.   Location, types and heights of existing and proposed buildings
and other structures, including density and number of dwelling units or other
uses of each structure;
            2.   Existing and proposed streets, alleys, bikeways, pedestrian
walkways and vehicle circulation patterns, off-street parking areas;
            3.   Locations, dimensions and sizes of common and open space
areas, and a landscaping plan showing areas to be landscaped and those that
will be left in a natural state; and
            4.   Physical features such as streams, ponds, canals, rights-of-
way, utilities.
         (c)   A written statement describing:
            1.   A schedule for installing improvements, developing lots and
constructing structures;
            2.   Proposed types of ownership of dwelling units and other uses,
and restrictive covenants, if any; and
            3.   Means of providing maintenance of common facilities and open
space areas
      (3)   A PUD will be reviewed and approved under the procedures for
conditional uses pursuant to §
153.11. Where the proposed PUD is subject to review as a subdivision under the
State Subdivision and Platting Act, the Zoning Commission and Planning Board
shall hold joint and concurrent review, including a joint public hearing(s).
Notice of each hearing shall be given in the manner prescribed by this chapter
and the municipality’s subdivision regulations.
      (4)   A PUD must conform to the conditions prescribed by the Zoning
Commission pursuant to §
153.11(B)(3).
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
§ 153.50 GENERAL PROVISIONS; INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   Within the jurisdictional area specified in §
153.04, zoning districts are hereby established and are shown on the official
zoning map described in §
153.06. Sections
153.51 and
153.55 set forth the specific requirements which must be met by any proposed
building, structure or use located within each district.
   (B)   Where uncertainty may exist as to the location of district boundaries
as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply in
interpreting the nearest logical line to that shown:
      (1)   Boundaries shall be construed as following the centerline of
streets, highways or alleys;
      (2)   Boundaries shall be construed as following the centerline of
streams, rivers, canals or ditches;
      (3)   Boundaries shall be construed as following a line midway between
the main tracks of a railroad right-of-way;
      (4)   Boundaries shall be construed as following platted lot lines;
      (5)   Boundaries shall be construed as following the boundaries of the
incorporated city limits;
      (6)   Boundaries shall be construed as parallel to or extensions of
features indicated on the official zoning map; and
      (7)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are
different from those shown on the official zoning map, or where circumstances
arise not covered by the rules above, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret
the district boundaries.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.51 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to provide for the development of
single-family residences and two-family residences at a density compatible with
existing residential development. This district also accommodates those
institutional and public uses compatible with residential neighborhoods.
   (B)   Permitted principal uses. The following uses are permitted within this
district:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings: constructed on site or assembled as
modular homes, but not including mobile homes;
      (2)   Churches;
      (3)   Nursing homes;
      (4)   Libraries, museums, schools: public or private;
      (5)   Parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities;
      (6)   Where licensed by the State Department of Health and Environmental
Sciences or Department of Family Services - group homes serving disabled
persons, half-way houses providing drug or alcohol rehabilitation, adult foster
family day-care facilities and group day-care homes serving 12 or fewer
children; and
      (7)   Youth foster homes, or youth group homes.
   (C)   Conditional uses. The following uses must comply with the additional
conditions specified below. Approval of these conditional uses must be obtained
from the Zoning Commission under the provisions of §
153.11.
 
Uses                                      Conditions
1. Modular homes                          Is generally compatible with architectural style of the
                                          residences in the neighborhood.
                                          1. Conform to off-street parking requirements specified in §
2. Nursing homes; 24-hour-per-day care    153.35
facilities                                2. Provide safe ingress/egress onto public streets
                                          3. Lot will be of adequate size and width to accommodate the
                                          proposed use, and the yard and parking requirements.
                                          1. For PUDs containing residences, the development plan provides
                                          for placement of housing units and street and open space design
3. Planned unit developments that seek    and layout that ensures: (a) privacy for residents, (b) safe
waivers from district requirements, in    entry from lots onto public streets, (c) usable yard areas, (d)
accordance with the requirements of §    adequate off-street parking, (e) proper installation of
153.39                                    utilities, and (f) access by emergency vehicles.
                                          2. Placement of structures shall take into consideration
                                          topography, privacy, building height and orientation, drainage
                                          and aesthetics.
4. Home occupations not conforming to §  Conditions as specified by the Zoning Commission pursuant to §
153.32(A)                                 153.11(B)(3).
5. Two-family dwellings                   Conditions as specified by the Zoning Commission.
 
   (D)   Accessory and temporary uses permitted. The following accessory and
temporary uses are permitted in this district:
      (1)   Accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above principal
uses;
      (2)   Temporary buildings for and during construction only; and
      (3)   Home occupations under the requirements of §
153.32.
   (E)   Lot area and width. Except for existing lots of record which, because
of ownership, cannot be reassembled to conform to this requirement, the
following lot areas and widths are required.
      (1)   Single-family dwelling: each lot shall contain a minimum of 5,000
square feet, and be at least 40 feet wide.
      (2)   Two-family dwellings: each lot shall contain a minimum of 8,000
square feet, and be at least 50 feet wide.
      (3)   Where either or both water supply and sewage treatment will be
provided on-site, the minimum lot size shall be determined by the State
Department of Health and Environmental Sciences.
   (F)   Yard requirements. Every lot shall have the following yard
requirements as measured from the farthest extension of the structure.
      (1)   Front yard: a minimum 30-foot yard shall be provided on all street
frontages (as measured from the curb line, drainage swale or equivalent
drainage facility). Corner lots shall be construed as having two frontages,
each of which shall require a minimum 30-foot yard.
      (2)   Side yards abutting interior lot lines shall not be less than ten
feet.
      (3)   A rear yard of at least ten feet shall be provided.
   (G)   Building height. Maximum height for all buildings and other structures
shall be 30 feet.
   (H)   Satellite dishes and radio antennas (towers).
      (1)   Satellite dishes and radio antennas or towers may be placed in the
rear yard.
      (2)   In the event that a usable signal cannot be obtained from the rear
yard, the dish, antenna or tower may be located on the side or front, provided
that no dish, antenna or tower may be placed in a required front or side yard.
   (I)   Signs. The following signs are permitted in this district:
      (1)   For residential uses, non-illuminated signs a maximum of ten square
feet in area; and
      (2)   For all other uses, non-illuminated signs, including bulletin
boards at schools and churches, not exceeding 32 square feet in area, provided
the sign is located at least ten feet from any road right-of-way and does not
obstruct traffic visibility. Maximum permissible sign height is 12 feet.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.52 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2).
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to recognize the existing
residential neighborhoods of the community as well as those areas which are
deemed appropriate for residential expansions. A variety of residential types
and densities, including multiple-family homes, will be accommodated to provide
a balance of housing types within the community, it is intended that this,
district be maintained and expanded to preserve the residential attractiveness
in a mixed use atmosphere. This district also will accommodate those
institutional and public uses compatible with residential neighborhoods.
   (B)   Permitted principal uses. The following uses are permitted within this
district:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings: constructed on site;
      (2)   Modular homes assembled on site and placed on a permanent masonry
foundation;
      (3)   Class A and B mobile homes in mobile home parks;
      (4)   Multiple-family dwellings;
      (5)   Boarding houses;
      (6)   Public or private schools;
      (7)   Churches and other places of worship;
      (8)   Libraries; museums;
      (9)   Parks and recreation facilities;
      (10)   Where licensed by the State Department of Health and Environmental
Sciences or Department of Family Services - group homes serving disabled
persons, half-way houses providing drug or alcohol rehabilitation, adult foster
family day-care facilities, and group day-care homes that serve 12 or fewer
children; and
      (11)   Youth foster homes, or youth group homes.
   (C)   Conditional uses. The following uses must comply with the additional
conditions specified below. Approval of these conditional uses must be obtained
from the Zoning Commission under the provisions of §
153.11.
 
Uses                                      Conditions
1. Mobile homes Class A                   1. Generally conforms to the architectural type of the
                                          neighborhood
2. Mobile home parks                      1. Conform to manufactured (mobile) home park requirements §
                                          153.55
                                          1. Conform to off-street parking requirements specified in §
3. Nursing homes; hospitals, 24-hour-per- 153.35
day care facilities                       2. Provide safe ingress/egress onto public streets
                                          3. Lot is of sufficient size and width to accommodate the
                                          proposed use, and yard and parking requirements
                                          1. For PUDs containing residences, the development plan provides
                                          for placement of housing units and street and open space design
4. Planned unit developments that seek    and layout that ensures (a) privacy for residents, (b) safe
waivers from district requirements, in    entry from lots onto public streets, (c) usable yard areas, (d)
accordance with the requirements of §    adequate off-street parking, (e) proper installation of
153.39                                    utilities, and (f) access by emergency vehicles
                                          2. Placement of housing units shall take into consideration
                                          topography, privacy, building height and orientation, drainage
                                          and aesthetics
5. Home occupations not conforming to §  Conditions as specified by the Zoning Commission pursuant to §
153.32(A)                                 153.11(B)(3)
 
   (D)   Accessory and temporary uses permitted. The following accessory and
temporary uses are permitted in this district:
      (1)   Accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above uses;
      (2)   Temporary buildings for and during construction only; and
      (3)   Home occupations under the requirements of §
153.32.
   (E)   Special provisions for Class B mobile homes. 
 
             1. Each mobile home must be placed on a permanent masonry foundation, or
             a. Provided with anchors and cable tie downs for securing the manufactured home,
             and
             b. Skirted, entirely enclosing the bottom section within 60 days after placement.
             Skirting must be of materials compatible with siding of manufactured home.
Class B      2. Each mobile home shall have siding material of a type customarily used on
Manufactured site-constructed residences.
Homes        3. The tongue, wheels, transporting lights and removable towing apparatus must be
             removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy.
             4. A mobile home shall have been manufactured no more that ten years before
             filing for a zoning permit and must bear a Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”)
             seal indicating it has met the United States mobile home construction and safety
             standards.
 
   (F)   Yard requirements. Every lot shall have the following yard
requirements as measured from the farthest extension of the structure:
      (1)   Front yard. A 30-foot yard shall be provided on all street
frontages (as measured from the curb line, drainage swale or equivalent
drainage facility). Corner lots shall be construed as having two frontages,
each of which shall allow a 30-foot yard with the exception of corner lots
located on streets with 60-foot rights-of-way, which shall allow for a 20-foot
yard or a yard that matches the established building line on that block.
      (2)   Side yard. Side yards abutting interior lot lines shall not be less
than ten feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. A rear yard of at least ten feet shall be provided.
   (G)   Satellite dishes and radio antennas (towers).
      (1)   Satellite dishes and radio antennas or towers may be placed in the
rear yard.
      (2)   In the event that a usable signal cannot be obtained from the rear
yard, the dish, antenna or tower may be located on the side or front, provided
that no dish, antenna or tower may be placed in a required front or side yard.
   (H)   Lot area and width. Except for existing lots of record which, because
of ownership, cannot be reassembled to conform to this requirement, the
following lot areas and widths are required.
      (1)   Single-family dwelling. Each lot shall contain a minimum of 5,000
square feet, and be at least 40 feet wide.
      (2)   Multiple-family dwellings. Each lot shall contain a minimum of
4,000 square feet per dwelling unit, and be at least 50 feet wide.
   (I)   Building height. Maximum building height shall be 30 feet for single-
family dwellings and 40 feet for multiple-family dwellings consisting of more
than two units.
   (J)   Signs. The following signs are permitted in this district:
      (1)   For residential uses, non-illuminated signs less than eight square
feet in area; and
      (2)   For all other uses, non-illuminated signs, churches, not exceeding
16 square feet in area, provided the sign is located at least ten feet from any
street right-of-way.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.53 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD).
   (A)   Purpose. The Central Business District is intended to be the central
focus of the city’s business, government, service and cultural activities. The
uses in this district should be those that are appropriate in a high density,
intensively developed commercial center. Appropriate area should be provided
for the logical and planned expansion of the present district. The area should
be developed as an attractive, functional and convenient commercial
environment, and to provide the mix of activities necessary to maintain the
downcity character.
   (B)   Permitted principal uses. The following uses are permitted within this
district:
      (1)   Amusement centers, recreational facilities located in enclosed
building;
      (2)   Apartments, located above the first floor;
      (3)   Auditoriums, theaters;
      (4)   Building materials and equipment sales conducted in an enclosed
building;
      (5)   Clubs and lodges;
      (6)   Convenience stores;
      (7)   Financial institutions;
      (8)   Funeral homes;
      (9)   Government, educational and institutional uses;
      (10)   Hotels, motels;
      (11)   Laundry and dry cleaning establishments;
      (12)   Medical and dentist offices, clinics and laboratories;
      (13)   Museums and art galleries;
      (14)   Nursing homes;
      (15)   Offices: professional, business, administrative, services;
      (16)   Parking areas;
      (17)   Police and fire stations;
      (18)   Libraries;
      (19)   Restaurants (not including drive-in eating establishments);
      (20)   Bars, taverns, lounges, night clubs - in accordance with §
153.34(J);
      (21)   Retail businesses or services, whose activities primarily are
conducted within an enclosed building;
      (22)   Senior citizen centers; and
      (23)   Other uses commensurate with the above uses and compatible with
the purpose of this district.
   (C)   Accessory and temporary uses.
      (1)   Accessory buildings and uses incidental to the principal uses;
      (2)   Temporary buildings or structures used for and during construction
or grading;
      (3)   Temporary signs;
      (4)   Temporary use of open land for meetings, circuses and carnivals;
and
      (5)   Sale of Christmas trees, baked goods, clothing or like products
where no permanent structure is erected.
   (D)   Lot area and width.
      (1)   Where public water and sewer service is available, no minimum lot
size is required.
      (2)   Where State Department of Health and Environmental Sciences
approval of water or sewer facilities is required, that agency shall determine
the lot size.
   (E)   Building height. Maximum building height shall be 45 feet.
   (F)   Yard requirements.
      (1)   Front yard: any building or structure must be set back at least
eight feet from the curb or street pavement.
      (2)   Side yard: no side yards are required.
   (G)   Signs. All signs must comply with requirements of §
153.36.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.54 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (GC).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to accommodate general business
uses while preserving the traffic capacity of the street system and the
desirability of adjacent residential development. The area should be developed
as an attractive, functional and convenient commercial development.
   (B)   Permitted principal uses. The following uses are permitted within this
district:
      (1)   All uses permitted in the Central Business District;
      (2)   Agricultural products processing, storage, loading and grain
elevators;
      (3)   Cement, concrete and paving products, including mixing plants;
      (4)   Amusement centers and recreational facilities;
      (5)   All uses pertaining to automobile and truck sales, service and
repair including service stations and car washes;
      (6)   Beverage bottling and distributing;
      (7)   Building equipment and materials - wholesale and retail, including
storage yards;
      (8)   Electronic equipment - assembly, repair and sales;
      (9)   Fabrication or assembly of products from pre-structured material or
compounds;
      (10)   Fraternal lodges, clubs;
      (11)   Freight terminals - truck or rail;
      (12)   Laboratories, including industrial;
      (13)   Laundry and dry cleaning establishments;
      (14)   Manufacturing or processing:
         (a)   Products from organic material, chemical, glass, metal,
minerals, stones or earth; and
         (b)   Foodstuffs, textiles, electrical components, wood, leather,
paper or plastic.
      (15)   Meeting halls, auditoriums, arenas, indoor theaters;
      (16)   Motels, hotels, convention centers;
      (17)   Outdoor advertising;
      (18)   Police and fire stations;
      (19)   Retail and wholesale sales, service and repair - agricultural
products, products serving agriculture, farm implements, heavy machinery,
mobile homes, travel trailers, recreational vehicles.
      (20)   Restaurants and drive-in eating establishments;
      (21)   Bars, taverns, lounges, night clubs - in accordance with §
153.34(J);
      (22)   Storage yards and buildings;
      (23)   Utilities, public and private;
      (24)   Veterinary office, clinic, hospital;
      (25)   Warehouses;
      (26)   Welding of sheet metal shops;
      (27)   Wholesale storage or sales; and
      (28)   Other uses commensurate with the above uses and compatible with
the purpose of this district.
   (C)   Conditional uses. The following uses must comply with the additional
conditions specified below. Approval of these conditional uses must be obtained
from the Zoning Commission under the provisions of §
153.11.
 
Uses     Conditions
Shopping Conditions as specified by the Zoning Commission pursuant to §
center   153.11(B)(3)
 
   (D)   Accessory and temporary uses.
      (1)   Accessory buildings and uses incidental to the principal uses;
      (2)   Temporary buildings or structures used for and during construction
or grading;
      (3)   Temporary signs;
      (4)   Temporary use of open land for meetings, circuses, carnivals; and
      (5)   Sale of Christmas trees baked goods, clothing or like products
where no permanent structure is erected.
   (E)   Lot area.
      (1)   Where public water and sewer service is available, no minimum lot
size is required.
      (2)   Where State Department of Health and Environmental Sciences
approval is required, that agency shall determine the lot size.
      (3)   Where neither of the above conditions apply, the minimum lot size
shall be one acre.
   (F)   Height requirements. No building or structure may exceed 45 feet in
height.
   (G)   Yard requirements.
      (1)   Front yard: a front yard of at least 20 feet shall be on all road
frontages.
      (2)   Side yard: side yards abutting interior lot lines shall be at least
ten feet.
   (H)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading areas must comply with the
provisions of §
153.35.
   (I)   Signs. Signs within this district shall comply with the provisions of
§
153.36.
   (J)   Access onto public roads.
      (1)   Approaches onto public roads and highways shall be at least 24 feet
wide.
      (2)   Approaches onto public roads and highways shall have a grade of 6%
or less.
      (3)   Approaches onto public roads or highways shall be at least 125 feet
apart. The centerline of approaches from properties on opposite sides of a
public road shall be aligned at the same point on the public road.
   (K)   Grading and drainage.
      (1)   The site shall be graded and appropriate drainage facilities
installed to remove surface run-off waters in a manner that will not affect
adjacent or nearby properties, rivers or public roads.
      (2)   Culverts, curbs, gutters, ditches, swales and other drainage
facilities shall be installed to assure that approaches, parking areas and
other traffic facilities do not obstruct drainage facilities or adversely
affect public road and traffic facilities.
      (3)   Culverts and bridges shall be large enough to accommodate potential
run-off from upstream drainage areas.
      (4)   Curbs and gutters or swales shall be required according to the
character of the area, density of development, and nature of adjoining
properties and public streets.
   (L)   Screening and buffering. Where a non-residential use in this district
abuts a residential use or district, the screening and buffering provisions of
§
153.37 must be met.
   (M)   Fencing. The following uses must be protected by a fence not less than
six feet in height:
      (1)   Outdoor storage of materials or equipment;
      (2)   Above-ground storage of flammable liquids, gases or other material;
and
      (3)   Electrical substations, gas regulator stations and microwave
reflectors.
   (N)   Lighting. Lighting must be shielded to avoid casting direct light on
adjacent residential uses or institutional uses providing human care.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.55 MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   Mobile home parks must meet all of the requirements of a planned unit
development, as well as the following special conditions.
   (A)   Provisions for mobile homes.
      (1)   Each mobile home must be skirted, entirely enclosing the bottom
section within 90 days after placement. Skirting must be of neat and durable
materials compatible with the siding of the mobile home. Each mobile home must
be connected to the city water supply and sanitary sewer system, and no mobile
home may be served by other means. The connections must be protected from
freezing by insulation, heat-tape or other means. Water supply and sanitary
sewer connections must meet all state federal and local plumbing codes.
      (2)   Mobile home movement: movement of mobile homes into or within the
mobile home park requires a zoning permit and must meet all conditions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Provisions for mobile home parks.
      (1)   Park density: average park density shall not exceed nine mobile
homes per acre.
      (2)   Lot size: minimum lot size shall be 4,500 square feet with no less
that 30 feet of lot width.
      (3)   Lot coverage: maximum mobile home lot coverage shall not exceed
50%. Coverage shall mean the mobile home, porches and decks and all accessory
buildings.
      (4)   Setbacks: mobile homes, attachments and accessory buildings shall
be set back not less than 15 feet from a City of Boulder Street and not less
than ten feet from all other lot lines.
      (5)   No detached structure, such as a storage shed, may be located
within five feet of any mobile home or its attached structures.
      (6)   Mobile home lots shall be arranged to permit the safe and practical
placement and removal of mobile homes.
      (7)   Gas and electric utilities shall be installed according to the
appropriate codes.
      (8)   Internal streets must be at least 20 feet wide, or wider if
necessary to accommodate the expected traffic or vehicles. Where on-street
parking is allowed, additional eight feet wide parallel parking lanes must be
provided.
      (9)   Parking: each lot must provide a minimum of two off-street parking
spaces, these parking spaces must be of a size and design that parked vehicles
do not pose a site hazard for the streets and roadways.
      (10)   Park and recreation area: a minimum of 10% of the gross mobile
home park area shall be reserved for park and recreation development. Such
areas shall be centrally located and be adequately landscaped with trees,
shrubs, grass and recreational equipment.
      (11)   Perimeter landscaping: buffer landscaping shall be established
along the perimeter or the park boundary.
      (12)   The city may require other standards and safeguards as specific
locations and circumstances dictate.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.56 HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. 
      (1)   The purpose and intent of this district is to stimulate the
restoration and rehabilitation of structures and property that contribute to
the character and fabric of established residential, commercial or industrial
neighborhoods. New construction will be encouraged provided the primary
emphasis is on preservation of existing buildings and that the design of new
development furthers the aesthetic character and function of the property and
area.
      (2)   Because most of the development within the district occurred prior
to adoption of zoning and other regulations, the land use and design is highly
diverse and often does not conform to conventional regulations. This section
recognizes that this diversity is a major contributing factor of the district’s
historic character. This section may be applied to encourage the protection and
enhancement of the existing historic and diverse features.
   (B)   Historic Preservation Overlay District established.
      (1)   After thorough study and inventory, the City Council may designate
a geographical area within the municipality having significant historical value
and character as a Historic Preservation Overlay District (HPOD).
      (2)   The boundaries of the HPOD may overlap (in other words, overlay)
the boundaries of other districts established under this chapter.
      (3)   A proposed development must conform to the requirements of both
this overlay district and the underlying district, except that through the
procedures of this overlay district a portion of the requirements of the
underlying district may be waived or modified.
      (4)   All new development within this district shall be reviewed and
acted upon by the Zoning Commission under the procedures of §
153.11.
   (C)   Design Review Board: powers.
      (1)   The City Council shall form and appoint a Design Review Board.
      (2)   The Design Review Board will comprise seven local members as
follows:
         (a)   Two licensed professional architects;
         (b)   One building contractor;
         (c)   The Zoning Administrator;
         (d)   One member of the City Council; and
         (e)   Two citizens.
      (3)   The Design Review Board shall have the following powers and
responsibilities:
         (a)   Review applications for development within this Historic
Preservation Overlay District.
         (b)   Recommend to the Zoning Commission appropriate modifications of
requirements of the underlying zoning district, and recommendations for
approval, conditions for conditional approval or denial of an application for
development within the HPOD;
         (c)   Develop and apply specific guidelines related to architectural
appearance, landscape design and signing for the construction or alteration of
structures or sites within the HPOD;
         (d)   Call upon city staff for advice or assistance; and
         (e)   Testify before boards or the City Council on matters relating to
architecturally significant sites, structures, areas or neighborhoods.
   (D)   Procedures for review and action.
      (1)   A person proposing development within the HPOD must submit an
application for a conditional use to the Zoning Administrator. The application
must present the information specified in §
153.11, and sketches of proposed new construction or alterations to existing
structures.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator will forward copies of the application to
the members of the Design Review Board and the Zoning Commission.
      (3)   The Design Review Board will review the application and meet with
the applicant.
      (4)   The Design Review Board will submit recommendations to the Zoning
Commission.
      (5)   The Zoning Commission and the Design Review Board will publish
notice and hold a joint public hearing to discuss the application. At the
hearing, the Zoning Administrator and the developer will be invited to explain
the proposed project, the Design Review Board will discuss its recommendations,
and the members of the general public will be invited to comment.
      (6)   The Zoning Commission, considering the recommendations of the
Zoning Administrator, Design Review Board and public comment, will approve,
conditionally approve or deny the application under the procedures specified in
§
153.11. The Zoning Commission will present in writing the conditions for
conditional approval or the reasons for denial.
   (E)   Standards of Historic Preservation Review. The Design Review Board and
the Zoning Commission will be guided by the following in considering
appropriate design and modifying requirements of the underlying zoning
districts:
      (1)   Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating
Historic Buildings, published by the U.S. Department of Interior, National Park
Service, Preservation Assistance Division (available for review at the office
of the Zoning Administrator).
      (2)   Architectural design guidelines used to consider the
appropriateness and compatibility of proposed development with existing
properties shall focus on:
         (a)   Height;
         (b)   Proportions of doors and windows;
         (c)   Relationship of building masses and spaces;
         (d)   Roof shape;
         (e)   Scale;
         (f)   Dominant horizontal or vertical expression of surrounding
structures; and
         (g)   Architectural details.
      (3)   The criteria for granting deviations from the underlying zoning
district requirements include:
         (a)   Modifications shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of
this section, the zoning ordinance and adopted comprehensive plan;
         (b)   Modifications shall have minimal adverse impact on abutting
properties or allowed uses;
         (c)   Modifications shall ensure the protection of the public health,
safety and general welfare; and
         (d)   Approvals may be conditioned to include:
            1.   Time period for completion of alterations;
            2.   Landscaping and its maintenance;
            3.   Location, surfacing and marking of off-street parking areas;
and
            4.   Other conditions in conformity with the intent and purpose of
this section.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with the grant of variances or conditional uses or
any of the requirements for conditions imposed by the City Council shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
more than $500 for each offense or imprisoned not more than six months, or
both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense and be
punishable as such.
(M.C.A. § 76-2-315)
   (B)   The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part
thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who
commits, participates in, assists or maintains such violation may be found
guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties specified above.
   (C)   Nothing set forth in this section or §
153.15 shall prevent the city from taking other lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-14-2008)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Montana Code Annotated
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MONTANA CODE ANNOTATED
M.C.A. Reference Code Section
M.C.A. Reference           Code Section
2-2-201                    34.99
3-11-103                   12.05
7-1-4127(8)(a) - (d)       153.12
7-5-4301 through 7-5-4322  34.01
7-5-4302                   34.21
7-23-4204                  90.032
16-4-503                   112.01
16-5103                    32.03
16-5107                    32.03
Title 18                   34.02
18-1-102                   34.09
18-1-103                   34.02
18-1-112                   34.09
18-1-113                   34.08
18-2-401                   34.02
Title 18, Chapter 4        34.02
18-4-123                   34.09
18-4-241                   34.08
18-4-305                   34.09
18-4-312(3)(a)             34.14
18-4-401                   34.09
18-5-101                   34.25
Title 25, Chapter 35       12.05
25-35-803                  12.05
41-3-1102                  153.07
61-1-501                   153.07
61-1-513                   153.07
61-1-101(3)                94.01
61-1-101(10)               94.01
61-1-101(17)               94.01
61-1-101(22)               94.01
61-1-101(23)               94.01
61-1-101(31)               94.01
61-1-101(32)               94.01
61-1-101(33)               94.01
61-1-101(34)               94.01
61-1-101(35)               94.01
61-1-101(39)               94.01
61-1-101(46)               94.01
61-1-101(49)               94.01
61-1-101(58)               94.01
61-1-101(59)               94.01
61-1-101(60)               94.01
61-1-101(68)               94.01
61-1-101(70)               94.01
61-1-101(71)               94.01
61-1-101(72)               94.01
61-1-101(75)               94.01
61-1-101(76)               94.01
61-8-102(2)                94.01
61-8-107                   94.01
61-9-401                   94.01
61-9-402                   94.01
75-5-203                   152.04
75-10-501                  94.15
76-1-101                   32.04
76-1-221                   32.04
76-2-301 through 76-2-328  153.02
itle 76, Part 2, Chapter 5 152.02
76-2-302(4)                153.07
76-2-315                   153.99
76-2-321                   153.12
76-2-321 through 76-2-328  153.12
76-2-322                   153.12
76-2-323                   153.12
76-2-324                   153.12
76-2-325                   153.12
76-2-326                   153.12
76-2-327                   153.12
76-2-411                   153.07
76-3-101 et seq.           153.11
itle 76, Chapter 5         152.01
76-5-102                   152.01
76-5-108                   152.08
76-5-110                   152.99
76-5-201 et seq.           152.01,
                           152.04
76-5-203                   152.04
                           152.01,
76-5-301                   152.05,
                           152.06
76-5-302                   152.01
76-5-401                   152.05
76-5-404                   152.07
76-5-405                   152.07,
                           152.12
76-5-406                   152.08
76-5-103(1)                152.02
76-5-103(2)                152.02
76-5-103(4)                152.02
76-5-103(7)                152.02
76-5-103(9)                152.02
76-5-105(1)                152.14
76-5-105(2)                152.14
76-5-301(1)                152.02
76-5-401(1)                152.05
76-5-401(2)                152.05
76-5-401(4)                152.05
76-5-401(5)                152.05
76-5-402(2)(b)             152.10
76-5-403(1)                152.06
76-5-403(2)                152.06
76-5-403(3)                152.06
76-5-404(1)                152.07
76-5-404(3)                152.05
76-5-404(3)(b)             152.09
76-5-404(3)                152.06
                           152.01,
76-5-404(3)(b)             152.05,
                           152.07
76-5-405(2)                152.08
76-5-406(1)                152.09
76-5-406(2)                152.09
76-5-406(3)                152.09,
                           152.12
76-5-406(4)                152.09
76-5-406(5)                152.09
76-5-406(6)                152.09
76-5-406(7)                152.09
76-5-103(11)               152.02
76-5-103(13)               152.02
                           
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
14       5-14-1952   150.05,
                     150.99
14A      7-25-1956   150.05,
                     150.99
89       5-21-1974   32.03
-        10-22-2001  30.02
2007-05  10-23-2006  30.03
2010-16  5-17-2010   34.40
2012-04  12-7-2011   30.04
2016-08  9-19-2016   150.08,
                     150.99
2019-02  1-22-2019   32.05
2019-08  3-19-2019   33.01
2019-23  9-11-2019   95.02
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2016-02  - -         150.09,
                     150.99
4        6-2-1911    11.01
6        6-2-1911    31.02
8        6-2-1911    33.16
9        6-2-1911    31.01
10       6-2-1911    30.05
16       6-2-1911    32.02,
                     32.99
41       6-14-1911   33.15
61       4-29-1937   31.03
64       4-29-1937   Ch. 72, Sch. I
                     53.01 through
85       12-13-1961  53.08,
                     53.99
                     70.01 through
                     70.06,
89       10-14-1969  70.99,
                     71.01 through
                     71.07,
                     71.99
-        5-29-1973   31.03
                     91.01 through
91B      10-8-1973   91.05,
                     91.99
                     52.01 through
92       10-8-1973   52.11,
                     52.99
100      12-8-1975   Ch. 73, Sch. I
112      8-22-1977   130.01
119      4-21-1980   93.01 through
                     93.14
122      10-27-1980  30.06
146      2-22-1988   Ch. 72, Sch. II
151      10-23-1989  150.01 through
                     150.04
154      2-12-1990   150.06
                     110.01 through
                     110.13,
157      5-13-1991   110.99,
                     111.01 through
                     111.09
158      9-9-1992    150.07
163      9-13-1993   50.01
                     112.01 through
164      5-27-1995   112.10,
                     112.25 through
                     112.34
165      5-27-1995   112.25 through
                     112.34
167      3-9-1998    71.99
                     92.01 through
168      8-24-1998   92.12,
                     92.99
169      2-22-1999   31.04
                     34.01 through
173      9-10-2001   34.27,
                     34.99
2003-02  1-27-2003   32.04
2004-03  9-8-2003    Ch. 73, Sch. I
                     90.001 through
                     90.016,
                     90.030 through
                     90.033,
                     90.045 through
2005-01  11-8-2004   90.050,
                     90.065,
                     90.066,
                     90.080 through
                     90.083,
                     90.999
2006-03  11-28-2005  94.01,
                     94.99
2007-02  1-8-2007    30.07
                     153.01 through
                     153.14,
                     153.30 through
2007-03  1-14-2008   153.39,
                     153.50 through
                     153.56,
                     153.99
2008-01  2-25-2008   31.05
2008-02  3-10-2008   10.17
                     51.01 through
2008-04  3-10-2008   51.11,
                     51.99
                     152.01 through
2018-01  5-21-2008   152.14,
                     152.99
2009-01  10-14-2008  32.01
                     151.01 through
2009-03  8-31-2009   151.15,
                     151.99
                     90.001,
                     90.003,
2010-01  8-31-2009   90.014,
                     90.080 through
                     90.082
2010-02  3-15-2010   95.01,
                     95.99
2010-03  8-16-2010   70.99,
                     71.99
2011-01  1-18-2011   32.06
2012-01  12-19-2011  153.34
2013-03  8-19-2013   33.17
                     54.01 through
                     54.13,
                     54.25 through
2015-01  3-16-2015   54.30,
                     55.01 through
                     55.08,
                     55.99
2016-03  10-17-2016  31.06
2018-01  5-21-2018   152.02
2019-02  9-16-2019   30.01
2020-01  6-19-2020   94.15 -
                     94.21
                     70.99,
                     71.99,
2021-01  5-17-2021   Ch. 72, Sch. I,
                     112.01,
                     112.26,
                     130.99
2022-02  1-17-2023   153.12
2025-02  5-19-2025   12.01 through
                     12.08
                    
 
 
