PLENTYWOOD, MONTANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Current through Ord. 22-05172021, passed 5-17-2021
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 24-09182023
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PLENTYWOOD, MONTANA, AMENDING
PLENTYWOOD’S MUNICIPAL CODE TO ADDRESS THE ABATEMENT OF BLIGHTED, DANGEROUS,
ABANDONED AND/OR PUBLIC NUISANCE BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND PROPERTIES
WHEREAS, The City of PLENTYWOOD 
(the “City”) is authorized by Montana law to promote the public health, safety,
aesthetic appearance, and welfare of the City. Mont. Code Ann. § 7-1-4123
WHEREAS, The City is authorized by Montana law to adopt land use regulations and to provide
for the enforcement and administration of such regulations and otherwise
provide for the orderly development of the community; and
WHEREAS, The City desires to amend the nuisance regulations for the abatement
of blighted, dangerous and/
or abandoned buildings, structures and properties deemed a public nuisance located within
the City of PLENTYWOOD, Montana.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PLENTYWOOD,
MONTANA:
Section 1: Action. That a Section 91.22 be added to the PLENTYWOOD, MONTANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES entitled “Blighted, Dangerous, Abandoned and /or Public
Nuisance Buildings, Structures and Properties” as follows:
SECTION 91.22. BLIGHTED, DANGEROUS, ABANDONED AND/OR PUBLIC NUISANCE BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES AND PROPERTIES
Sec. 91.22.1. Definitions.
 
Abandoned: Property and real property wherein the previous owner has
intentionally and permanently surrendered, deserted, or relinquished the
property or premises.
Abate:
 To repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy the condition identified by such a means,
in such a manner and to such an extent that is determined necessary to be in
the best interest of the health, safety, and general welfare of the affected
community.
Attractive hazard: The open storage of any materials, goods, products, waste,
junk, old refrigerators,
containers, vehicles garbage or debris that may attract children, pests, rodents, or wild animals, offer harbor
for vagrants and pose a threat to the health, safety, and general welfare of
the surrounding properties.
Blighted Property:
 An abandoned building or structure, a structure which is not being inhabited, occupied
or used and which is unsecured (a structure which is unsecured and the public
can gain entry without the
consent of the owner), any partially constructed, reconstructed or partially demolished building or structure
upon which work is abandoned. Work is deemed abandoned when there is no valid
and current building or demolition permit or when there has not
been any substantial work on the project for a period of six (6) months or
more.
 
Dangerous structure: Any structure, residential or commercial of nature that is
dilapidated, blighted, decaying, unkempt, falling, or damaged that is
unsuitable for safe occupancy or the intended use of that
structure. Agricultural and Industrial structures are exempt when located in the appropriately zoned district
and the owner can prove a safe and necessary use or occupancy of the structure
in question.
Junk: Includes the open storage of old appliances, equipment, tools not being
used on a regular basis or as part of an active project, parts of equipment,
parts of vehicles, old iron, other scrap metal, vehicle tires, cardboard, old
lumber, scrap wood (not part of active project) rags, rope, cables, chains,
paper, general
debris, rubble, old bricks, concrete blocks, rock piles, waste dirt, batteries, mattresses, salvage material not
actively being used as part of a project, fencing, building materials, asphalt
shingles, or any other material that is not part of active commercial or public
salvaging or recycling operation.
Nuisance:
 A situation created or allowed to continue over time, by the owner or occupant of real property
which endangers public safety or health, is offensive to the senses, renders
any public right-of-way
dangerous for passage, adversely affects the property values of adjacent properties, or obstructs the free use
of property so as to interfere
with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. A nuisance may include, but
is not limited to:
1)   Allowing rubble, debris salvage, junk, or refuse to accumulate.
 
2)   Allowing a structure to remain unsecured from unauthorized entry.
 
3)   Allowing a structure to become an eyesore or blight on a neighborhood by
neglect or failure to make necessary repairs.
4)   Allowing a residential or commercial structure 
(of residential occupancy or use) to become unsuitable for human habitation by
neglect or failure to maintain the structure in compliance with
applicable building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or other technical and model
codes endorsed by the city.
5)   Allowing a property or structure condition to continue which materially
and
adversely affects property values on multiple adjacent and nearby properties.
Open Storage: Any goods, materials, supplies, junk or debris, which is exposed
to the elements or not stored inside an enclosed structure which includes walls
on all sides and a roof.
Premises: Any lot, parcel, or tract of land, building, real estate, unplatted
land, whether improved or
unimproved or developed or undeveloped subdivision including any portion of any street, right-
of-way, or alley lying between such lot or parcel of land.
Responsible Person:
 Any agent, lessee, owner, or other person occupying or having charge or control of
any premises.
Sec. 91.21.2. City Policy on abatement of blighted, dangerous, and/
or abandoned buildings, structures and properties deemed a public nuisance.
 
The purpose of this article is to provide standards to safeguard the life,
health, property and general welfare of the
public by regulating and controlling blighted, dangerous, abandoned and/
or public nuisance buildings, structures and properties located within the
jurisdictional city limits of PLENTYWOOD, Montana.
Sec. 91.21.3. Abatement of nuisances.
 
Building and property public nuisances (nuisances) as defined herein shall be
abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition, removal, or cleanup in accordance with the procedures provided herein.
Sec. 91.21.4. Abatement of buildings, structures, and property.
 
All buildings, properties, or portions of thereof which are determined to be
dangerous by the City of PLENTYWOOD, acting through its duly-authorized
representatives, are hereby declared to be public nuisances 
(nuisances) as defined herein and shall be abated by the repair,
rehabilitation, demolition, removal, and/or cleanup in accordance with the
procedures provided herein.
Sec. 91.21.5. Determination.
 
Upon inspection and documentation of any building, or property by the City of
PLENTYWOOD Public Works Director, the State of Montana Deputy Fire Marshal,
SHERIDAN COUNTY Sanitarian or representative thereof, or a law enforcement
officer for the City of PLENTYWOOD, showing that the
building, property, or any portion thereof has been found and determined to be
a nuisance, the City Council or its designated representative shall commence
proceedings to cause the repair or rehabilitation of the building or cleanup of
the property, or if he/she finds that repair or rehabilitation is impractical,
to cause the vacation (if occupied) and demolition and removal of the building
or structure.
Sec. 91.21.6. Notice and order.
 
Upon determination that a blighted, dangerous, abandoned or public nuisance building or property exists,
the City Council, or its designated
representative, shall issue a notice and order directly to the owner
(s) of record of the building or premises and to the responsible person(s), if
any, of the building or premises.
(1)   The notice and order shall contain the following elements:
 
(a)   The street address and legal description sufficient for identification of
the premises on which the blighted, dangerous, abandoned or nuisances are
located; and
(b)   A statement that the building or other conditions identified to be
dangerous and a public nuisance, with a brief description of the conditions
which render the building or premises dangerous and public nuisance under the
provisions of this chapter, including whenever an order to vacate and demolish
is given, a finding that the repair or rehabilitation is impractical, with a
brief statement of facts upon which such finding is based; and
(c)   An order to secure permits and physically commence, within 50 calendar days from the date of
service of the notice and order, and to complete the necessary rehabilitation,
repair, or cleanup work within 120 calendar days from such date, or, if
impractical, to vacate the building and commence demolition within 90 calendar
days and complete the demolition within 180 calendar days from such date of
service; and
(d)   A statement advising that the required abatement of nuisance, repair, or demolition work must
be commenced within the time specified, or the City of PLENTYWOOD
may proceed with abatement and cause the work to be done and assess the costs
thereof against the property; and
(e)   A statement advising that any person having any record title or interest
in the building or premises may appeal the notice and order or any action of
the City’s officials to the City
Council; provided that the appeal is made in writing, as provided herein, and filed with 30 calendar
days of the date of service with the Clerk of the City of PLENTYWOOD.
(2)   Person to be served notice and order. The notice and order, and any amended notice and order, shall
be served upon each person to whom it is directed, and one copy thereof shall
be served on each of the following:
 the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; the owner or
holder of any lease of record; and the holder of any other estate or interest of record in or to the building or
land on which it is located. The failure of the City or its designated
representative to make or attempt service on any person required by this
provision to be served shall not invalidate any abatement proceedings, as to
any other person duly served from any duty or obligation imposed on him/her by
these provisions.
(3)   Manner of service and Notice of Order. Service of the notice and order
shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing
a copy of such notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return
receipt requested, to each person at his/her address as it appears on the last
tax assessment of the City of PLENTYWOOD, Montana, or as otherwise known by the
City or its designated representative.
(4)   If no address of such person(s) so appears to or is known to the City or
its designated representative, a copy of the notice and order shall be mailed
to such person(s) at the address of the building or structure involved in the
proceedings. The failure of such person(s) to receive such notice shall not
affect the validity of any proceeding(s) taken under these provisions. Service
by certified mail in the manner provided shall be effective on the date of
mailing.
(5)   Proof of service of notice and order shall be documented at the time of service by the person effecting
service. The time and manner in which the service was made shall be noted and a
record kept along with
any receipt card returned in acknowledgement of receipt by certified mail. These records must be retained
by the City of PLENTYWOOD.
(6)   At the time the notice and order are served, the City or its designated
representative shall file in the office of the County
Clerk and Recorder a certificate legally describing the property and certifying that the building or condition
is a dangerous building or condition for which the owner was notified. Whenever
the corrections ordered shall have been completed, whether voluntarily or by
city abatement, and the notice and order reversed or modified, and the building
no longer exists as a dangerous building on the property described in the
certificate, the Building Official shall file a new certificate with the County
Clerk and Recorder that the building has been demolished or removed or is no
longer dangerous.
Sec. 91.21.7. Posting.
 
(1)   Upon determination that any building or structure is a dangerous building under the provisions of
this chapter and there exists therein or on the premises thereof any conditions
imminently dangerous to life should such building be or remain occupied by
human beings, the City or its designated representative may order the immediate
evacuation (with approval from the Mayor of PLENTYWOOD) of such building. If
the building is occupied, the City or its designated
representative shall cause to be posted at each entrance thereto a notice
reading substantially as follows:
 
DANGER
DO NOT ENTER
This structure has been deemed unsafe to Occupy
 
City of PLENTYWOOD, Montana
 
Any unauthorized person removing this sign or entering this building shall be
prosecuted.
 
 
(2)   Whenever such a notice is posted, the Building Official shall include a
notification thereof in the
notice and order issued by the City of PLENTYWOOD, under this chapter, reciting the emergency and specifying
the conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter any building upon which
this notice has been posted, except for entry to repair, demolish, or remove
such building. No person shall remove or deface any such notice posted by the
City of PLENTYWOOD, until the required repairs, demolition, or removal has been
completed and a certificate of occupancy has been issued pursuant to the
provisions of the building codes endorsed by the City of PLENTYWOOD.
Sec. 91.21.8. Failure to comply – City Authorized to Enter
If the owner fails to comply with the notice and order issued by the deadline
given in the notice, the city shall have the right to enter the real property
containing the nuisance and to remedy the same, whether by repair, demolition,
or removal of the nuisance. The City may have such work done by its own
personnel or may contract for it to be performed by a party who is not
otherwise employed by the City.
Sec. 91.21.9. Charges for Work
 
A bill for the removal of the nuisance vegetation shall be sent to the owner.
The charges
shall consist of the actual cost of removal plus an administrative fee, which
shall be set by the
council. The bill shall be due upon receipt. The owner of the real property on
which the nuisance vegetation was removed shall be personally liable for the
costs and administrative fee. Multiple owners of property shall be jointly and
severally liable for such charges. The city may pursue the collection of such
costs through either judicial proceedings filed in the appropriate court
against the owner, or through the foreclosure of the special assessment lien as
described below, or both.
Sec. 91.21.10. Assessment and Lien Charges
 
At least once a year, the clerk shall prepare and present to the council a
resolution containing a list of all unpaid accounts resulting from the city’s
repair, demolition, and/or removal of nuisances. Such resolution shall identify
the real property on which the nuisance was removed and the associated costs
and administrative fee. Upon passage of such resolution, the charges stated
therein shall constitute a special assessment and lien upon the affected
property. A copy of the resolution, after passage, shall be certified and
forwarded to the appropriate county officials for collection in the same manner
as other taxes and special assessments. The city shall have the right to
enforce or foreclose such lien with the same remedies,
such as a sale of the premises, that are available under Montana law for the
enforcement or
foreclosure of any other tax or assessment lien.
Sec. 91.21.11. Appeal; Hearing
 
Any owners or other persons who believe they have been aggrieved by the
obligations,
responsibilities, procedures, decisions, assessments or other actions provided
here have the
opportunity to appeal or challenge the same in a hearing before the PLENTYWOOD
city council. Any
such person desiring such hearing shall notify the clerk in writing and provide
a written
explanation as to what actions are being questioned or appealed. Following the
receipt of
such notice, the mayor shall set a hearing before the council. The person
making such
appeal shall be notified of the date and time of the hearing and given the
opportunity to
appear and have the appeal heard. Following such hearing, the council shall
decide the
issues presented. Violations of this chapter are not criminal offenses.
Section 2: Codification. This Ordinance shall be codified as follows: Section
91.21. “Blighted, Dangerous, Abandoned and/
or Public Nuisance Buildings, Structures and Properties” Section 91.21.1-
91.21.11
Section 3:
 Severability. Invalidity of a section of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of the remaining
sections or parts of sections.
Section 4:
 Conflicts with existing code sections. In the occasion a conflict exists between the regulations of
this chapter and other code or ordinance sections of the PLENTYWOOD Municipal
Code, the terms and provisions of this chapter shall take precedence.
Section 5:
 Effective Date. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect thirty 
(30) days after final passage and approval.
Section 6: Editor to re-arrange Chapter. The Editor, Code Publishing, is hereby
authorized to add the above sections to a new Section 08.21 of the existing
code.
FIRST PASSED AND APPROVED by the City Council of the City of PLENTYWOOD,
Montana, at a regular session thereof held on the     18th   day of
Septmeber      , 2023.
APPROVED:
 
 
RANDY RICE, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
 
            
City Clerk
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 24-11182024
 
AN ORDINANCE PROHIBITING LOITERING WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS OF PLENTYWOOD,
MONTANA; PROVIDING FOR DEFINITIONS, PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS, AND EFFECTIVE
DATE
 
 
LOITERING DEFINED
A.   To collect, gather, congregate, or to be a member of a group or a crowd of
people who are gathered together in any public place or place open to the
public, which includes but is not limited to: city property, schools,
restaurants, bars, casinos, convenience stores, department stores, public
restrooms, or any other building open to the public, and to engage in any
conduct prohibited under the City of Plentywood Code of Ordinances or the
Montana Code Annotated.
B. To collect, gather, congregate, or to be a member of a group or crowd of
people who gathered together in the vicinity of any private dwelling house,
apartment building or any other place of residence with the unlawful intent to
watch, gaze or look upon the occupants therein in a clandestine manner.
ENFORCEMENT OF LOITERING
When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in the
definition of LOITERING as set forth above, a law enforcement officer and/or
peace officer shall verbally order that person to stop causing or committing
such condition. If any person receiving any such order from a law enforcement
officer and/or peace officer fails or refuses to obey the same, then the person
(s) shall be subject to the violations and penalties in as follows:
A.   Any person who commits a first violation shall pay a fine not to exceed
$50 AND/OR no more than 5 hours of community service AND/OR no more than 2
hours of court approved counseling.
B.   Any person who commits a second violation shall pay a fine not to exceed
$100 AND/OR no more than 10 hours of community service AND/OR no more than 4
hours of court approved counseling.
C.   Any person or persons who commit a third or subsequent violation shall pay
a fine not to exceed $200 AND/OR no more than 20 hours of community service
AND/OR no more than 8 hours of court approved counseling.
 
PASSED AND APPROVED ON THE 18TH DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2024.
 
 
 
                     ______________________________
                     RANDY RICE
                     MAYOR
 
ATTEST:
 
 
________________________________
ELIZABETH SAMUELSON
CITY CLERK
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 25-02032025
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PLENTYWOOD, MONTANA, ADDING TO
PLENTYWOOD’S MUNICIPAL CODE TO ADDRESS FLOATABLE OIL AND
ITS EFFECT ON THE CITY’S SEWER SYSTEM
 
FLOATABLE OIL DEFINED: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
REQUIREMENT OF FLOATABLE OIL INTERCEPTORS:   
       A.   Required: Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when,
in the opinion of the director of public works, they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. This Ordinance is applicable to existing and new persons and/or places
of business located in the City of Plentywood city limits.
       B.   Type; Capacity: All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the director of public works and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
       C.   Construction: Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and
equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be
gastight and watertight.
       D.   Maintenance: Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors
shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
ENFORCEMENT OF FAILURE TO MAINTAIN FLOATABLE OIL INTERCEPTORS:
When any person and/or place of business fails to properly install and/or
maintain its floatable oil interceptors, and said failure causes any damage
and/or issue to the City of Plentywood’s sewer system, said person and/or place
of business shall be assessed a $1,500.00 fine per occurrence, as well as any
and all costs incurred to repair the City of Plentywood’s sewer system.
 
PASSED AND APPROVED ON THE 3RD, FEBRUARY, 2025.
 
 
 
                                                         ______________________________
                  RANDY RICE
                  MAYOR
 
ATTEST:
 
 
________________________________
ELIZABETH SAMUELSON
CITY CLERK
 
 
 
 
 
 
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 90.99
PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF VICIOUS DOG ORDINANCE
 
 
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
    (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code of
ordinances.
    (B)   Violations of §§ 90.01 through 90.08 are municipal infractions or
civil offenses. Citations shall be issued and proceedings thereon shall be
conducted in accordance with § 10.35. When judgment is entered against a
defendant, there shall be imposed for the first violation of this chapter a
minimum civil penalty of $50. For a second violation of
§§ 90.01 through 90.08 involving the same dog, there shall be imposed a minimum
civil penalty of $100. For a third or subsequent violation of
§§ 90.01 through 90.08 involving the same dog, there shall be imposed a minimum
civil penalty of $150. Violations occurring within one year from the previous
court disposition date shall be counted for second, third or subsequent
violations for the purpose of this provision. Besides imposing the civil
penalty provided above, the court may order or grant any or all other kinds of
relief authorized in § 10.35 or otherwise permitted under state law.
(C) A violation of § 90.09 is a municipal infraction or civil offense.
Citations shall be issued and proceedings thereon shall be conducted in
accordance with § 10.35. When judgment is entered against a defendant, there
shall be imposed for the first violation of this chapter a minimum civil
penalty of $100. For a second violation of § 90.09 involving the same dog,
there shall be imposed a minimum civil penalty of $200 and/or the Court may
order that the dog be permanently removed from city limits. Violations
occurring within one year from the previous court disposition date shall be
counted for second or subsequent violations for the purpose of this provision.
Besides imposing the civil penalty provided above, the court may order or grant
any or all other kinds of relief authorized in § 10.35 or otherwise permitted
under state law.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-9)
    (D)   A violation of §§ 90.20 and 90.21 is a municipal infraction or civil
offense. Citations shall be issued and proceedings thereon shall be conducted
in accordance with § 10.35.
(Prior Code, § 4-3B-3)
(Ord. 7-050409, passed 5-4-2009)
                
 
______________________________
                RANDY RICE
                MAYOR
 
ATTEST:
 
 
________________________________
ELIZABETH SAMUELSON
CITY CLERK
 
 
 
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Code Construction
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Acceptance
   
10.03   Interpretation
   
10.04   Application to future ordinances
   
10.05   Construction of code
   
10.06   Catchlines
   
10.07   Construction of words
   
10.08   Definitions
   
10.09   Severability
   
10.10   Reference to other sections
   
10.11   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Reasonable time
   
10.14   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.15   Repeal of general ordinances
   
10.16   Public ways and public utility ordinances
   
10.17   Court proceedings
   
10.18   Limitation periods
   
10.19   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.20   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.21   Code alterations
   
10.22   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.23   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
Offenses and General Penalty
   
10.35   Municipal infractions or civil offenses
   
10.36   Police powers
 
   
10.99   General penalty
CODE CONSTRUCTION
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   Upon the adoption by the Council, this city code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official city code. This city code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the “Plentywood City Code” and is hereby
published by authority of the Council and shall be supplemented to incorporate
the most recent legislation of the city, as provided in §
10.20. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter
and title heading and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well
as to the section itself, when reference is made to this city code by title in
any legal documents.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-1)
§ 10.02 ACCEPTANCE.
   The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of
this state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect,
except the excluded ordinances enumerated in §
10.15.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-2)
§ 10.03 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.04 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.05 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto re-enacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if
it had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws re-enacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and re-enacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning, application
or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section unless otherwise provided.
§ 10.06 CATCHLINES.
   The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-3)
§ 10.07 CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any word in any section of this city code importing the
plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or
persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included,
although distributive words may not have been used.
      (2)   When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this
city code by words importing the singular number only, or a particular gender,
several matters, parties or persons and the opposite gender and bodies
corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided that these rules of
construction shall not be applied to any section of this city code which
contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject
matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
   (B)   The word “ordinance” contained in the ordinances of the city has been
changed in the content of this city code to “title”, “chapter”, “section” and/
or “division” or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the city’s ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-1)
§ 10.08 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
   CITY. The City of Plentywood, Montana.
   CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Plentywood.
   CITY COUNCIL. Unless otherwise indicated, the City Council of the City of
Plentywood.
   CITY TREASURER. The City Treasurer of the City of Plentywood.
   CODE. The city code of the City of Plentywood.
   COUNTY. The County of Sheridan, Montana.
   EMPLOYEES. Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the
City of Plentywood”.
   FEE. A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   GENDER. A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
   HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads and streets unless otherwise expressly
provided.
   KNOWINGLY. Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the
act or omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
   LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MCA. Abbreviation for Montana Code Annotated.
   MISDEMEANOR. Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code
which is a lesser offense than a FELONY, as defined by state law.
   MONTH. One calendar month.
   MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL. The City of Plentywood, Montana.
   NEGLECT, NEGLIGENT, NEGLIGENCE or NEGLIGENTLY. A want of such attention to
the nature or probable consequences of the act or omission as a prudent person
ordinarily bestows in acting in his or her own concern.
   NUISANCE. Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of, another person or to the
community.
   OATH. Includes affirmation.
   OCCUPANT. As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE. Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICERS. Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the City of
Plentywood”.
   OPERATOR. The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OWNER. As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock
company, partnership, organization, club, fraternal organization, company,
corporation, business, trust or his, her, their or its manager, lessee, agent,
servant, officer or employee or any of them.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
   PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur unless some other section is designated.
   PROPERTY. Includes both real and personal property.
   RETAILER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   STATE. The State of Montana.
   STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly
dedicated and maintained way when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel. Such public dedication shall be shown
by the records of the County Clerk and Recorder.
   TENANT. As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
   WHOLESALER or WHOLESALE DEALER. As used in this code unless otherwise
specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
   WILLFULLY. When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
   WRITTEN and IN WRITING. May include printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the
proper handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write,
by such person’s proper mark.
   YEAR. One calendar year unless otherwise expressly provided.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
§ 10.09 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase of this city code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof.
   (B)   The Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section,
subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-4)
§ 10.10 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this municipality exercising the powers, duties
or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. Whenever any
ordinance or resolution of the Council refers to any board, bureau, commission,
division, department, officer, agency, authority or instrumentality of any
government, and that name designation is incorrectly stated; on the effective
date of that ordinance or following the effective date, the rights, powers,
duties or liabilities placed with that entity are or were transferred to a
different entity; then the named board, bureau, commission, department,
division, officer, agency, authority or instrumentality, whether correctly
named in the ordinance at its effective date or not, means that correctly named
entity, or the entity to which the duties, liabilities, powers and rights were
transferred.
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.13 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.14 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or
law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is
not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall
not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under
the section unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section
shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any
proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture or
liability.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this city
code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this city code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-1)
§ 10.16 PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public
ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities,
shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code or by virtue of
the preceding section, except as the city code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this city code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-2)
§ 10.17 COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Prior acts. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceedings, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   (B)   Extend to all repeals. This section shall extend to all repeals,
either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance
making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (C)   Currently pending actions. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this city code.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-3)
§ 10.18 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and re-enactment; but all suits, proceedings and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.19 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.20 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this city code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and such ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its
proper place in each copy of this city code. Each such replacement page shall
be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the
city code.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-3)
§ 10.21 CODE ALTERATIONS.
   It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or
deface in any way any section or any page of this city code in such a manner
that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement
pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized
by the Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk.
Any person having custody of a copy of the city code shall make every effort to
maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered or made available to such person through the office of the City
Clerk. Such code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be
returned to the office of the City Clerk when directed so to do by order of the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-4)
§ 10.22 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
      (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-
1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
      (MC.A. § 36-5-2-2)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
            This city shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records unless otherwise exempted by state law.
         Statutory reference:
            Inspection of public records, see MCA § 11-1102
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in a previous year and subsequently amended,
the previous code section number shall be indicated in the history by “(Prior
Code, §      )”.
§ 10.23 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way;
contracts entered into or franchises granted; the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway; and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
OFFENSES AND GENERAL PENALTY
§ 10.35 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS OR CIVIL OFFENSES.
   (A)   Definition. A MUNICIPAL INFRACTION is a civil offense punishable by a
civil penalty of not more than $300 for each violation or, if the infraction is
a second or subsequent offense, a civil penalty not to exceed $500 for each
such repeat offense.
   (B)   Issuance of citation. Citations for civil infractions shall be issued
and signed by the City Attorney, city employees designated or authorized by the
City Council to perform animal control duties or by a sworn peace office of the
state, or the City Fire Chief as the authorized Fire Code Official. The person
or party against whom a citation for a civil infraction is issued shall be
known as the defendant and the city shall be the plaintiff. Each day that a
violation occurs or is permitted to exist by the defendant constitutes a
separate infraction.
   (C)   Service of citation. The citation may be served by personal service;
by certified mail addressed to the defendant at the defendant’s last known
mailing address, return receipt requested; or by publication as provided in
Rule 4D(4) of the Montana Justice and City Court Rules of Civil Procedure. A
copy of the citation shall be retained by the person issuing the citation and
one copy shall be sent or delivered to the city court.
   (D)   Contents of citation. The citation serves as notification that a
municipal infraction has been committed and shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The name and address of the defendant;
      (2)   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the
officer or person issuing the citation;
      (3)   The location and time of the infraction;
      (4)   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternate relief
sought, or both;
      (5)   The manner, location and time in which the penalty may be paid;
      (6)   The time and place of court appearance;
      (7)   The penalty for failure to appear in court; and
      (8)   Any other information required by law or this code.
   (E)   Jurisdiction of city court. Citations for civil offenses or municipal
infractions shall be tried in the city court by the City Court Judge in the
same manner as a “small claims” matter; provided that the total dollar amount
of civil penalties to be assessed does not exceed any jurisdictional dollar
limit for cases of municipal infractions or civil offenses placed by law upon
the city court. If the total amount of civil penalties to be assessed exceeds
such jurisdictional limit, then the matter shall be tried before a judge in the
district court as provided by law. All references herein to the COURT shall
mean the city court, except in those instances where the case is originally
tried in district court due to the amount at issue being in excess of the city
court’s jurisdictional dollar limit.
   (F)   Burden of proof. The city has the burden of proof that the municipal
infraction occurred and that the defendant committed the infraction. The proof
must be by clear and convincing evidence.
   (G)   Conduct of proceedings. As provided by the state statutes, in
municipal infraction proceedings, the matter must be tried before the City
Court Judge in the same manner as a small claim if the total amount of civil
penalties does not exceed $3,000. The matter may only be tried before a judge
in district court if the total amount of civil penalties assessed exceeds
$3,000. Jury trials shall be conducted in the manner provided by law for jury
trials in city courts. The court shall ensure that the defendant has received a
copy of the charges and that the defendant understands the charges. The
defendant may question all witnesses who appear for the city and may produce
evidence or witnesses on the defendant’s behalf. The defendant may be
represented by counsel of the defendant’s own choosing and at the defendant’s
own expense. The defendant may answer by admitting or denying the infraction.
   (H)   Disposition. If a municipal infraction is proven, the court shall
enter a judgment against the defendant. If the infraction is not proven, the
court shall dismiss the citation. If the defendant named in the citation is
served, as provided above, and fails without good cause to appear in response
to the civil citation, judgment shall be entered against the defendant.
   (I)   Penalties and forfeitures. All penalties or forfeitures collected by
the court for municipal infractions shall be remitted to the city in the same
manner as fines and forfeitures collected for criminal offenses.
   (J)   Court costs. A person against whom judgment is entered shall pay court
costs and fees as provided under state law for small claims court actions. If
the citation is dismissed by the court, the city shall be liable for court
costs and fees.
   (K)   Alternative relief. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized herein does
not preclude the city from seeking alternative relief from the court in the
same action.
   (L)   Judgment. When judgment is entered against a defendant, the court may
do any of the following:
      (1)   Impose a civil penalty by entry of a judgment against the
defendant;
      (2)   Direct that payment of the civil penalty be suspended or deferred
under conditions imposed by the court;
      (3)   Grant appropriate alternative relief ordering the defendant to
abate or cease the violation;
      (4)   Authorize the city to abate or correct the violation;
      (5)   Order that the city’s costs for abatement or correction of the
violation be entered as a judgment against the defendant or assessed against
the property where the violation occurred, or both; or
      (6)   Any other condition or form of relief authorized by law.
   (M)   Violation. If a defendant willfully violates the terms of an order
imposed by the court, such violation or failure to comply is contempt.
   (N)   Costs of abatement or correction. The City Court Judge has
jurisdiction to assess or enter judgment for costs of abatement or correction
in any amount not to exceed the jurisdictional dollar amount for a money
judgment in a civil action brought in city courts in the state, as provided by
law, under MCA § 3-11-103 or successor statutes. If the city seeks abatement or
correction costs in excess of such jurisdictional amount, the matter must be
referred to the district court, where such matter shall be heard and determined
as provided by law.
   (O)   New trials and appeals. The defendant or the city may file a motion
for a new trial or may appeal the decision to district court. A factual
determination made by the trial court, supported by substantial evidence as
shown in the record, is binding for purposes of appeal relating to the
violation at issue but is not admissible or binding as to any future violations
for the same or similar code provision by the same defendant.
   (P)   Basis for other actions.
      (1)   Except for willful or wanton misconduct on the part of the city,
the issuance of a civil citation for a municipal infraction or the ensuing
court proceedings shall not provide an action for false arrest, false
imprisonment or malicious prosecution.
      (2)   In addition to the foregoing, the city and its agents or officers
shall be entitled to whatever other immunities, rights, privileges or benefits
are available with respect to the acts or omissions of the city and/or its
agents or officers concerning any or all proceedings involving a citation for a
municipal infraction.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-2) (Ord. 6-050409, passed 5-4-2009; Ord. 08-051710, passed
5-17-2010)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see MCA §§ 7-1-4150, 7-1-4151 and 7-1-4152
§ 10.36 POLICE POWERS.
   City police officers are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to serve
warrants of arrest, and to arrest persons accused of crime within the corporate
limits of the city, and within five miles of the outer boundaries of the
corporate limits of said city, and along the entire water supply of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-3)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalty imposed. Whenever in any provision of this code or other
ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful, a misdemeanor or an offense, or whenever in any such provision or
ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise provided
therefor, any person, upon conviction for the violation of any such provision
of this code or ordinances, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or
by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment
for each such offense. Each day any violation of any provision of any ordinance
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Exception. Where violations are specified to be municipal infractions
or civil offenses to be cited and processed under §
10.35, the foregoing shall not apply.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Wards; polls
   
11.02   Corporate seal
§ 11.01 WARDS; POLLS.
   (A)   There shall be elected from each of the following wards two
Alderpersons, whose terms shall be as prescribed by law.
      (1)   Ward One. The first ward shall include all of that part of the city
lying westerly of a line along the center line of Main Street and such line
extending to the incorporated limits of the city.
      (2)   Ward Two. The second ward shall include all of that part of the
city lying easterly of a line along the center line of Main Street and such
line extending to the incorporated limits of the city.
   (B)   The polling or voting places for city elections shall be determined by
the County Election Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 1-8-1)
§ 11.02 CORPORATE SEAL.
   (A)   Design. The corporate seal of the city shall be circular in form and
shall bear upon its upper portion the words “City of Plentywood” and upon its
lower portion the words “State of Montana”. Within the circle shall be the
words “Corporate Seal” and the date “1912”.
   (B)   Adoption. The seal described in division (A) above is hereby adopted
as the corporate seal of the city.
   (C)   Custodian. The Clerk shall be the custodian of the corporate seal and
shall affix such to all acts requiring to be so authenticated.
(Prior Code, § 1-8-2)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GOVERNING BODY
      
31.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   ELECTIONS
      
33.   PUBLIC SAFETY; LAW ENFORCEMENT
      
34.   MUNICIPAL COURT
      
35.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
CHAPTER 30: GOVERNING BODY
Section
City Council
   
30.01   Composition; term; qualifications
   
30.02   President of Council
   
30.03   Vacancies
   
30.04   Powers and duties
   
30.05   Meetings
   
30.06   Rules of order
Mayor
   
30.20   Qualifications
   
30.21   Term of office
   
30.22   General powers
   
30.23   Mayor as presiding officer
   
30.24   Powers related to city officers, personnel and citizens
   
30.25   Duties
   
30.26   Pardons
   
30.27   Veto power
CITY COUNCIL
§ 30.01 COMPOSITION; TERM; QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Council shall consist of four members or Aldermen. Two Aldermen shall
represent each ward of the city. At each city election, one Alderman shall be
elected from each ward, as described in this code. An Alderman shall hold
office for a term of four years and until qualification of the Alderman’s
successor. No person is eligible for the office of Alderman unless the person,
for at least 60 days preceding the election to office, is a resident of the
ward electing the Alderman or of an area which has been annexed by the city and
placed in the ward. A candidate must meet all other requirements prescribed by
law.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-1)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see MCA §§ 7-4-4401 and 7-4-4402
§ 30.02 PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.
   The Council shall elect, from its members, a president who, in absence of
the Mayor, is the presiding officer and who shall perform the duties of Mayor.
In the absence of the Mayor and President of the Council, the Council shall
appoint one of its number to serve as presiding officer and Acting President of
the Council. When presiding at Council meetings, the Council President or
Acting Council President shall have all of the rights and privileges as other
members of the Council. The acts of the said President or Acting President
shall be binding upon the Council and city as if performed by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-2)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see MCA §§ 7-4-4403 and 7-3-220
§ 30.03 VACANCIES.
   Vacancies in the Council shall be filled in accordance with applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-3)
§ 30.04 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Council is the legislative body and has the power to make and pass all
bylaws, ordinances, orders and resolutions not repugnant to the constitutions
of the United States or the state or other provisions of the law of this state,
necessary for the government and management of the affairs of the city, for the
execution of the powers vested in the city and Council, and for carrying into
effect the provisions of applicable law. The Council members shall attend all
Council meetings unless excused therefrom. Council members shall perform all
duties regarding the management and governance of the city that are imposed
hereunder or otherwise by law.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-4)
§ 30.05 MEETINGS.
   The Council shall hold regular sessions in the City Hall on the first and
third Mondays at 7:30 p.m.; provided that the time for any regular session may
be changed when necessary. A majority of the members of the Council constitute
a quorum for the transaction of business, but a less number may meet and
adjourn to any time stated and may compel the attendance of absent members,
under such rules and penalties as the Council may prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-5)
§ 30.06 RULES OF ORDER.
   (A)   Presiding. The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide
all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the Council. If the Mayor is
absent, the President of the Council shall preside. If the President of the
Council is absent, then the Council may appoint a presiding officer.
   (B)   Addressing. Every member, previous to speaking, shall address the
Mayor, or President, but shall not proceed until recognized and named by the
presiding officer. When two or more members address the presiding officer, he
or she shall decide who is to speak first.
   (C)   Conduct of members. While a question is being put, no member shall
walk across or about the Council room or leave the same, and while a member is
speaking, no other member shall engage in private conversation or do anything
else to divert the attention or interrupt the speaker.
   (D)   Monopoly of subject. No member shall speak more than twice on the same
subject without leave of the Council, or more than once until every member
choosing to speak on the pending question shall have had an opportunity.
   (E)   Personal remarks. No personalities or reflections injurious to the
feelings of any member or the harmony of the Council shall be allowed. Anyone
offending in this regard shall be called to order by the presiding officer and
shall immediately take his or her seat unless permitted by the Council to
explain. If an appeal is taken from the decision of the Chair, it shall be
decided without debate; and, unless appealed, the decision of the Chair shall
stand.
   (F)   Motions; rules and restrictions.
      (1)   Second required. No motion shall be debated or put unless the same
shall be seconded. It shall then be stated by the presiding officer and at the
request of any member reduced to writing.
      (2)   Withdrawal. After a motion has been stated by the presiding
officer, it shall be deemed in the possession of the Council, but may be
withdrawn at any time before amendment or decision by the mover with the
consent of his or her seconder.
      (3)   Division of question. If a question under consideration contains
more than one distinct proposition, any member may demand a division.
      (4)   Different subject matter. No motion or proposition on a subject
different from that under consideration shall be admitted under cover of an
amendment.
      (5)   Motion for reconsideration. No motion for reconsideration shall be
in order unless made at the same meeting or the meeting following that on which
the decision was made; nor shall such motion be made save by one who voted with
the majority upon the adoption. In all cases, the name of the member proposing
a motion or resolution shall be entered with it on the Council minutes.
   (G)   Filling blanks. When a blank is to be filled and different sums and
times are proposed, the question shall first be put on the largest sum and
longest time.
   (H)   Form of question; debate.
      (1)   When a question is under debate, no motion shall be entertained,
except: first, to adjourn; second, to lay on the table; third, for the previous
question; fourth, to postpone to a certain day; fifth, to commit to a standing
committee; sixth, to commit to a select committee; seventh, to amend; and
eighth, to postpone indefinitely, and these several motions shall have
precedence in the order stated.
      (2)   (a)   The previous question must be seconded by a majority of the
members present. It shall be put in the following form:
            “Shall the main question be now put?”
         (b)   This question shall not be debatable, and shall operate to close
all further debate on the subject under consideration.
      (3)   Every member of the Council present shall vote upon every question
submitted to the Council unless excused or directly interested, in which case
he or she shall not vote.
   (I)   Repealing/passing. These rules shall not be appealed, amended or
suspended, except by a vote of two-thirds majority of the Council, and in all
parliamentary practices not herein provided for, Robert’s Rules of Order shall
govern so far as applicable.
   (J)   Final passage.
      (1)   The ayes and noes must be called and recorded on the final passage
of any ordinance, bylaw or resolution; the making of any contract; or the
consideration of any other matter called for a vote.
      (2)   The voting on the election or appointment of any officer must be
viva voce.
      (3)   A majority of the whole number of the members elected is requisite
to appoint or elect any officer, and such vote must be recorded.
   (K)   Motion to adjourn. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, save
when a member is addressing the Chair, or a vote is being taken. Motions for
adjournment and tabling shall not be debatable.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-6)
MAYOR
§ 30.20 QUALIFICATIONS.
   No person shall be eligible for the office of Mayor unless such person is a
citizen of the United States, is at least 21 years of age, has been a resident
of the state for at least three years and a resident of the city or area which
has been annexed by the city for a period of two years next preceding such
person’s election and fulfills all other requirements prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-1)
§ 30.21 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor shall hold office for a term of four years and until qualification
of the Mayor’s successor.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-2)
§ 30.22 GENERAL POWERS.
   The Mayor has the power to:
   (A)   Communicate to the Council, at the beginning of every session and more
often if considered necessary, a statement of the affairs of the city with such
recommendations as the Mayor considers proper;
   (B)   Recommend to the Council such measures connected with the public
health, cleanliness and ornament of the city and the improvements of the
government and finances as the Mayor considers expedient;
   (C)   Call special meetings of the Council;
   (D)   Cause to be presented, once in three months, a full statement of the
financial condition of the city;
   (E)   Bid for the city on any property sold at a tax or judicial sale
whenever the city is an interested party;
   (F)   Procure and have in the Mayor’s custody the seal of the city;
   (G)   Take and administer oaths;
   (H)   Cause ordinances of the city to be executed;
   (I)   Approve all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council; and
   (J)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or resolution or
ordinance of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-3)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see MCA § 7-5-4102
§ 30.23 MAYOR AS PRESIDING OFFICER.
   The Mayor is the presiding officer of the Council and must sign the journals
thereof and all warrants on the City Treasury and decide all ties by his or her
vote. The Mayor has no other vote.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-4)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see MCA § 7-5-4102
§ 30.24 POWERS RELATED TO CITY OFFICERS, PERSONNEL AND CITIZENS.
   The Mayor has the power to:
   (A)   Nominate and, with the consent of the Council, appoint all non-
elective officers of the city provided for by the Council or law, except as
otherwise provided;
   (B)   Suspend and, with the consent of the Council, remove any non-elective
officer, stating in the suspension or removal the cause thereof;
   (C)   Supervise the discharge of official duty by all subordinate officers;
   (D)   Require of any of the officers of the city an exhibit of the officer’s
books and papers;
   (E)   Request that the governor call out the militia to aid the Mayor in
suppressing riots or other disorderly conduct, preventing and extinguishing
fires, securing the peace and safety of the city or carrying into effect any
law or ordinance;
   (F)   Require that any officer of the city make a report, in writing, on any
subject pertaining to the office; and
   (G)   Appoint, with consent of a majority of the Council, all department
heads and remove department heads and appoint and remove all other department
employees.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-5)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see MCA § 7-4-4303
§ 30.25 DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall:
   (A)   Enforce laws, ordinances and resolutions;
   (B)   Perform duties required of the Mayor by law, ordinance or resolution;
   (C)   Administer the affairs of the city;
   (D)   Carry out policies established by the Council;
   (E)   Recommend measures to the Council;
   (F)   Report to the Council on the affairs and financial condition of the
city;
   (G)   Execute bonds, notes, contracts and written obligations of the city as
approved by the Council and require that the terms thereof be faithfully
performed;
   (H)   Report to the Council as the Council may require;
   (I)   Attend Council meetings and take part in discussions;
   (J)   Execute the budget adopted by the Council; and
   (K)   Appoint, with the consent of the Council, all members of boards,
except the Mayor may appoint, without the consent of the Council, temporary
advisory committees established by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-6)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see MCA § 7-3-203
§ 30.26 PARDONS.
   (A)   The Mayor has the power to grant pardons and remit fines and
forfeitures for offenses against the city ordinances when, in the Mayor’s
judgment, public justice would be thereby subserved.
   (B)   The Mayor must report all pardons granted, with the reasons therefor,
to the Council at its next meeting following such pardon.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-7)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see MCA § 7-4-4305
§ 30.27 VETO POWER.
   The Mayor has the power to veto an ordinance or resolution or any part
thereof. This veto power must be exercised, in writing, prior to the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Council, after passage of such ordinance or
resolution. Such written veto must state all objections to the measure. At the
next regularly scheduled Council meeting following passage, the Council must
act either to override or confirm the veto. No such ordinance or resolution so
vetoed by the Mayor shall go into effect unless the veto is overridden and the
measure is passed by a two-thirds vote of the whole number of members of the
Council. If the Mayor fails to veto any resolution or ordinance as aforesaid
and refuses or neglects to sign the same, the measure takes effect without
further action.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-8)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see MCA §§ 7-3-214, 7-5-106 and 7-5-4206
CHAPTER 31: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Oath of office
   
31.02   Bonds
   
31.03   Salaries
   
31.04   Officers to surrender monies, books and the like
   
31.05   Reports from officers
City Clerk
   
31.20   Appointment
   
31.21   Duties
City Treasurer
   
31.35   Election, term and qualifications
City Attorney
   
31.50   Appointment
   
31.51   Duties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Before entering upon office, all officers, elected and appointed, must take
and subscribe the constitutional oath of office.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-1)
§ 31.02 BONDS.
   (A)   The City Clerk, Assistant Clerk, Treasurer and City Court Judge shall
be covered by a fidelity bond for the faithful performance of his or her
duties.
   (B)   Such bond shall be executed by a duly authorized surety company and
the premiums thereon shall be paid by the city.
   (C)   The amount of coverage shall be determined by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-2)
§ 31.03 SALARIES.
   The salaries of the officers and employees of the city shall be set annually
by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-3)
§ 31.04 OFFICERS TO SURRENDER MONIES, BOOKS AND THE LIKE.
   Every officer departing office shall deliver to such officer’s successor all
monies, books and other materials and appurtenances relating to such office and
in the possession of such departing officer upon the expiration of such
officer’s term or departure from such office.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-4)
§ 31.05 REPORTS FROM OFFICERS.
   The Council shall have the power to require from an officer, at any time, a
report, in detail, of the transactions in such officer’s office or any matter
connected therewith.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-5)
CITY CLERK
§ 31.20 APPOINTMENT.
   The Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-7A-1)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see MCA § 7-4-4102(4)(b)
§ 31.21 DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Clerk:
   (A)   To attend all meetings of the Council; to record and sign the
proceedings thereof and all ordinances, bylaws, resolutions and contracts
passed, adopted or entered into; and to sign, number and keep a record of all
licenses, commissions or permits granted or authorized by the Council;
   (B)   To enter in books all ordinances, resolutions and bylaws passed and
adopted by the Council;
   (C)   To enter in a book kept for that purpose, the date, amount and person
in whose favor and for what purpose warrants are drawn upon the City Treasury;
   (D)   To countersign and cause to be published or posted, as provided by
law, all ordinances, bylaws or resolutions passed and adopted by the Council;
   (E)   To file and keep all records, books, papers or property belonging to
the city and to deliver the same to the Clerk’s successor when qualified;
   (F)   To make and certify copies of all records, books and papers in the
Clerk’s possession, on the payment of like fees as are allowed County Clerks,
which fees must be paid into the City Treasury;
   (G)   To make and keep a complete index of the journal, ordinance book,
finance book and all other books and papers on file in the Clerk’s office;
   (H)   To perform such duties in and about the assessment, levy and
collection of taxes and assessments as may be prescribed by law or ordinance;
   (I)   To take and administer oaths, but must not charge or receive any fees
therefor;
   (J)   To record and account for all monies received through or disbursed
from the Clerk’s office; and
   (K)   To perform such other and further duties as the Council may prescribe
or as are prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 1-7A-2)
CITY TREASURER
§ 31.35 ELECTION, TERM AND QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The Treasurer shall be elected to hold office for a term of four years
and until the qualification of the Treasurer’s successor.
   (B)   The Treasurer shall perform those duties that are prescribed by law
and this code.
   (C)   The Treasurer shall be a resident of the city and shall satisfy all
qualifications prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 1-7B-1)
CITY ATTORNEY
§ 31.50 APPOINTMENT.
   The Mayor shall appoint, with the approval of the Council, a city attorney,
who shall hold office for two years unless suspended or removed as provided by
law. The City Attorney, to be appointed, shall be a person who is licensed to
practice as an attorney in the state.
(Prior Code, § 1-7C-1)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see MCA §§ 7-4-4601 and 7-4-4602
§ 31.51 DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to attend before the city court
and the district court and prosecute on behalf of the city. The City Attorney
shall, when required, prepare, for the use of the Council, contracts and
ordinances for the government of the city and, when required, give to the Mayor
or Council written opinions on questions pertaining to the duties, rights,
liabilities and powers of the city. The City Attorney shall perform such other
duties as pertain to the functions of the Council or as the Council may
prescribe by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 1-7C-2)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see MCA § 7-4-4604
CHAPTER 32: ELECTIONS
Section
   
32.01   Elections in accordance with law
   
32.02   Qualifications of electors
   
32.03   Eligibility for elective office
§ 32.01 ELECTIONS IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW.
   All city elections, primary or general, shall be held in accordance with the
law of the state.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-1)
§ 32.02 QUALIFICATIONS OF ELECTORS.
   All persons of legal age who are residents of the city or an area that has
been annexed shall be qualified to vote provided that they fulfill all legal
requirements to be an elector and are validly qualified and registered as a
voter by the County Election Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-2)
§ 32.03 ELIGIBILITY FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE.
   Before seeking or assuming elective positions within the city, the person
shall meet all qualifications prescribed by this code and state law.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-3)
CHAPTER 33: PUBLIC SAFETY; LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
Police Department
   
33.01   Supervision and appointments
   
33.02   Chief of Police
   
33.03   Temporary police officers
Fire Department
   
33.15   Personnel; election; appointment
   
33.16   Fire Chief; Assistant Chief
   
33.17   Suspension authority
   
33.18   Suspension procedure
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.01 SUPERVISION AND APPOINTMENTS.
   The Mayor shall have charge of, and supervision over, the Police Department
and shall appoint, in accordance with applicable law, all members and officers
thereof subject to the approval of the Council. All appointments shall be
subject to the qualifications, terms and conditions prescribed by law and these
ordinances, as well as all policies adopted by the Mayor, Council and/or
Department.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-1)
§ 33.02 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint, with the approval of the
Council, a chief of police who shall hold office for the duration of his or her
appointment or until such time as the Chief may be removed by the Mayor with
the consent of the Council.
   (B)   Duties. It is the duty of the Chief of Police:
      (1)   To execute and return all processes issued by the City Court Judge
or directed to the Chief by any legal authority and to attend the city court
regularly;
      (2)   To arrest all persons guilty of a breach of the peace or for the
violation of any city ordinance and bring them before the City Court Judge for
trial;
      (3)   To have charge and control of all police officers of the city,
subject to such rules as may be prescribed by ordinance, the Mayor or Council,
and to report to the Mayor and Council all delinquencies or neglect of duty or
official misconduct of police officers for action by the Mayor and/or Council;
      (4)   To preserve the peace and good order of the city; and
      (5)   To perform such other duties as the Mayor or Council may prescribe.
   (C)   Powers of constable. The Chief of Police has the same powers as a
constable in the discharge of the Chief’s duties, except that the Chief shall
not serve a process in any civil action or proceeding unless the city is a
party.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-2)
§ 33.03 TEMPORARY POLICE OFFICERS.
   The Mayor shall have the power and authority, at any time when the Mayor
deems it expedient, to employ not to exceed two persons at one time for a
period not to exceed 30 days to perform police duty, such persons not otherwise
being members of the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-3)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see MCA § 7-32-4109
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.15 PERSONNEL; ELECTION; APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   Composition. The City Fire Department shall consist of one Chief, one
Assistant Chief, other officers as provided by the Department’s bylaws and such
number of other firefighters as may be authorized by the Council.
   (B)   Election. The Chief, Assistant Chief and any other officers shall be
elected by the Department members in accordance with the rules or bylaws of the
Department governing such elections. Following such election, the assumption of
office by the Chief, Assistant Chief or any other officer shall be subject to
the nomination and appointment process provided for in division (C) below.
   (C)   Nomination and appointment. The Mayor shall nominate and, with the
consent of the Council, appoint the Chief, the Assistant Chief, all other
officers elected by the Department’s members and all other firefighters or
members of the Department.
   (D)   Term of appointment. Each appointment to the Department shall be first
made for an initial probationary term of 12 months, and, thereafter, all such
appointees shall hold their appointments during good behavior and while they
have the physical ability to perform their duties. Terms of office for Chief,
Assistant Chief and other officers shall be one year unless otherwise stated in
the bylaws and rules of the Department.
   (E)   Not considered municipal officers. The Chief, Assistant Chief, other
officers and firefighters shall not be considered officers of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)
§ 33.16 FIRE CHIEF; ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   (A)   Chief. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have sole command and
control over all members of the Fire Department and shall possess full power
and authority over its organization, government and discipline, and to that
end, may, from time to time, establish such disciplinary rules and other rules
as the Chief may deem advisable, subject to the approval of the Council. The
Chief shall have charge of and be responsible for the engines and other
apparatus and the property of the city furnished to the Fire Department and see
that they are, at all times, ready for use in the extinguishing of fires.
   (B)   Assistant Chief. The Assistant Chief shall aid the Chief in the work
of the Department and, in the absence of the Chief, shall perform the Chief’s
duties and shall be invested with the same powers and authority as the Chief
while so acting in the Chief’s absence.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-2)
§ 33.17 SUSPENSION AUTHORITY.
   The Mayor may suspend the Chief, Assistant Chief, any other officer or any
firefighter or member of the Fire Department for neglect of duty or a violation
of any of the rules or bylaws of the Department. The Chief may suspend the
Assistant Chief, any other officer or any firefighter or member of the
Department for like cause. The Assistant Chief may suspend any officer of
lesser rank, or any non-officer firefighter or member of the Department for
like cause.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-3)
§ 33.18 SUSPENSION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Charges; hearing. In all cases of suspension, the person suspended
must be furnished with a written copy of the charges against such person,
setting forth reasons for the suspension. Such charges must be presented at the
next meeting of the Council and a hearing held thereon, at which time the
suspended member of the Department may appear in person or by counsel and
present a defense to said charges.
   (B)   Charges not presented or proved. Should the charges not be presented
at the next meeting of the Council after suspension or should the charges be
found not proven by the Council, the suspended person shall be reinstated.
   (C)   Charges proven. If such charges are found proven by the Council, the
Council, by a vote of the majority of the whole Council, may impose such
penalty as it shall determine the offense warrants, either in the continuation
of the suspension for a limited time or in the removal of the suspended person
from the Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-4)
CHAPTER 34: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
   
34.01   Established
   
34.02   Monthly reports
   
34.03   Election, term and qualifications
§ 34.01 ESTABLISHED.
   A city court is established for the city. The City Judge shall establish
regular sessions of the city court. On judicial days, the court must be open
for all business, civil and criminal. On non-judicial days, as defined by law,
the court may transact such business as allowed by law. The jurisdiction of the
city court, for civil or criminal proceedings, shall be as defined and allowed
by the law of the state.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-1)
§ 34.02 MONTHLY REPORTS.
   The City Judge shall provide to the City Treasurer a monthly report showing
monies received and disbursements made. The City Judge shall, on a monthly
basis, pay over all monies received to the City Treasurer, except such sums
from fines or other sources as are to be paid over elsewhere.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-2)
§ 34.03 ELECTION, TERM AND QUALIFICATIONS.
   The City Judge shall be elected and shall hold office for a term of four
years until qualification of a successor. The City Judge shall be a resident of
the city and satisfy all qualifications prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-3)
CHAPTER 35: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
   
35.01   Special Improvement District Revolving Fund
§ 35.01 SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT REVOLVING FUND.
   (A)   Created. There hereby is created a special improvement district
revolving fund in order to, and for the purpose of, securing prompt payment of
any and all special improvement district bonds and/or warrants of all special
improvement districts of the city, created subsequent to February 25, 1929, in
compliance with Title 1, Local Government, of the Montana Code Annotated. Any
such existing fund created heretofore is hereby reaffirmed, recreated and
ratified.
   (B)   Powers of Council. For the purpose of providing funds for such
Revolving Fund, the City Council:
      (1)   May, in its discretion, from time to time, transfer to the
Revolving Fund from the General Fund of the city such amount as may be deemed
necessary, which amount so transferred shall be deemed and considered, and
shall be loans from such General Fund to the Revolving Fund; and
      (2)   Shall, in addition to such transfer from the General Fund, or in
lieu thereof, levy and collect for such Revolving Fund such a tax, hereby
declared to be for a public purpose, on all the taxable property in the city as
shall be necessary to meet the financial requirements of such fund. Such levy,
together with such transfer, shall not exceed in any one year 5% of the
principal amount of the then outstanding special improvement district bonds and
warrants.
   (C)   Insufficient funds. Whenever any special improvement district bond or
warrant, or any interest thereon, shall be, at the time of the passage hereof,
or shall thereafter become due and payable, and there shall then be either no
money or not sufficient money in the appropriate district fund with which to
pay the same, an amount sufficient to make up the deficiency may, by order of
the City Council, be loaned by the Revolving Fund to such district fund, and
thereupon such bond or warrant or such interest thereon, or in case of such
bonds or warrants due at the time of the passage hereof, such part of the
amount due on such bonds or warrants, whether it be for principal or interest,
or both, as the Council may, in its discretion, elect or determine, shall be
paid from the money so loaned or from the monies so loaned when added to such
insufficient amount, as the case may require; provided, however, that none of
the provisions of this section shall apply to any district created prior to
February 25, 1929.
   (D)   Loans. Whenever any loan is made to any Special Improvement District
Fund from the Revolving Fund, the Revolving Fund shall have a lien therefor on
all unpaid assessments and installments of assessments on such district,
whether delinquent or not, and on all monies thereafter coming into such
district, to the amount of such loan, together with interest thereon from the
time it was made at the rate, or percentage, borne by the bond or warrant for
payment of which, or, of interest thereon, such loan was made; and whenever
there shall be monies in such District Fund which are not required for payment
of any bond or warrant of such district, or interest thereon, so much of such
monies as may be necessary to pay such loan shall, by order of the Council, be
transferred to the Revolving Fund; and after the bonds and warrants issued on
any special improvement district have been fully paid, all monies remaining in
such district fund shall, by order of the Council, be transferred to and become
part of the Revolving Fund.
   (E)   Excess funds.
      (1)   Whenever there is, in the Revolving Fund, an amount in excess of
the amount which the Council deems necessary for payment or redemption of
maturing bonds or warrants or interest thereon, the Council may:
         (a)   By vote of its members at a meeting called for that purpose,
order such excess or any part thereof transferred to the General Fund; or
         (b)   Use such excess or any part thereof for the purpose of
purchasing property at sales for delinquent taxes or assessments, or both, or
which may have been struck off or sold to the county for delinquent taxes or
assessments, or both, and against which property there then is any unpaid
assessment for special improvements on account whereof there are outstanding
special improvement district bonds or warrants of the city.
      (2)   The Council may sell any tax certificates issued on any such sale.
After acquiring title to such property, the city may lease such property or
sell the same at public or private sale and make conveyance thereof, or
otherwise dispose thereof as the interest of the city may require. All proceeds
from such sale of tax certificates and from such leasing, sale or other
disposition of the property shall belong to, and be paid into, the Revolving
Fund and be subject to transfer, in whole or in part, to the General Fund by
the vote of all the members of the Council at a meeting called for that purpose
as hereinbefore provided.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-1)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES
      
51.   SEWERS
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   GARBAGE
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES
Section
Utility Accounts and Services
   
50.01   Responsibility for payment
   
50.02   Payment deadline
   
50.03   Late payment fee
   
50.04   Discontinuance of water service
   
50.05   Procedure for discontinuance
   
50.06   Conditions for re-establishment
   
50.07   Appeals
   
50.08   Request for extension or modification
   
50.09   Shutoff valve
   
50.10   Providing water or sewer to other premises
   
50.11   Access to premises
   
50.12   Discontinuance of garbage service
   
50.13   Scope of service
   
50.14   Meter required
   
50.15   Right to deny or discontinue service
Procedure for Unpaid Charges
   
50.30   General statement of purpose
   
50.31   Definitions
   
50.32   Notice of deadline for payment
   
50.33   Resolution for assessment and lien
   
50.34   Notice
   
50.35   Appeal by owner
 
   
50.99   Penalty
UTILITY ACCOUNTS AND SERVICES
§ 50.01 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT.
   All rates or assessments for utility services (water, sewer and/or garbage)
shall be charged against the property served and against the owner thereof,
regardless of whether or not the property is occupied by the owner at the time
such services are provided. By special agreement with the city, when property
is being rented or occupied by someone other than the owner, the utility bill
may be sent to such renter or occupant. However, in all instances, (even when
by agreement the renter or occupant receives the bill) the owner shall remain
fully liable for all utility charges for all times, including, without
limitation, when the renter or occupant fails to pay the utility bill, or any
part thereof regarding a period when the property was rented to a tenant or
occupied by someone other than the owner. In the event any utility services are
discontinued for failure to pay for them, such services will not be reinstated
for such property regardless of a change in ownership or occupancy, until all
delinquent amounts are paid in full. Multiple owners of property shall be
considered jointly and severally liable for the entire amount of the utility
charges for services provided to their property during their ownership.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-1)
§ 50.02 PAYMENT DEADLINE.
   Charges for sewer, water and garbage services shall be due and payable on
the fifteenth day of the month immediately following the month in which such
charges are determined and the bill for such charges is mailed out.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-2) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 LATE PAYMENT FEE.
   A late payment fee shall be imposed on an account that is not paid in full
by the due date. The late payment fee may be imposed for delinquent sewer,
water and/or garbage services, or previously imposed late payment fees.
Additional late payment fees shall be imposed each month to any delinquent
amount until it is paid in full. The late payment fee shall be in an amount set
by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-3)
§ 50.04 DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE.
   Water services to premises shall be discontinued when the account has an
outstanding balance for charges for water or sewer services that has existed
for one month or more beyond the due date unless prior to the deadline set for
payment all past due charges for such services are paid in full. As used in the
foregoing sentence, CHARGES shall include the amount billed for water or sewer
services along with any late payment fees regarding charges for such services.
All discontinuances or shutoffs shall be done pursuant to orders made and
issued by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-4)
§ 50.05 PROCEDURE FOR DISCONTINUANCE.
   (A)   Notice to disconnect. Prior to the discontinuance of water services,
there shall be provided to the delinquent account customer a written or printed
notice stating the intention to discontinue water services for such
delinquency. Such notice shall be given at least five business days (days other
than Saturday, Sunday and those days recognized by the city as holidays) in
advance of the time at which such services are to be discontinued.
   (B)   Service of notice.
      (1)   Personal service. The notice shall be personally or hand delivered
to the person in whose name the account is listed on the records of the city,
or one of the persons in whose names the account is so listed if it is listed
in multiple names.
      (2)   Entity or organization. If the account is listed by the city in the
name of an entity or organization, then such notice shall be delivered
personally to a person at least 18 years of age who is reasonably believed to
be an agent of such entity or authorized to receive such notice.
      (3)   Account holder or agent unavailable. If no such account holder or
agent is found on the premises, the notice shall be given to a responsible
adult member of the household, if applicable, or other responsible adult on the
premises.
      (4)   Placement in conspicuous location. In lieu of personal service, the
said notice may be placed at a conspicuous location on the premises whose
account is delinquent.
      (5)   Service by mail. In those instances where personal service or
placement of the notice on the property would not be practical or the notice
would not likely reach the owner, then service may, as an alternative, be made
by mail addressed to the last known address of the account holder or owner of
the premises.
      (6)   When deemed served. The notice shall be deemed served when it is
personally delivered, placed at a conspicuous location on the said premises or
mailed.
   (C)   Contents of notice. The notice shall state that, in the event the
customer desires to appeal the order to discontinue services, dispute the
amount owed on the bill or otherwise contest on any ground the delinquency and/
or the proposed shutoff, then the customer may do so by contacting the City
Clerk’s office and filing an appeal of such order. Such notice shall give the
telephone number and address of the City Clerk’s office along with the office
hours of the Clerk. The customer shall have five business days, as defined
above, from the date of the service of the notice (not counting the day of
service of the notice) in which to file such an appeal of the order and the
notice shall so state.
   (D)   Hours turnoff permitted. Water shall be discontinued for delinquency
in payment only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on Mondays,
Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays. Water shall not be discontinued on holidays
recognized by the city or days that are immediately followed by any holiday.
   (E)   Remedy prior to shutoff. Water services will not be discontinued for
the premises receiving a shutoff notice if, prior to the time when
discontinuance of service is scheduled, the customer pays all past due amounts
owed for water service, sewer service and/or late payment fees for such
services.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-5)
§ 50.06 CONDITIONS FOR RE-ESTABLISHMENT.
   In the event water service to any premises has been discontinued for a
delinquent account as provided herein, such service will be re-established upon
payment of all past due amounts owed for water service, sewer service and/or
late payment fees for such services.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-6)
§ 50.07 APPEALS.
   (A)   Stay of discontinuance. Upon the filing of an appeal of an order of
discontinuance of services, there shall be no shutoff or discontinuance of
services pending the appeal.
   (B)   Hearing scheduled. Upon the filing of an appeal, the Clerk shall
forthwith notify the Mayor of such filing and the Mayor shall set the matter
for hearing. All hearings of such appeals shall be before the City Council at
either a regular or special meeting.
   (C)   Notice of hearing. Written notice of the hearing date, time and place
shall be provided to the customer at least three business days prior to the
hearing date. Such notice shall be deemed to be sufficient if it is mailed to
the customer’s last known address at least five business days, not counting the
day it is mailed, prior to the date of hearing.
   (D)   Hearing. The Council, at the hearing, shall follow the ordinary and
applicable procedures and rules regarding its deliberations, voting and
actions. In the event the Council upholds or affirms its original order to
discontinue services, the Council shall cause to be served upon the customer a
notice of intent to discontinue service and such notice shall be delivered to
the customer or the affected premises in accordance with the procedures set
forth in §
50.05, or the notice may be served upon the customer at such hearing after the
Council has duly considered and acted upon the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-7)
§ 50.08 REQUEST FOR EXTENSION OR MODIFICATION.
   (A)   A customer may request, for reasons of hardship or other special
circumstances, an extension of a due date for the payment of accrued or
delinquent utility charges for water, sewer and/or garbage services, or other
modification of or exception to the terms and conditions under which such
services are provided.
   (B)   All such requests must be made to the City Council, either orally or
in writing. On the basis of proven hardship or special circumstances, it is
within the discretion of the Council to grant a modification of or exception to
such terms and conditions. The consideration of and action upon such request
shall be done in accordance with the ordinary procedures and rules regarding
Council action.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-8)
§ 50.09 SHUTOFF VALVE.
   (A)   Required. Premises receiving city water service shall have a shutoff
valve located on the water service line between the water main and the meter so
that the supply of water to the premises can be shut off and turned on. Where
water services to premises have been discontinued due to the demolition,
vacancy or removal of the serviced structure or other reason, an operable
shutoff valve in good repair shall be located on the water service line as long
as the line is connected to the city main.
   (B)   Maintenance. The shutoff valve and box shall be kept in good repair
and operable condition, at all times, by the owner of the premises and any
occupant thereof.
   (C)   Inoperable valve.
      (1)   Notice to repair. In the event that a shutoff valve is found by the
city to be inoperable, leaking or otherwise in need of replacement or repair,
the city shall provide the account holder or the owner of the premises with a
notice requiring that the shutoff valve be repaired or replaced within 30 days
of the date of the mailing of the notice.
      (2)   Failure to comply. If the repair or replacement is not made within
such time, the city may repair or replace the valve and the cost of such repair
or placement shall be billed to the owner or added to the account for the
affected premises.
      (3)   Access. Shutoff valves shall be placed and maintained in a location
that is easily accessible by city personnel. The owner, tenant or occupant
shall not cause access by city personnel to the shutoff valve to be obstructed
or prevented by any means whatsoever. Such obstructions shall be immediately
removed upon the request by the city to do so. In the event that the city
personnel’s immediate access to a shutoff valve is denied or obstructed for any
reason, the city personnel may remove any such obstructions. Any costs or
expenses incurred by the city as the result of the removal of such obstructions
may be added to the account for the premises involved.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-9) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.10 PROVIDING WATER OR SEWER TO OTHER PREMISES.
   (A)   Water or sewer services shall not be provided to two or more buildings
or separate premises, regardless of the ownership of the buildings or premises,
from the same metered connection or service line without the permission of the
city.
   (B)   Upon the discovery of such unpermitted use of water or sewer, the city
may discontinue water service and/or sewer service to the meter or connections
involved until separate, satisfactory connections or service lines are made and
separate accounts are established.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-10)
§ 50.11 ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   The city shall, at all reasonable times, have access to the buildings,
structures or other premises that are served by city water and/or sewer for the
purpose of inspecting, testing, observing or examining any or all meters,
plumbing, pipes, fixtures or other apparatus that is connected, directly or
indirectly, to the city water and/or sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-11) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.12 DISCONTINUANCE OF GARBAGE SERVICE.
   (A)   Discontinuance of service. Garbage collection service to premises may
be discontinued when the outstanding balance for charges for garbage service
has existed for one month or more beyond the due date unless, prior to the
deadline set for payment, all past due amounts owing for such services are paid
in full. As used herein, CHARGES shall include the amount billed for garbage
services, along with any late payment fees regarding charges for such services.
All discontinuances or shutoffs of garbage services shall be done pursuant to
orders made and issued by the City Council.
   (B)   Procedure for discontinuance. Prior to shutting off garbage service,
the owner or occupant of the affected premises shall be given a written or
printed notice stating the intention of the city to terminate garbage services
unless payment of all past due amounts for such services is made by a certain
date. The procedures for service of the notice and the rights of appeal shall
be the same as that provided above for the discontinuance of water service. The
notice shall be provided at least five business days prior to any
discontinuance of service. The termination of garbage services will coincide
with a day on which the garbage would have otherwise been collected but for the
discontinuance.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-12)
§ 50.13 SCOPE OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Sewer and water services are intended to serve only those premises
within the city limits with the exception of those instances where the city
grants permission for its water or sewer lines to serve property outside the
city.
   (B)   No person through the use of plumbing, service lines, pipes or other
means shall cause or allow premises or property outside of city limits to be
served by city water or sewer without the express consent of the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-13) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.14 METER REQUIRED.
   Water that is delivered and sold to a city utility account customer shall be
measured by a meter that is approved by the city unless the city permits water
to be furnished without a meter.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-14) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.15 RIGHT TO DENY OR DISCONTINUE SERVICE.
   The city reserves the right to deny or discontinue water and/or sewer
service to any premises whenever the provision of such services would not be
compliant with applicable laws, standards or regulations or city ordinances or
policies or when the provision of such services would cause a risk of damage or
contamination to the city’s system, or property damage or personal injury to
any party.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-15)
PROCEDURE FOR UNPAID CHARGES
§ 50.30 GENERAL STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   This subchapter authorizes a procedure for levying an assessment and lien
upon real property to collect unpaid charges and penalties for city utility
services. This assessment procedure is in addition to the authority of the city
to bring suit in city court or any other court of competent jurisdiction to
collect arrearages on accounts for utility services as any other debt owed to
the city.
(Ord. 21-031918, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 50.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Plentywood, Sheridan County, Montana.
   OWNER. Unless otherwise indicated, an OWNER is a person, party or entity
having a legal ownership interest in real property based upon the records or
information in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder along with records
or files in other offices of the county or the state. The word OWNER includes
ownership by a single party, person or entity, or ownership by multiple
parties, persons or entities. For pending contracts for deed not declared on
public record to be in default, the purchasing party or buyer shall be regarded
as the OWNER. Where property has been repossessed or foreclosed upon by a
seller or lender, the seller or lender is regarded as the OWNER. When property
is held in trust, according to the records of the county or the state, the
trustee is regarded as the OWNER or responsible party and the party to whom
notice should be directed. If the OWNER of property is deceased, incompetent or
the subject of a conservatorship or guardianship proceedings, the owner’s
personal representative, guardian, conservator or other acting fiduciary,
according to public records of the county or the state, will be regarded as the
OWNER or responsible party and the one to whom notice will be given.
   PENALTIES FOR DELINQUENT UTILITY CHARGES. The term PENALTIES, when referring
to delinquent utility bills, includes any additional charge imposed or incurred
as the result of not paying for utilities by the due date such as “late” fees
or charges.
   UTILITY or UTILITIES. Water, sewer and/or garbage collection services, or
any of them, provided or furnished by the city.
(Ord. 21-031918, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 50.32 NOTICE OF DEADLINE FOR PAYMENT.
   (A)   Each year by the end of June, the City Clerk shall prepare a list of
delinquent utility accounts on which a substantial past-due amount is owed to
the city for services furnished before the end of June of that year.
Thereafter, for such listed accounts, the City Treasurer, no later than July 7,
shall give written notice to the owner of the lot, parcel or real property to
which such utilities have been provided or that were served by city utilities.
   (B)   The notice shall contain the following:
      (1)   Name of the owner of the lot, parcel or real property;
      (2)   Street address of the lot, parcel or real property;
      (3)   Legal description of the lot, parcel or real property;
      (4)   Utility services provided;
      (5)   Amount owed for utilities and penalties, such as late fees;
      (6)   Warning that if the delinquent utility charges and penalties are
not paid within 30 days of the date of the notice, the said unpaid amounts will
be levied as an assessment and lien against the lot, parcel or real property;
and
      (7)   A statement that the city may also collect past-due utility charges
and penalties as a debt owed to the city by bringing suit in city court or any
other court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 21-031918, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 50.33 RESOLUTION FOR ASSESSMENT AND LIEN.
   (A)   (1)   The City Clerk shall prepare and present to the Council a
resolution listing those accounts that have not been paid by the deadline set
in the notice provided by the City Treasurer.
      (2)   This resolution shall contain the following:
         (a)   Name of the owner of the property to which utility services were
provided;
         (b)   Street address of the lot, parcel or real property furnished or
served by city utilities;
         (c)   Legal description of lot, parcel or real property provided with
or served by city utilities;
         (d)   Utilities provided or furnished; and
         (e)   Amount of utility charges and penalties, such as late fees, to
be assessed.
   (B)   Upon the passage of the resolution, the delinquent utility charges,
together with any penalties, shall constitute a special assessment and lien
that is thereby levied upon the property served with utilities or provided with
utility services. A copy of the adopted resolution shall be forwarded to the
county and/or state officials or personnel responsible for assessments, levies
and collections as with other such similar taxes and assessments. The adopted
resolution shall constitute a certification by the city that the information
contained in such resolution is true and correct according to the city’s files
and records. The said officials of the Department of Revenue and/or other
involved county or state offices shall impose the amount of delinquent charges,
along with any penalties, as a tax against the lot, parcel or real estate,
which is to be assessed for the delinquent or unpaid utility charges and
penalties. The city shall have the right to enforce or foreclose upon such
assessment and lien so levied in the resolution with the same remedies, such as
the sale of the premises, available under state law for the enforcement or
foreclosure of any other such similar or like tax or assessment lien.
Immediately after the passage of such resolution, a copy shall be mailed to the
owner of the real property that is subject to the assessment by the resolution.
(Ord. 21-031918, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 50.34 NOTICE.
   (A)   Any required notice is considered served by:
      (1)   Personal delivery to the owner or party entitled to notice; or
      (2)   Sending the notice by first-class mail through the United States
Postal Service to the last known address of the owner or party entitled to
notice, or the address shown in the real estate tax records of the county.
Notice is deemed given when personally delivered or deposited with the United
States Postal Service.
   (B)   For multiple owners, any required notice shall be served personally or
mailed to the owner or person who is shown by the records of the county or the
state as the designated or responsible party to whom real property tax notices
or tax related documents are to be sent.
(Ord. 21-031918, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 50.35 APPEAL BY OWNER.
   (A)   An owner aggrieved by the obligations, procedures, decisions,
assessments, levies or other actions provided or taken herein for the
collection of delinquent utility accounts can appeal the same for hearing by
the City Council. A person wishing to have a hearing shall file a signed
written notice of appeal with the City Clerk with a detailed description of the
actions being appealed and the reasons for appeal. A notice of appeal must be
filed within 15 days (counting Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) from the date
of the action being appealed. For a notice by the Treasurer of the intent to
levy an assessment and lien upon real property, the date of action is the date
of the notice.
   (B)   A notice of appeal shall not delay, stay or postpone the presentation
to or adoption by the City Council of the resolution levying an assessment and
lien upon real property, or other actions or proceedings taken with regards to
such resolution, assessment or lien. An administrative or judicial appeal does
not waive or excuse the obligation to pay the full amount of the delinquent
charges, including penalties or late fees, within the 30 days provided in the
notice by the City Treasurer. Any payment of delinquent utility charges, along
with penalties or late fees, must be designated as “paid under protest” if made
while an appeal is pending or planned, and prior to the final resolution of the
appeal. If the delinquency is not paid within the 30 days, as required by the
Treasurer’s notice, the appeal will not be considered effective, perfected or
valid. All delinquent charges and penalties paid “under protest” during a
pending appeal shall be credited to the delinquent account and subject to
refund if the appeal is eventually resolved in favor of the appellant after any
administrative or judicial proceedings. For payments made “under protest”,
legal actions challenging such payment or its validity and seeking to recover
such payment must be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction no later than
30 days from the date of the mailing of the Council’s decision following a
hearing.
   (C)   After the appeal is filed, the Mayor shall set a hearing before the
Council. The person filing the appeal shall be notified of the hearing and
given an opportunity to appear and be heard. The hearing’s format and
procedures shall be set by the Mayor and Council. The Council’s deliberation
and action shall be done by voting. The Mayor is the presiding officer and may
vote to break ties. Hearing decisions may be orally announced, or taken under
advisement. Decisions must be written and a copy mailed to the owner filing the
appeal within 30 days after the hearing, not including weekends and holidays.
The mailing of the decision is deemed the final administrative action.
(Ord. 21-031918, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violations of §§
50.01 through
50.15 are a municipal infraction or civil offense. Citations issued and
proceedings thereon shall be conducted in accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-16)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
Sewer System
   
51.01   Permission for connection
   
51.02   Sewer service lines
   
51.03   Privies, cesspools and septic tanks
Sewer Service Charges
   
51.15   Sewer use charge
 
   
51.99   Penalty
SEWER SYSTEM
§ 51.01 PERMISSION FOR CONNECTION.
   No person shall tap into, connect a sewer service line to or make a
connection with the city sewer system or sewer mains, or replace or make
modifications of such connections without the permission of the city.
Modifications or connections requiring such permission shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, those involving a connection to or an extension of a
sewer service line to provide sewer service to another building or premises in
addition to a building or premises already served, regardless of ownership of
such buildings, premises or sewer service lines. All connections of sewer
service lines with the city sewer mains or city sewer system shall be made in a
manner and with materials satisfactory to the city and in compliance with all
state statutes, standards and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-1) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.02 SEWER SERVICE LINES.
   (A)   Definition. SEWER SERVICE LINE is that line or pipe extending from the
property, structure or facility served and continuing up to and including the
junction of such line with the city main and the materials for such junction,
such as the “saddle”. The term includes both active lines, and lines that are
inactive due to the discontinuance of service to the property as the result of
the demolition or vacancy of the serviced structure or other reason.
   (B)   Ownership. Sewer service lines are owned by the owner of the property
served.
   (C)   Costs. The owner of the sewer service line or the premises served
thereby shall be responsible for all costs and work incidental to the
installation of sewer service lines, connecting such lines to the city water
mains and making repairs, replacements, alterations or extensions to such
service lines. The city shall not be responsible whatsoever for the
installation, repair, maintenance or replacement of sewer service lines or any
other work relating to sewer service lines.
   (D)   Maintenance. The owner of the sewer service line shall keep such line
in good repair and condition at all times.
   (E)   Notice to repair/replace. In the event any sewer service line becomes
broken, clogged or otherwise in need of repair, maintenance or replacement,
written notice of the need for such work may be sent to the owner. Such notice
shall give the owner 30 days in which to perform such repair, maintenance or
replacement. If the owner fails to do such work within the said 30 days, the
city may perform such work and bill the costs thereof to the owner. The owner
shall be responsible for the payment of such costs. If the owner fails to pay
such costs, they may be added to the balance on the owner’s utility account, in
which case the amount shall be payable as sewer service charges and non-payment
thereof shall be subject to all remedies for non-payment of sewer service
charges.
   (F)   Dimensions. Sewer service lines shall have a minimum diameter of four
inches.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-2) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.03 PRIVIES, CESSPOOLS AND SEPTIC TANKS.
   The installation or use of privies, cesspools and septic tanks within the
corporate limits of the city is expressly prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-3) Penalty, see §
51.99
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
§ 51.15 SEWER USE CHARGE.
   For each sewer connection to the city sewer system, there shall be a monthly
charge for sewer services in an amount to be determined by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-1)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violations of this chapter are a municipal infraction or civil
offense. Citations issued and proceedings thereon shall be conducted in
accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-4)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
   
52.01   Connection
   
52.02   Service lines
   
52.03   Rates
   
52.04   Use of water restricted
   
52.05   Abandonment of service lines
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 CONNECTION.
   No person shall tap into, connect a water service line to or make a
connection with the city water mains or water distribution system or make
modifications of such connections without the permission of the city.
Modifications or connections requiring such permission shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, those involving a connection to or extension of a
water service line to provide water service to another building or premises in
addition to a building or premises already served, regardless of the ownership
of such buildings, premises or water service lines. All connections of water
service lines to the city water mains or water distribution system shall be
made in a manner and with materials satisfactory to the city and in compliance
with all state statutes, standards and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-1) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.02 SERVICE LINES.
   (A)   Definition. WATER SERVICE LINE is that line or pipe extending from the
property, structure or facility served and continuing up to and including the
junction of such line with the city main and the materials for such junction,
such as the “corporation” and “saddle”. The term includes both active lines,
and lines that are inactive due to the discontinuance of service to the
property as the result of the demolition, removal or vacancy of the serviced
structure or other reason.
   (B)   Ownership. Water service lines are owned by the owner of the property
served.
   (C)   Costs. The owner of the service line or the premises served thereby
shall be responsible for all costs and work incidental to the installation of
water service lines, connecting such lines to the city water mains and making
repairs, replacements, alterations or extensions to such service lines. The
city shall not be responsible whatsoever for the installation, repair,
maintenance or replacement of water service lines or any other work relating to
water service lines.
   (D)   Specifications. All water service lines shall preferably be copper
(type K) or PVC plastic with 160 psi or greater. All connections made at the
city main and the curb stop shall be of the compression coupler type with no
flare or soldered fittings to be installed.
   (E)   Replacement of existing lines. Any existing water service line that is
not made of the said approved materials and which becomes broken or in
disrepair so as to require repair or replacement shall be replaced with pipe of
the approved types and such replacement shall be made to the entire service
line.
   (F)   Maintenance. The owner of the water service line shall keep such line
in good repair and condition at all times. In the event any water service line
becomes broken, or leaks, or is otherwise in need of repair, maintenance or
replacement, written notice of the need for such work may be sent to the owner.
Such notice shall give the owner 30 days in which to perform such work. If the
owner fails to do such work within the stated time, the city may perform such
work and bill the costs thereof to the owner. The owner shall be responsible
for the payment of the costs of such work. If the owner fails to pay such
costs, they may be added to the balance on the owner’s utility account, in
which case the amount shall be payable as water service charges and non-payment
thereof shall be subject to all remedies for non-payment of water service
charges. In addition, the city shall also have the right to discontinue water
service to any property that has a water service line that is not functioning
properly or requires maintenance, repair or replacement.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-2) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 RATES.
   Rates or charges for water service shall be set by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-3)
§ 52.04 USE OF WATER RESTRICTED.
   The use of water for the purpose of irrigating and watering yards, lawns or
gardens may be restricted and limited by action of the Council; provided that
when such action is taken to restrict said use of water, the Clerk shall cause
notice of said hours to be publicly announced.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-4)
§ 52.05 ABANDONMENT OF SERVICE LINES.
   (A)   Disconnection of water service line. Owners of water service lines
connected to city mains or owners of the premises served by such lines who
desire to disconnect the service line from the city main shall disconnect such
service line at the point of connection or junction with the city main. Such
disconnection at the main shall be made at the expense of the owner of the
service line. The corporation cock or service valve at the city main for such
abandoned service line shall be sealed to complete such disconnection.
   (B)   Discontinuance of service. When water or sewer service is discontinued
to premises due to the demolition, vacancy or removal of the serviced structure
or other reason, the owner of the premises or service lines shall continue to
be responsible for the maintenance and repair of the service lines as long as
the lines are connected to the city mains.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-5) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter are a municipal infraction or civil offense.
Citations shall be issued and proceedings thereon shall be conducted in
accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-6)
CHAPTER 53: GARBAGE
Section
   
53.01   Garbage defined
   
53.02   Containers
   
53.03   Removal
   
53.04   Disposal
   
53.05   Authority of city and scope of services
   
53.06   Cost of collection
   
53.07   Depositing prohibited
   
53.08   Burning
   
53.09   Building debris; large appliances
   
53.10   Fee for collecting all other waste
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 GARBAGE DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Every kind of refuse, waste or trash, whether the same is composed
of artificial, animal, vegetable or mineral matter, or a combination or
derivative thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-1)
§ 53.02 CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Duty to provide. It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant or
agent of any or every building used for human habitation or business purposes
within the city to provide, or cause to be provided, portable containers of not
more than 34 gallons’ capacity.
   (B)   Specifications. Such containers shall be galvanized, plastic or other
similar material sufficient to hold the garbage accumulating between periods of
collection. Such containers shall be provided with handles and tight-fitting
covers. The covers shall be kept on the containers at all times, except when
necessarily removed for depositing or removing garbage.
   (C)   Location. The owner, occupant, tenant or lessee, or any of them, shall
provide a rack for said garbage containers, with a platform raised 18 inches
off the ground. The front of the rack shall not extend higher than 15 inches
from the top of the platform. The rack shall be placed on private property not
more than ten feet from the alley line and in rear of the respective place of
residence; except, in the absence of alleys, curb collection is permissible,
for which garbage containers may be placed at the curb line not earlier than
the evening preceding the designated day of collection, and removed not later
than the evening of such day. Containers of not more than 34 gallons may be
recessed in the ground at a sufficient depth to make the top flush with the
level of the ground. For business places, a covered rack with front opening for
easy access shall be used for dry papers and boxes and bulky items only.
   (D)   Leaves, grass, branches. Leaves, grass and other trimmings shall be
placed in a box or plastic bag next to said containers if collection of the
same is desired. The city is not responsible for picking up loose grass or lawn
clippings. To be picked up, tree branches or limbs must be tied in bundles,
must not exceed five feet in length and individually shall be less than three
inches in diameter.
   (E)   Sanitary condition. It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant, agent
or occupant of any and every building using such garbage containers to keep the
same in a clean and sanitary condition, and to keep the area around said
containers clear and free of debris.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-2) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.03 REMOVAL.
   All garbage must be removed and disposed of in a manner approved by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-3) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.04 DISPOSAL.
   All garbage upon any premises in the city, in order to be collected, must be
boxed, bagged or bundled and, unless it is unable to do so, shall be placed in
suitable garbage cans or containers, as described in §
53.02.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-4) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.05 AUTHORITY OF CITY AND SCOPE OF SERVICES.
   (A)   Control and authority. The collection, removal and disposal of garbage
shall be done and performed under the supervision, direction and control of the
City Council and in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The Mayor
and Council shall have the power to hire and discharge the collectors and such
additional labor as is found necessary to collect and remove all garbage. The
city shall provide for the disposal of all garbage within the city and to that
end shall have the power to contract with some responsible person to perform
such services. In lieu of contracting for such services, the Council is
authorized and empowered to purchase equipment and hire personnel for the
removal of the garbage and other refuse accumulated within the city.
   (B)   Scope of services. The city garbage collection services are intended
to serve premises and property within the city limits. No premises or property
lying outside the city limits shall be served by city garbage collection
without the express consent of the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-5)
§ 53.06 COST OF COLLECTION.
   The cost of collection of garbage by the city shall be assessed by the
Council, which shall determine the rates. Such rates shall be assessed on each
utility account for premises receiving water and/or sewer services or on
occupied premises. Premises shall be deemed to be “occupied” when somebody
resides thereon, a business is open for customers on the premises or there is
activity on the premises that is likely to generate garbage. Such rates shall
be imposed, as stated above, despite any practice of the owner or occupant to
employ some other means for disposing of garbage. The rates shall be billed and
collected in the same manner as other city utility charges.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-6)
§ 53.07 DEPOSITING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall deposit, place or accumulate garbage, or allow the deposit,
placement or accumulation of garbage, on or in streets, alleys, lots, premises,
thoroughfares, roadways, parking lots, yards or any other kind of real property
unless it is placed in a suitably secure container designed as a receptacle for
garbage or otherwise in a reasonably secure container or location.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-7) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.08 BURNING.
   The burning of GARBAGE, as defined herein, within the corporate limits of
the city is hereby prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-8) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.09 BUILDING DEBRIS; LARGE APPLIANCES.
   (A)   Building debris. The city shall not be responsible for collecting or
picking up as garbage any or all of the following: building debris, building
materials or residue, lumber, wood, concrete, bricks, wiring, pipes, ductwork,
steel or other matter generated by building construction, demolition,
renovation or remodeling.
   (B)   Large appliances. The city shall not be responsible for collecting or
picking up as garbage large electrical appliances such as refrigerators,
freezers, washers, dryers, water heaters, ovens, stoves and the like.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-9)
§ 53.10 FEE FOR COLLECTING ALL OTHER WASTE.
   The city shall have the authority to remove and dispose of all garbage,
rubbish or other waste materials situated on private property or otherwise when
the same is unsightly, unsanitary and/or unable to be collected by the city’s
usual means of collection due to the size, location or nature of such waste. If
the owner of the premises refuses to remove and dispose of such materials when
requested by the city to do so, such waste may be removed by the usual means of
collection or by other action. If such waste is removed other than by the usual
means of collection, the owner/occupant of the said premises or the person
responsible for such waste shall be obligated to pay the cost of the said
removal and disposal. Such costs may be added to the utility bill for the
premises from which the waste is removed or generated in the same manner as
other utility charges. The city may otherwise pursue any and all available
lawful means of collection of such costs, including, but not limited to, the
commencement of a civil action to recover such costs.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-10)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter are municipal infractions or civil offenses.
Citations shall be issued and proceedings thereon shall be conducted in
accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-11)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Speed limits
   
70.02   Off-road vehicular traffic
   
70.03   Left-hand turns to park motor vehicles
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 SPEED LIMITS.
   The speed limit on public streets within the city limits shall be 25 mph,
except where posted by signs specifying a speed change. The speed limit on
alleys shall be 15 mph.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.02 OFF-ROAD VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.
   (A)   Definition. VEHICLE, when used herein, shall be deemed to include
automobiles, cars, trucks, pickups, motorbikes, all-terrain vehicles,
motorcycles, go carts and any and all other wheeled vehicles, whether or not
self-propelled.
   (B)   Vehicles prohibited. No person shall drive, operate or cause to be
driven or operated a vehicle on city-owned land adjacent to the Bolster Dam or
on any city-owned part of the Bolster Dam recreational area, except on graded
roads provided for travel of such vehicles or on any and all other areas where
such vehicle travel is authorized.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 LEFT-HAND TURNS TO PARK MOTOR VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for a person operating any motor vehicle to turn left
and drive across the lane for oncoming traffic for the purpose of parking such
vehicle in a diagonal or parallel fashion on the left-hand side of the street
or roadway on which such person is proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating §
70.02 shall be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-2)
   (C)   Any violation of §
70.03 shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-3)
CHAPTER 71: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
71.01   Riding on sidewalks
   
71.02   Parking in business district
Parking of Occupied Recreational Vehicles
   
71.15   Occupied recreational vehicles on lots
   
71.16   Exceptions
   
71.17   Definitions
   
71.18   Additional remedies
 
   
71.99   Penalty
BICYCLES
§ 71.01 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Business district. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a
bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.
   (B)   Signs. The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any
sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person,
and when such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the same.
   (C)   Right-of-way; passing. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a
sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall
give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-1) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 PARKING IN BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   Bicycles, when parked in the business districts, shall be parked in places
or racks designated or marked for that purpose, where present or available. It
shall be unlawful to park any bicycle along buildings in the business districts
in such manner as to interfere with pedestrians, along roadways where they may
interfere with traffic or any place where they may interfere with persons
getting into or out of motor vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-2) Penalty, see §
71.99
PARKING OF OCCUPIED RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
§ 71.15 OCCUPIED RECREATIONAL VEHICLES ON LOTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to occupy, or permit or allow to be occupied, a
recreational vehicle that is located on a lot within the city.
   (B)   This prohibition applies to any or all of the following persons who
each may be separately liable for violations of this subchapter and who are
subject to its enforcement jointly or severally with any others liable for the
same offense:
      (1)   Any or all persons who occupy a recreational vehicle in violation
of this subchapter;
      (2)   Any or all owners of a recreational vehicle occupied in violation
of this subchapter; and
      (3)   Any or all owners of the lot on which is located a recreational
vehicle occupied in violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 14-061812, passed 6-18-2012) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.16 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   This prohibition shall not apply to any recreational vehicles that are
lawfully located in a facility that is licensed by the state for the parking of
occupied recreational vehicles and permitted by the city code.
   (B)   This subchapter does not apply to a recreational vehicle located on a
lot that is occupied for a short duration by guests or visitors. However, for
any one lot, or premises consisting of multiple lots held in common ownership,
the occupied use of a recreational vehicle by such guests or visitors for such
short durations shall not, on an aggregate or cumulative basis, exceed 21 days
in any single calendar year.
   (C)   This subchapter does not apply to recreational vehicles not occupied,
as that term is defined herein, as long as the location of the recreational
vehicle is otherwise lawful.
(Ord. 14-061812, passed 6-18-2012) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.17 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LOCATED. Parked, resting, sitting, standing, placed or situated by any means
or in any manner.
   LOT. Land or real property, located within any part of the city, and held as
an individual unit or parcel of ownership shown on a certificate of survey,
subdivision plat, deed or other instrument of record in the office of the
County Clerk and Recorder. Publicly dedicated real property such as a street,
alley or right-of-way is not considered a LOT.
   OCCUPY. The use of a recreational vehicle for living, sleeping, dwelling,
housekeeping, business, residence or other purposes associated with human
habitation, for any duration and whether occurring on an overnight basis.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A mobile or movable vehicle or unit designed or
serving as living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, temporary, short-
term or seasonal use and that either has its own power or is mounted on or
towed by another vehicle. The term includes, but is not necessarily limited to,
the commonly known or recognized types of recreational vehicles: camping
trailer, fifth wheel trailer, motor home, park trailer, travel trailer, pop-up
tent trailer and truck camper. The term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE is intended to
include vehicles or units whether factory or home-built; whether or not hitched
to a self-propelled vehicle; whether on or off wheels; whether towed or carried
on a motor vehicle. The term includes campers that are affixed to a bed of a
truck and also converted vehicles such as buses, trucks or trailers.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES may or may not have kitchen or toilet facilities or self-
contained water or sewage systems.
(Ord. 14-061812, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 71.18 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   Instead of, or in addition to, the penalties or relief provided above, the
city may take such other available legal action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy a violation of this subchapter. A civil action may be commenced and
pursued in the city court for the purpose of preventing, abating, enjoining,
restraining, stopping or correcting any violation of this subchapter,
including, but not limited to, an order enjoining or preventing the occupancy
of a recreational vehicle constituting such a violation.
(Ord. 14-061812, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of §§
71.01 and
71.02 shall be fined not to exceed the sum of $100.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-3)
   (C)   Violations of §§
71.15 through
71.18 are municipal infractions or civil offenses. Citations shall be issued
and proceedings conducted in accordance with §
10.35. When judgment is entered against a defendant, there shall be imposed for
the first violation a minimum civil penalty of $100. For a second violation,
there shall be imposed a minimum civil penalty of $150. For a third or
subsequent violation, there shall be imposed a minimum civil penalty of $200.
Violations occurring within one year from the date of a defendant’s previous
judgment shall be counted for second or subsequent violations for the purpose
of §§
71.15 through
71.18. Besides, or in lieu of, imposing the civil penalty provided above, the
court may order or grant any or all of the other kinds of relief authorized in
§
10.35 or otherwise permitted under state law. Each day, or part of a day, that
any violation is maintained or allowed to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 14-061812, passed 6-18-2012)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   NUISANCES
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Animal Control
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Animal control duties
   
90.03   Registration; licensing
   
90.04   Tag and collar
   
90.05   Running at large
   
90.06   Public nuisance
   
90.07   Impoundment
   
90.08   Rabid animals
   
90.09   Vicious dog
Livestock
   
90.20   Prohibited
   
90.21   Investigation
 
   
90.99   Penalty
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner and not under the immediate control
of such owner by leash, cord, chain or other means. AT LARGE shall not include
those instances when the owner has a dog within the immediate presence of the
owner and the dog is subject to voice control, but is not physically
restrained.
   CITY. The City of Plentywood, Montana.
   DOG. Either a male or female canine.
   OWNER. Any person, persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping
or harboring a dog, or otherwise having custody of or responsibility for the
care of a dog.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-1) (Ord. 7-050409, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 90.02 ANIMAL CONTROL DUTIES.
   (A)   The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, may designate an employee
of the city to perform animal control duties. To assist or to act in the place
and stead of such designee with regards to animal control responsibilities, the
Mayor, with the consent of the Council, may authorize such other employees to
perform animal control duties.
   (B)   In providing for city employees to perform animal control duties in
this subchapter and in the Council’s designating or authorizing employees to
perform such duties, no new or separate positions, departments or offices shall
be created.
   (C)   Those designated or authorized by the Council to perform animal
control duties shall have the following authority:
      (1)   Do all things necessary and proper to enforce this chapter;
      (2)   Prepare, sign, serve and file citations of violations of this
chapter;
      (3)   Seize, apprehend, take into custody or impound dogs running at
large, constituting a public nuisance or that are vicious in violation of this
subchapter;
      (4)   Cause to be destroyed by humane means dogs that are ordered to be
destroyed by the city court or other court having jurisdiction of the matter;
dogs that must be euthanized due to illness, disease, injury or other reason
justifying destruction; or dogs that are not claimed or redeemed in accordance
with the procedure for impounded dogs provided in the city code;
      (5)   Enter private property to seize a dog that, in his or her presence,
is running at large, constituting a public nuisance or constituting a vicious
dog;
      (6)   Enter private property to seize a dog pursuant to a court order
authorizing such entry and seizure; and
      (7)   Demand from the occupants of premises where a dog is kept or
harbored that the animal be exhibited and that the license for such animal be
shown.
   (D)   No person shall interfere with, hinder or obstruct anyone designated
or authorized by the City Council to perform animal control duties when such
person is performing or carrying out such duties. No person shall release or
attempt to release any dog in the custody of the city, except through the
lawful means provided in the city code.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-1) (Ord. 7-050409, passed 5-4-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 REGISTRATION; LICENSING.
   (A)   Required. All dogs more than five months old that are kept, harbored
or maintained within the city limits shall be registered or licensed before
January 1 of each year. Any person who owns, harbors or keeps a dog more than
five months old within the city limits shall have such dog registered or
licensed as required herein.
   (B)   Application. At the time application is made for such registration or
license, the owner shall state, upon a form provided for such purpose, the name
and address of the owner, a description of the dog and the date of the most
recent rabies inoculation or vaccination.
   (C)   Certificate of rabies inoculation. No registration, license or renewal
shall be issued for any dog more than five months of age unless a certificate
signed by a qualified veterinarian is filed with the application showing that
the dog described in the application has been inoculated or vaccinated against
rabies within the last or next preceding three years.
   (D)   Term. The registration or license shall be in effect, regardless of
the date of its issuance, until the following December 31.
   (E)   Fees. The registration or license fees shall be set by resolution of
the Council.
   (F)   Exception. The provisions of this section do not apply to dogs
temporarily brought into the city by their owners or other persons having
authorized custody or responsibility of any such dog during the course of
travel or visitation.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-2) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 TAG AND COLLAR.
   (A)   Issuance of certificate and tag. Upon payment of the license fee and
compliance with the provisions of §
90.03, the City Clerk shall issue to the applicant a registration certificate
and a tag for each dog so registered.
   (B)   Tag. The tag shall be changed in shape each year and shall have
stamped thereon the year for which it applies and a number corresponding with
the number on the license or registration certificate.
   (C)   Collar. Every owner licensing a dog hereunder shall provide each dog
licensed with a collar to which the registration or license tag must be affixed
and such collar and tag shall be worn by the dog, at all times, when the dog is
off or away from the premises where the dog is kept or otherwise maintained.
   (D)   Duplicate tag. In case a tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate tag
will be issued by the City Clerk upon presentation of a receipt showing the
payment of the license fee for the current year. There shall be a fee for the
issuance of such duplicate tag and the amount of the fee shall be set by
resolution of the Council.
   (E)   Transferability; refund. Dog tags are not transferable from one dog to
another, and no refund shall be made on a dog license because of the death or
loss of a dog or because the dog or its owner leaves the city before the
expiration of the registration period.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-3)
   (F)   Counterfeiting prohibited. No person shall make, sell, purchase or
possess, place or allow to be placed on his or her dog any metal tag of the
same form, shape or like the official tag of the city or shall attempt in any
way to counterfeit the design adopted for such official tag, or place or use
the official tag on a dog other than that for which such tag was issued.
(Ord. 7-050409, passed 5-4-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   No owner of any dog shall permit or allow such dog to be at large, at any
time, within the corporate limits of the city, whether such dog is registered
or unregistered.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-4) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   Defined. Any dog within the corporate limits of the city, whether such
dog is registered or not, is a PUBLIC NUISANCE which:
      (1)   Frequently frightens, barks at or chases any person not trespassing
on the property of the dog’s owner;
      (2)   Is a female in heat and not continually confined by its owner;
      (3)   Is more than five months old and has not been vaccinated or
inoculated against rabies within the last three years;
      (4)   Does not have on a collar and registration license tag as required
under the provisions of this subchapter;
      (5)   Annoys any person by loud and frequent yelping, barking or howling;
      (6)   Damages any property not the property of its owner; and
      (7)   Chases vehicles, bicycles or pedestrians on streets, roadways,
sidewalks or other public ways.
   (B)   Prohibited. No owner of any dog shall permit or allow such dog to be a
PUBLIC NUISANCE, as defined in division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-5) (Ord. 7-050409, passed 5-4-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Authority to impound. Employees of the city are hereby authorized to
apprehend any dog found to be at large or running at large in violation of the
provisions of this subchapter. When the owner is not immediately available or
circumstances otherwise warrant, a dog, whether or not properly licensed, that
is creating, causing or constituting a PUBLIC NUISANCE, as defined in §
90.06(A), may, upon probable cause that such nuisance has been or is being
created, be apprehended or taken into custody by a city employee, pending
judicial action on or disposition of any citation issued. In the case of
vicious dogs, as provided in §
90.09, a city employee is authorized to apprehend and impound such animals
pending judicial action on or disposition of a citation issued.
   (B)   Impound facility. All dogs that are apprehended or taken into
possession by the city shall be impounded at a suitable facility designated by
the City Council for such purpose.
   (C)   Impound registry. Upon receipt of any such dog at the pound facility,
a complete registry shall be made of such dog, including breed, color, sex and
the number of the registration, if any. If the dog has no tag or evidence of
registration, that fact should be noted.
   (D)   Notice of impoundment. Not later than the next business day after the
impounding of any dog, the owner thereof shall be notified of the dog’s
impoundment. If the owner of the dog is not known, a reasonable attempt shall
be made to identify the owner, including doing such things as broadcasting on
the local radio station or posting a public notice of the dog’s impoundment,
along with a description of the dog.
   (E)   Redemption by owner; fees. The owner of any dog so impounded may
reclaim such dog upon proof of compliance with the licensing provisions of this
subchapter and upon payment of all costs incurred by the city for the
impounding and maintenance of the dog, together with any or all fines imposed
upon the owner by the city court as of the date of reclaiming. Daily
maintenance fees at the pound or kennel shall consist of those charges billed
or imposed by the operator of the pound facility or kennel.
   (F)   Unclaimed dogs. All dogs impounded by the city shall be impounded no
longer than four days from the date of the notice to the owner or, in the case
of the owner being unknown, four days from the date on which a public notice of
the impoundment was first issued, whether through the radio station or by other
means. If, at the expiration of such four days, the dog has not been reclaimed,
the dog may be destroyed. In lieu of destruction, the dog may be given to some
responsible person who is able and willing to provide suitable care for the
dog. If the dog is not licensed, the person to whom the dog is given must pay
for the license fees and provide necessary proof of rabies vaccination.
   (G)   Diseased dogs. Whenever an impounded dog is so sick or injured that,
in the judgment of the city or veterinarian, the animal should be humanely
destroyed to prevent needless suffering, the dog may be promptly euthanized.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-6) (Ord. 7-050409, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 90.08 RABID ANIMALS.
   (A)   Duty to surrender animal; quarantine. The owner of any animal which
has contracted rabies, which is suspected of having rabies, which has been
bitten by an animal suspected or believed to have rabies or which has bitten
any person shall, upon demand of a city employee, county law enforcement
officer or county health or sanitation personnel, surrender the animal to the
demanding agency to be held in quarantine or observation for a period
determined by the demanding agency in consultation with qualified personnel.
   (B)   Infected animal. If, upon examination, any animal is found infected
with rabies, the animal shall be disposed of or otherwise handled as directed
by qualified persons.
   (C)   Costs. All expenses of keeping any animal confined or under
observation shall be paid by the owner.
   (D)   Removal from city. It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or
suspecting an animal to be rabid to allow such animal to be taken off or
removed from the owner’s or custodian’s premises or beyond the city limits
without the written permission of the city.
   (E)   Duty to notify city. Every owner or other person, upon learning an
animal is rabid, shall immediately notify the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-7) (Ord. 7-050409, passed 5-4-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 VICIOUS DOG.
   (A)   Definition. A VICIOUS DOG is one which has bitten without provocation
any person or domestic animal while the person or domestic animal was not, at
the time of the biting, trespassing on the property of the dog’s owner or doing
damage or injury to persons or property of the owner.
   (B)   Prohibited. No person shall keep, harbor, own or shelter a vicious dog
within the city limits.
   (C)   Surrender of dog. If a person is found by the city court to own,
harbor or otherwise keep a vicious dog, the judge, besides any other penalties
provided herein and imposed upon such person, may issue an order directing the
owner or keeper to forth with surrender the dog to the city or other named
party. In the event that the person or other person harboring such animal fails
to surrender it, the dog may be seized by city employees or other party named
by the court and the seizing party may enter private property to do so. The
judge may order the dog destroyed or, at the discretion of the judge, the dog
may be ordered removed from the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-8) (Ord. 7-050409, passed 5-4-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
LIVESTOCK
§ 90.20 PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibition. No person shall keep, raise or have within the city any
cattle, cows, pigs, horses, sheep, swine, goats, chickens, ducks, turkeys,
geese, fowl or other livestock.
   (B)   Exceptions. This prohibition shall not apply to livestock or animals
brought into the city on a temporary basis while waiting to be transported
elsewhere as long as such animals or livestock are kept at livestock yards or
other suitable confinement designed for such temporary keeping or are in
trailers or other suitable means of transportation. This prohibition shall not
apply to isolated instances when animals or livestock are confined, led, driven
or ridden in the city while in the physical custody or control of a responsible
person for special events, shows, parades or other functions.
(Prior Code, § 4-3B-1) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.21 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Authority to demand exhibition of animal. Any law enforcement officer
is empowered to demand from the occupants of any premises upon which or in
which a dog or other animal is kept or harbored, the exhibition of such dog or
other animal and the license or tag for the animal.
   (B)   Authority to take possession. Whenever complaint has been made that an
animal is kept in a reportedly cruel or inhumane manner, a law enforcement
officer may examine such animal and take possession of the same, when, in the
officer’s opinion, it requires treatment.
(Prior Code, § 4-3B-2)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violations of §§
90.01 through
90.09 are municipal infractions or civil offenses. Citations shall be issued
and proceedings thereon shall be conducted in accordance with §
10.35. When judgment is entered against a defendant, there shall be imposed for
the first violation of this chapter a minimum civil penalty of $50. For a
second violation of §§
90.01 through
90.09 involving the same dog, there shall be imposed a minimum civil penalty of
$100. For a third or subsequent violation of §§
90.01 through
90.09 involving the same dog, there shall be imposed a minimum civil penalty of
$150. Violations occurring within one year from the previous court disposition
date shall be counted for second, third or subsequent violations for the
purpose of this provision. Besides imposing the civil penalty provided above,
the court may order or grant any or all other kinds of relief authorized in §
10.35 or otherwise permitted under state law.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-9)
   (C)   A violation of §§
90.20 and
90.21 is a municipal infraction or civil offense. Citations shall be issued and
proceedings thereon shall be conducted in accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 4-3B-3)
(Ord. 7-050409, passed 5-4-2009)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Responsibility of owners and others
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Reports of nuisance conditions
   
91.04   Failure to comply
   
91.05   Charges for removal and administrative fees
   
91.06   Assistance of court
   
91.07   Assessment and lien
   
91.08   Appeal to City Council
Specific Nuisances
   
91.20   Abandoned iceboxes and refrigerators
   
91.21   Nuisance vegetation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OTHERS.
   (A)   An owner of real property within the city shall not allow, permit or
cause any nuisance conditions to exist in or upon such property; or upon such
property’s adjacent boulevard, sidewalk or curb; or to the centerline of such
property’s adjacent alley or alley right-of-way. It is the duty of real
property owners within the city to prevent or eliminate all nuisance conditions
on their real property and adjacent areas described above.
   (B)   When premises are leased, rented or otherwise occupied by persons or
entities other than the owner, it is the duty of any such renter, lessee or
occupant, along with the owner, to prevent or eliminate nuisance conditions on
the rented, leased or occupied premises and the adjacent areas described above.
(Ord. 18-041717, passed 4-17-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUISANCE CONDITIONS.
      (1)   Includes as follows:
         (a)   Open presence of personal property that is (or reasonably
appears to be) junk, waste, debris, garbage, refuse, trash or rubbish of any
source, origin, design, kind, composition or substance;
         (b)   Dwellings, businesses, accessory structures or any other
buildings or structures that are in public view and damaged (or partly or
totally destroyed) by fire and remain unrepaired or unrestored, and without the
removal of the damaged or destroyed portions, for six months or more from the
date of the fire causing such damage or destruction; or
         (c)   Any objects, articles, conditions or personal property
encroaching upon or interfering with the movement of traffic or vehicles, or
access, in an alley or publicly dedicated right-of-way that serves as an alley.
      (2)   The following are exclusions from this definition.
         (a)   The term NUISANCE CONDITIONS does not apply to construction,
demolition or landscaping projects in progress as long as the work is in the
process of being diligently and expeditiously performed in a continuous manner
with completion likely within a reasonable period of time. The city reserves
the right to specify a time limitation or deadline for the completion of any
project.
         (b)   The term NUISANCE CONDITIONS does not apply to or include
vehicles subject to special disposition or handling under state statutes:
            1.   Removal and sale of abandoned motor vehicles in MCA Title 61,
Chapter 12, Part 4; or
            2.   Motor vehicle recycling and disposal in MCA Title 75, Chapter
10, Part 5.
   OPEN. The presence of nuisance conditions is OPEN when the nuisance
conditions are visible or subject to view from outside the boundaries of the
property where they are located. Nuisance conditions are not considered to be
in OPEN presence when they are stored inside a permanent enclosed structure or
building with walls and a roof, such as an accessory building, commercial
structure or dwelling that has been permitted as a building or structure under
the City Zoning Code incorporated in chapter 153. Nuisance conditions are
considered to be in OPEN presence when they are covered or hidden or attempted
to be so by fences, screens, tents, tarps, canvas or any other materials that
serve as a visual barrier but are not permitted buildings or structures
described above.
   OWNER. A person, party or entity having a legal ownership interest in the
real property in question based upon the records or information in the office
of the County Clerk and Recorder or other records or information filed or
recorded in the public offices of the county. The word OWNER is intended to
include ownership by a single party, person or entity; or ownership by multiple
parties, persons or entities. In the case of a pending contract for deed that
is not declared on record to be in default, the purchasing party or buyer shall
be regarded as the owner. Where property has been repossessed or foreclosed
upon by a seller or lender, the seller or lender shall be regarded as the
OWNER. In the case of property held in trust according to the records of the
County Clerk and Recorder, the trustee shall be regarded as the owner or
responsible party and the one to whom notice of nuisance conditions will be
directed. If the owner of property is deceased, incompetent or the subject of a
conservatorship or guardianship proceedings, the owner’s personal
representative, guardian, conservator or other acting fiduciary, according to
public records or filings of the county, will be regarded as the OWNER or
responsible party and the one to whom notice of nuisance conditions will be
given.
   PRESENCE. The existence, accumulation, placement or storage of objects or
articles constituting nuisance conditions.
   PUBLIC VIEW. Visible or subject to view outside the boundaries of the
property where they are located.
   RENTED OR LEASED PREMISES. When premises are leased, rented or otherwise
occupied by persons or entities other than the owner, it is the duty of any
such renter, lessee or occupant, along with the owner, to prevent or eliminate
nuisance conditions on the rented, leased or occupied premises and the adjacent
areas described above.
(Ord. 18-041717, passed 4-17-2017)
§ 91.03 REPORTS OF NUISANCE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   All reports or complaints of nuisance conditions shall be directed to
and received by the City Clerk. Upon receiving a report, the Clerk shall cause
an investigation to be made of the real property that is the subject of the
report. Upon determining from the investigation that evidence of nuisance
conditions exist, the Clerk shall cause notice of such conditions to be given
to the owner. In addition to the notice to the owner, the Clerk may also
provide notice to any party, other than the owner, who is renting, leasing or
occupying the premises.
   (B)   The notice to the owner shall provide the following information:
      (1)   Name(s) of the owner(s);
      (2)   Street address of the real property that is the subject of the
notice;
      (3)   Legal description of the real property that is the subject of the
notice;
      (4)   Mailing address of the owner to whom notice is given;
      (5)   Brief description of the nuisance conditions;
      (6)   Warning that owner has 30 days from the date of the notice to
eliminate or remove the nuisance conditions; and
      (7)   Notice that, unless nuisance conditions are eliminated or removed
satisfactorily by the deadline, the city will clean up the nuisance conditions
and charge the clean-up cost, along with a specified administrative fee, to the
owner and, if not paid, the cost and fee will be levied as a special assessment
against the property as a lien and collected in the same manner as real estate
taxes.
   (C)   (1)   Notice of a violation shall be served by:
         (a)   Personal delivery to the owner; or
         (b)   First class mail through the United States Postal Service to the
last known address of the owner or the address shown in the real estate tax
records of the county.
      (2)   In case of multiple owners, the notice will be served personally or
mailed to the owner or person who the records of the county show as the
designated party to whom real property tax notices or other tax related
documents are sent or given. Notice is deemed given when deposited with the
United States Postal Service or personally delivered.
(Ord. 18-041717, passed 4-17-2017)
§ 91.04 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   If the owner fails to comply with the request to remove or eliminate the
nuisance conditions by the deadline given in the notice, or in the event such
notice cannot be sent or delivered despite a reasonably diligent attempt to do
so, the city, through its employees or contracted personnel, shall have the
authority to enter the real property (and/or adjacent publicly dedicated real
property or right-of-way) containing such nuisance conditions and cause the
removal or elimination of the nuisance conditions. At its discretion, the city
may have such removal or elimination done by its own employees or may contract
for it to be performed by a person, business or party who is not otherwise
employed by the city. Such elimination and/or removal shall also include the
authority to dispose of nuisance items with no obligation to allow salvage
value or credit to anyone claiming the same.
(Ord. 18-041717, passed 4-17-2017)
§ 91.05 CHARGES FOR REMOVAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
   A bill for the removal of the nuisance conditions shall be sent to the
owner. The charges shall consist of the actual cost of removal plus an
administrative fee set by the Council. The costs of removal shall be based on
the amount charged by a contractor for the work or, in the case of city
employees, shall be based on the hourly wages of the city employees assigned to
do the work. The bill is due upon receipt by the owner. The owner of the real
property from which the nuisance conditions were removed (and/or adjacent to
the publicly dedicated real property or right-of-way from which the nuisance
conditions were removed) is personally liable for the costs of removal and the
administrative fee. Multiple owners of property are jointly and severally
liable for such costs and administrative fee. The city may pursue the
collection of such fee and costs through either judicial proceedings filed
against the owner in the city court (or in another appropriate court at the
option of the city) or through the levy and foreclosure of the special
assessment lien as described below, or both.
(Ord. 18-041717, passed 4-17-2017)
§ 91.06 ASSISTANCE OF COURT.
   When necessary for the enforcement of this subchapter, or the investigation
or removal of nuisance conditions, the city court or the judge thereof is
authorized to issue orders or warrants for the following:
   (A)   To permit entry or access to real property, and/or presence thereon,
for inspection where nuisance conditions reasonably appear to be present; or
   (B)   To permit entry or access to real property, and/or presence thereon,
for removal of nuisance conditions where such conditions reasonably appear to
be present.
(Ord. 18-041717, passed 4-17-2017)
§ 91.07 ASSESSMENT AND LIEN.
   At least once a year, the Clerk shall prepare and present to the City
Council a resolution containing a list of all unpaid accounts resulting from
the city’s elimination of nuisance conditions. Such resolution shall identify
the real property on or adjacent to which the nuisance conditions existed, the
names of all owners and the balance owing for the costs and administrative fee.
Upon passage of such resolution, the costs and administrative fee stated
therein shall constitute a special assessment and lien upon the affected
property. A copy of the resolution, after passage, shall be certified in the
same manner as other taxes and special assessments and forwarded to the county
or state officials or personnel responsible for the said assessment and its
levy and collection. The city shall have the right to enforce or foreclose such
lien with the same remedies, such as a sale of the premises, available under
state law for the enforcement or foreclosure of any other tax or assessment
lien. Immediately upon passage of such resolution, a copy thereof shall be
mailed to the owner of the real property that is subject to the assessment by
the resolution.
(Ord. 18-041717, passed 4-17-2017)
§ 91.08 APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL.
   Any owners or other persons who believe they have been aggrieved by the
obligations, responsibilities, procedures, decisions, assessments or other
actions provided herein have the opportunity to appeal or challenge the same in
a hearing before the City Council. Any such person desiring such hearing shall
file a signed written notice of appeal with the City Clerk and provide a
written explanation of what actions are being appealed and the reasons for
appeal. A notice of appeal must be filed within 15 days (counting weekends and
holidays) from the date of the action being appealed. Following the receipt of
such notice, the Mayor shall schedule a hearing before the Council. The person
filing the appeal shall be notified of the date, time and place of the hearing
and given the opportunity to appear and have the appeal heard. The format and
procedures for the hearing shall be set by the Mayor and Council. After
conducting the hearing, the Council shall decide the issues presented and
render a written decision. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the owner
filing the appeal. The Council’s decision shall be deemed a final
administrative decision.
(Ord. 18-041717, passed 4-17-2017)
SPECIFIC NUISANCES
§ 91.20 ABANDONED ICEBOXES AND REFRIGERATORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or abandon, without first
removing the door or doors, any refrigerator, icebox or airtight container of
any kind. Violations of this section are municipal infractions or civil
offenses. Citations shall be issued and proceedings thereon shall be conducted
in accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.21 NUISANCE VEGETATION.
   (A)   Duty to cut. An owner of real property within the city shall not
allow, permit or cause any nuisance vegetation to exist in or upon such
property or upon such property’s adjacent boulevard, sidewalk and curb or to
the centerline of the said property’s adjacent alley. It is the duty of real
property owners within the city to cut and prevent all nuisance vegetation on
their real property along with the adjacent areas described above.
      (1)   “Nuisance vegetation” is grass or weeds in excess of 12 inches in
height.
      (2)   When premises are leased, rented or otherwise occupied by persons
or entities other than the owner, it is also the duty of any such renter,
lessee or occupant to cut or prevent nuisance vegetation on the rented, leased
or occupied premises and the described adjacent areas.
      (3)   An “owner” shall be a person, party or entity having a legally
recognized ownership interest in the real property in question based upon the
records of the County Clerk and Recorder. In the case of a pending contract for
deed that is not declared to be in default, the purchasing party shall be
regarded as the owner. Where property has been repossessed by a seller or
lender, the seller or lender shall be regarded as the owner. In the case of
property held in trust, the trustee shall be regarded as the owner. If the
owner of property is deceased, incompetent or the subject of a conservatorship
or guardianship, the owner’s personal representative, guardian, conservator or
other acting fiduciary shall be regarded as the owner.
   (B)   Reports of nuisance vegetation; notice.
      (1)   (a)   All reports or complaints of nuisance vegetation shall be
directed toward and received by the City Clerk. Upon receiving such a report or
complaint, the Clerk shall cause an investigation to be made of the real
property that is the subject of the report or complaint. Upon determining from
such investigation that nuisance vegetation exists, the Clerk shall cause to
given to the owner a notice of such violation. In addition to notice to the
owner, the Clerk may also provide such notice to any party, other than the
owner, who is renting, leasing or occupying the premises.
         (b)   The notice shall provide the following information:
            1.   The owner shall have ten days from the date of the notice to
cut or eliminate the nuisance vegetation; and
            2.   If the nuisance vegetation is not cut or eliminated by the
stated time, the city may cause the nuisance vegetation to be cut and that the
cost of such cutting, together with an administrative fee, will be charged
against the owner and levied against the property as a special assessment,
which will constitute a lien upon the property.
      (2)   (a)   Notice of a violation shall be served by:
            1.   Personal delivery; or
            2.   Sending it to the owner by first class mail through the United
States Postal Service to the last known address of the owner or the address as
shown on the tax rolls of the county.
         (b)   In case of multiple owners, the notice need only be served
personally or mailed to the owner or person whom the records of the county show
as the responsible party to whom tax notices or other tax-related documents are
to be sent or given. Notice shall be deemed given when deposited with the
United States Postal Service or when personally delivered.
   (C)   Failure to comply; city to cut vegetation. If the owner fails to
comply with the request to eliminate nuisance vegetation by the deadline given
in the notice, or in the event that such notice cannot be sent or delivered for
whatever reason despite a diligent attempt to do so, the city shall have the
right to enter the real property containing such nuisance vegetation and cause
the cutting of the same. The city may have such work done by its own personnel
or may contract for it to be performed by a party who is not otherwise employed
by the city.
   (D)   Charges for work. A bill for the removal of the nuisance vegetation
shall be sent to the owner. The charges shall consist of the actual cost of
removal plus an administrative fee, which shall be set by the Council. The bill
shall be due upon receipt. The owner of the real property on or adjacent to
which the nuisance vegetation was removed shall be personally liable for the
costs and administrative fee. Multiple owners of property shall be jointly and
severally liable for such charges. The city may pursue the collection of such
costs through either judicial proceedings filed in the appropriate court
against the owner, or through the foreclosure of the special assessment lien as
described below, or both.
   (E)   Assessment and lien for charges. At least once a year, the Clerk shall
prepare and present to the Council a resolution containing a list of all unpaid
accounts resulting from the city’s cutting of nuisance vegetation. Such
resolution shall identify the real property on or adjacent to which the
nuisance vegetation was cut, the names of all owners and the balance owing for
the costs and administrative fee. Upon passage of such resolution, the charges
stated therein shall constitute a special assessment and lien upon the affected
property. A copy of the resolution, after passage, shall be certified and
forwarded to the appropriate county officials for collection in the same manner
as other taxes and special assessments. The city shall have the right to
enforce or foreclose such lien with the same remedies, such as a sale of the
premises, that are available under state law for the enforcement or foreclosure
of any other tax or assessment lien.
   (F)   Appeal; hearing. Any owners or other persons who believe they have
been aggrieved by the obligations, responsibilities, procedures, decisions,
assessments or other actions provided herein have the opportunity to appeal or
challenge the same in a hearing before the City Council. Any such person
desiring such hearing shall notify the Clerk in writing and provide a written
explanation as to what actions are being questioned or appealed. Following the
receipt of such notice, the Mayor shall set a hearing before the Council. The
person making such appeal shall be notified of the date and time of the hearing
and given the opportunity to appear and have the appeal heard. Following such
hearing, the Council shall decide the issues presented. Violations of this
section are not criminal offenses.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
Fire Code
   
92.01   Adoption of the International Fire Code, 2021 edition
   
92.02   Adoption procedure
   
92.03   Designation of Fire Code Official
   
92.04   Civil penalties for violations
   
92.05   Additional enforcement remedies
   
92.06   Limitations of jurisdiction
Storage of Dangerous Chemicals and Gases
   
92.20   Anhydrous ammonia
   
92.21   Flammable substances
   
92.22   Liquified petroleum gases
 
   
92.99   Penalty
FIRE CODE
§ 92.01 ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE, 2021 EDITION.
   The City Council hereby adopts, for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion
within the jurisdictional limits of the city, that certain code known as “the
International Fire Code” (IFC), 2021 edition and appendices, with the
additions, amendments and deletions enumerated in § 23.12.601 of the Montana
Administrative Rule.
(Res. 05152023, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 92.02 ADOPTION PROCEDURE.
   Notice of intent to adopt this subchapter has been duly published as
required by law after the first reading hereof and prior to the final reading
and adoption. A copy of the Code has been duly filed with the City Clerk for a
period of at least 30 days prior to the date of adoption for public reading or
copying.
(Ord. 08-051710, passed 5-17-2010)
§ 92.03 DESIGNATION OF FIRE CODE OFFICIAL.
   The City Fire Chief is hereby designated and appointed to be the “Fire Code
Official” who shall be responsible for enforcing and administering the Code in
accordance with its provisions. References in the Code to “Fire Code Official”
shall be deemed to refer to the said Fire Chief. The Fire Chief, as the Fire
Code Official, shall have the authority to appoint a Deputy Fire Code Official,
other related technical officers, inspectors and other persons or employees to
carry out administration and enforcement responsibilities. Only the Deputy Fire
Code Official is authorized to act in the place and stead of the Fire Chief as
Fire Code Official.
(Ord. 08-051710, passed 5-17-2010)
§ 92.04 CIVIL PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   As an alternative to imposing a civil penalty in a monetary amount as
provided above, the court, upon entrance of judgment against a defendant, may
do one or more of the following:
      (1)   Direct that payment of the civil penalty be suspended or deferred
under conditions imposed by the court;
      (2)   Grant appropriate alternative relief ordering the defendant to
abate or cease the violation;
      (3)   Authorize the city to abate or correct the violation; or
      (4)   Order that the city’s costs for abatement or correction of the
violation be entered as a judgment against the defendant or violator or
assessed against the property where the violation occurred, or both.
   (B)   The word PERSON, as used above, shall mean a natural person, heirs,
executors, administrators, personal representatives, legal representatives,
trustees or assigns and shall also include a firm, partnership, corporation,
trust, estate, co-tenancy, joint tenancy or any other entity, along with the
assigns, successors or agents of any of the aforesaid entities.
(Ord. 08-051710, passed 5-17-2010) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   Besides the enforcement of the provisions of the Code as provided above, the
city may take such other available legal action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation of the Code. A civil action may be commenced and pursued
in the city court for the purpose of preventing, abating, enjoining,
restraining, stopping or correcting any violation of the Code, including, but
not limited to, an order enjoining or preventing the occupancy of land,
building or structure or any act, conditions or conduct constituting such a
violation.
(Ord. 08-051710, passed 5-17-2010)
§ 92.06 LIMITATIONS OF JURISDICTION.
   (A)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary appearing within this
subchapter, the Code or the Administrative Rules of Montana, it is the intent
of the city in adopting this subchapter that this subchapter and the Code shall
apply only within the territorial limits or jurisdictional boundaries of the
said city.
   (B)   The city does not intend to assume, nor does it assume hereby, any
responsibility or authority for the application and/or enforcement of the said
ordinance and/or the Code with respect to any area or place lying outside the
said territorial limits or jurisdictional boundaries of the city.
(Ord. 08-051710, passed 5-17-2010)
STORAGE OF DANGEROUS CHEMICALS AND GASES
§ 92.20 ANHYDROUS AMMONIA.
   No person shall store, or cause to be stored, anhydrous ammonia within the
city. Mobile tanks, nurse tanks or mobile containers transporting or holding
anhydrous ammonia may be parked within the city for a period not in excess of
one hour per occasion.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-1) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.21 FLAMMABLE SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   Definition. FLAMMABLE SUBSTANCES are defined as follows:
      (1)   FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS (class I) as defined in the Uniform Fire Code and
the International Fire Code, 2021 edition, as adopted by the city;
      (2)   COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS (class II and III) as defined in the Uniform
Fire Code and the International Fire Code, 2021 edition, as adopted by the
city; and
      (3)   LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS as defined in the Uniform Fire Code, as
adopted by the city.
   (B)   Prohibited. No aboveground storage tanks, exceeding 2,000 U.S. gallons
water capacity and containing flammable substances, shall be installed,
maintained or operated within the city.
   (C)   Exception.
      (1)   This provision shall not apply to those tanks or facilities that
were in existence as of the effective date of the adoption of the original
ordinance from which this section is derived.
      (2)   However, no additions to or replacements of such existing tanks or
facilities shall be allowed if the additional or replacement tank exceeds the
capacity stated in division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-2) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.22 LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GASES.
   (A)   Definition. LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS is a material which is composed
predominantly of the following hydrocarbons or mixtures of them: propane,
propylene, butane (normal butane or isobutane) and butylenes.
   (B)   Permit required; exception. No person shall use, fill, install or
maintain any liquefied petroleum gas container with a capacity in excess of 120
gallons’ water capacity without first obtaining a permit for such container
from the city. There is excepted from this requirement any container mounted on
a motorized vehicle and used for the transportation of liquefied petroleum gas,
or any container used for fuel to propel a vehicle.
   (C)   Conditions of permit.
      (1)   Permission to maintain, store or use. A permit shall constitute
permission to maintain, store or use liquefied petroleum gas with respect to
the container, or to install such container for storage or use. Such permission
shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any
provisions of the Uniform Fire Code, as adopted by the city. Such permit shall
not take the place of any other license or permit required by law.
      (2)   Term; transferability. A permit issued shall continue to be
effective indefinitely unless sooner revoked or suspended. A permit shall not
be transferable to any other container or to the same container at a different
location. Any change in use, location or operation of the container shall
require a new permit.
      (3)   Maintenance and use. All permits are deemed to contain the
condition that the applicant, or the agents or employees of the applicant,
shall maintain and use the liquefied petroleum gas container in compliance with
the Uniform Fire Code and the International Fire Code, 2021 edition, as adopted
by the city and any other applicable laws and regulations, and in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications.
   (D)   Application for permit; fee. An application for a permit shall be made
to the City Clerk in such form and detail and accompanied by such plans and
information as prescribed by the Council. Each application to be complete must
be accompanied by a fee that shall be determined by the Council.
   (E)   Inspection and retention of permits.
      (1)   Inspection required. Before a permit may be issued, the Fire Chief,
or the Chief’s authorized representative, shall inspect and approve the
container and its installation and location. Article 82, or its successor
article dealing with liquefied petroleum gas containers, of the Uniform Fire
Code and the International Fire Code, 2021 edition, as adopted by the city,
shall be a guide as to the protection and location for a container.
      (2)   Affixed to related container. Permits shall, at all times, be
affixed to the container on the premises designated in the application. The
permit and its related container shall, at all reasonable times, be subject to
inspection by the Fire Chief, or other authorized member of the City Fire
Department; a city police officer; or other person authorized by the city to
conduct such inspection.
   (F)   Revocation or suspension of permit. Any permit issued may be suspended
or revoked when it is determined after a hearing by the Fire Chief that:
      (1)   The permit or container is used by a person other than the person
to whom it was issued, except in the case of a person who is a successor in
interest to the premises on which the permitted container is located and there
is no change in the use or location of the container;
      (2)   The permit is used for a location other than that for which it is
issued;
      (3)   Any of the conditions or limitations under which the permit was
issued has been violated;
      (4)   The holder of the permit fails, refuses or neglects to comply with
any order or notice duly served upon such holder within the time provided in
the order or notice; or
      (5)   There was a false statement or misrepresentation as to a material
fact in the application or plans upon which the permit was based.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-3) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Code hereby
adopted in §§
92.01 through
92.06 or who shall fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to
comply with any order issued or made thereunder by the Fire Code Official or a
court of competent jurisdiction shall be guilty of a municipal infraction or
civil offense. Citations shall be issued and proceedings thereon shall be filed
and conducted in the city court in accordance with §
10.35. Each violation is punishable by a penalty not in excess of $300. The
penalty for a second or subsequent offense involving a similar violation
committed by the same person regarding the same premises and the same hazard
shall not exceed $500. Violations occurring within one year from the previous
court disposition date shall be counted for such second or subsequent offenses
for the purpose of this provision. Each day that any prohibited condition is
maintained or allowed to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   A violation of §
92.20 is a municipal infraction or civil offense. Citations shall be issued and
proceedings thereon shall be conducted in accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-1)
   (C)   A violation of §
92.21 is a municipal infraction or civil offense. Citations shall be issued and
proceedings thereon shall be conducted in accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-2)
   (D)   A violation of §
92.22 is a municipal infraction or civil offense. Citations shall be issued and
proceedings thereon shall be conducted in accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-3)
(Ord. 08-051710, passed 5-17-2010)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
111.   LIQUOR
      
112.   PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Advertising
   
110.01   Consent required
   
110.02   Billboard requirements
 
   
110.99   Penalty
ADVERTISING
§ 110.01 CONSENT REQUIRED.
   No person shall post, paint, tack or otherwise attach any sign, notice,
advertising or other printed or written matter of any kind to any fence, wall,
building or other property without first obtaining consent from the owner of
such property, or an authorized agent. No person shall post, paint, tack or
otherwise attach any sign, notice, advertising or other printed or written
matter of any kind to any electric, telephone or other utility pole.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-1) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.02 BILLBOARD REQUIREMENTS.
   All billboards or signboards in the city shall conform to the following
requirements.
   (A)   The clear posting or painting space on any billboard or signboard
erected upon uprights or other supports extending into the ground shall not be
of inflammable material, such as wood or cloth. All posts used shall not be
less than four inches by six inches and not be placed more than eight feet
apart and extend to the top of the billboard or signboard. There shall not be
less than one brace and one anchor to each post. All anchors shall not be less
than six inches by six inches in size. Each brace shall extend from each post
to its corresponding anchor post and be not less than two inches by six inches
in size.
   (B)   There shall be maintained at the top of every billboard or signboard
in printed letters the name of the person owning or in charge thereof.
   (C)   Every billboard or signboard, whether now or hereafter erected, shall
be securely built, firmly anchored and maintained in a safe condition. All
billboards and signboards must be kept in a sanitary condition.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-2) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter is a municipal infraction or civil offense.
Citations shall be issued and proceedings thereon shall be conducted in
accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-3)
CHAPTER 111: LIQUOR
Section
Licenses
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   License required; fees
   
111.03   Qualifications; classes of licenses
   
111.04   Clerk to issue licenses and collect fees
   
111.05   Term of license
   
111.06   Transfer of license
   
111.07   Display of license
   
111.08   Revocation or suspension
   
111.09   Public display, exhibition or drinking prohibited
Areas of Sale
   
111.20   Definitions
   
111.21   Authorized areas for sale of alcoholic beverages
   
111.22   Distance between business and place of worship
   
111.23   Limited modification intended
 
   
111.99   Penalty
LICENSES
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, also called ethanol, or the hydrated oxide of ethyl.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. A compound produced and sold for human consumption as a
drink that contains more than 0.5% of alcohol by volume. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
shall include any form of alcohol, whether defined as LIQUOR, BEER, WINE or
some other generic type classification.
   BEER. A malt beverage containing not more than 7% of alcohol by weight.
   CONTAINER. Any sort of device that is capable of holding or containing
fluids.
   LIQUOR. An alcoholic beverage, except beer and table wine.
   MALT BEVERAGE. An alcoholic beverage made by the fermentation of an infusion
or decoction, or combination of both, in potable brewing water, of malted
barley with or without hops or their parts or their products and with or
without other malted cereals and with or without the addition of unmalted or
prepared cereals, other carbohydrates or products prepared from carbohydrates
and with or without other wholesome products suitable for human food
consumption.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle propelled by its own power and designed or used to
transport persons or property upon roadways or elsewhere.
   OPEN CONTAINER. A container that is not closed or sealed so that when
inverted, any fluid therein will readily flow out of the container without the
removal of any seal, cap, cover or other device holding such fluid inside such
container. Means a glass, mug, cup or other such similar device used for
holding and/or drinking beverages; a bottle or other such similar device made
of glass, plastic or other material that is not corked, capped, sealed or
similarly closed to prevent spillage or consumption of the beverage therein; a
can or other such similar device made of metal or other material that has been
opened so that it no longer has its original seal and from which a person can
readily consume any beverage therein.
   PUBLIC DISPLAY OR EXHIBITION OF AN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. The carrying,
possession and/or exhibiting of an open container of an alcoholic beverage:
      (1)   In, on or within a public place within the city; or
      (2)   In, on or within a motor vehicle parked, standing or driving upon a
public place.
   PUBLIC DRINKING. The drinking or consuming of an alcoholic beverage in, on
or within a public place within the city, including, but not limited to, such
drinking or consuming conducted within a motor vehicle that is parked or
traveling in, on or within a public place.
   PUBLIC PLACES. All streets, roadways, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots or
unenclosed parking spaces located within the city. The term does not include
premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.
   TABLE WINE. Wine that contains not more than 16% alcohol by volume and
includes cider.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property may be
transported or drawn upon a roadway or elsewhere, except devices moved by
animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   WINE.
      (1)   An alcoholic beverage made from or containing the normal alcoholic
fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe fruit or other agricultural products
without addition or abstraction, except as may occur in the usual cellar
treatment of clarifying and aging, and that contains more than 0.5% but not
more than 24% of alcohol by volume.
      (2)   WINE may be ameliorated to correct natural deficiencies, sweetened
and fortified in accordance with applicable federal regulations and the customs
and practices of the industry. Other alcoholic beverages not defined in this
definition but made in the manner of wine and labeled and sold as wine in
accordance with federal regulations are also WINE and shall be considered WINE.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-1)
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   License required. No person shall sell beer, wine, liquor or any other
alcoholic beverages at retail within the city without obtaining from the city a
license to engage in such business.
   (B)   Exception. This license requirement shall not apply to state
authorized or franchised liquor stores, as provided under state law.
   (C)   Annual fees. Annual fees for such license shall be set by the Council
and shall be payable in advance. Renewal licenses shall be obtained on or
before July 1 of each license year.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-2) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 QUALIFICATIONS; CLASSES OF LICENSES.
   (A)   State license required. No license shall be issued unless the
applicant therefor is authorized and licensed by the State Department of
Revenue to sell alcoholic beverages at retail at the location for which the
city license is sought.
   (B)   Classifications. The classifications for fee purposes shall be as
follows: beer only, wine only, beer and wine, all beverages and non-profit
organizations. The terminology used for such classifications shall be defined
in accordance with state statutes where applicable.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-3)
§ 111.04 CLERK TO ISSUE LICENSES AND COLLECT FEES.
   The application for a license shall be made to the City Clerk. The Clerk is
authorized to collect license fees and issue a license upon payment of the
proper fee and fulfillment of all other requirements stated herein.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-4)
§ 111.05 TERM OF LICENSE.
   The term of the license shall be for one year, with such license commencing
on July 1 of any given year and being effective through June 30 of the
following year. There shall be no proration of licenses in the event a license
is obtained subsequent to July 1 of any given year. There shall be no refund of
license fees in the event a licensee discontinues or ceases the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages prior to the expiration of the license.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-5)
§ 111.06 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A license is not transferable as to location of the licensed business or as
to ownership of the business except as follows.
   (A)   A license may be transferred as to the location in those instances in
which the state authorizes the transfer of the site of the licensed retail
business.
   (B)   A license may be transferred from one owner to another in those
instances in which the state authorizes the transfer of the state issued
license from one owner to another.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-6) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.07 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   All licenses issued hereunder shall be prominently displayed in the licensed
place of business.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-7) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.08 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   If any license issued by the state to sell alcoholic beverages at
retail shall be revoked or suspended by the state, the city license issued
hereunder shall be likewise revoked or suspended for the same period.
   (B)   There shall be no refund of the fees for any period of such revocation
or suspension of the city license.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-8)
§ 111.09 PUBLIC DISPLAY, EXHIBITION OR DRINKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibition. Public drinking or public display or exhibition of an
alcoholic beverage is hereby prohibited as a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Posting required.
      (1)   All bars, stores or other businesses selling alcoholic beverages
shall display by a door thereof, in a conspicuous location, the substantive
wording of this section on a sign. Such sign shall indicate the maximum fine
for a conviction of this section.
      (2)   The following is an example of such sign:
         “Anyone leaving the premises with an open container of an alcoholic
beverage is subject to a $100.00 fine.”
(Prior Code, § 2-1-9) Penalty, see §
111.99
AREAS OF SALE
§ 111.20 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a contrary intent is clearly indicated, the words, phrases or
expressions used in this subchapter shall have the same definitions as such
words, phrases or expressions have in the “Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code”,
contained in MCA Title 16, Chapters 1 through 4 and Chapter 6.
(Ord. 5-030209, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 111.21 AUTHORIZED AREAS FOR SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   Businesses licensed by the state for retail sale of beer, wine, liquor or
other alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall be located only
within those areas of the city that are authorized or zoned for such businesses
in the city code, city ordinances and/or the official city zoning map.
(Ord. 5-030209, passed 3-2-2009) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.22 DISTANCE BETWEEN BUSINESS AND PLACE OF WORSHIP.
   (A)   The premises of a business licensed by the state for retail sale of
beer, wine, liquor or other alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption
shall not be located within 400 feet of and on the same street as a building
used exclusively as a church, synagogue or other place of worship. This
distance shall be measured in a straight line from the center of the nearest
entrance of the place of worship to the nearest entrance of the licensed
premises.
   (B)   This distance rule only applies if the following criteria are met:
      (1)   The entrance doors of the licensed premises and the entrance doors
of the place of worship are situated on the same street;
      (2)   The physical address of the licensed premises is designated as the
same street as the physical address of the place of worship; and
      (3)   The distance, measured in a straight line, from the entrance doors
of the licensed business to the entrance doors of the place of worship is 400
feet or less.
   (C)   If the three-part test in divisions (B)(1), (B)(2) and (B)(3) above is
not met in its entirety, then the distance rule does not apply.
   (D)   The distance between entrance doors is measured by a geometric
straight line, regardless of intervening property and buildings. An entrance is
considered to be a means of ingress to the premises that is generally used by
the public.
(Ord. 5-030209, passed 3-2-2009) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.23 LIMITED MODIFICATION INTENDED.
   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to MCA § 16-3-309 and is intended to
partially supplant or supersede parts of MCA § 16-3-306(1) in the following
limited respects: it modifies the required distance between the premises of a
retail business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises
consumption and a building on the same street used exclusively as a place of
worship. Except for the said modification, no other amendments to MCA § 16-3-
306(1) are intended. The remaining unamended parts of MCA § 16-3-306(1), such
as the required distance from schools, are intended to continue as unaffected
and applicable within the city with no change in their force and effect.
(Ord. 5-030209, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, penalties for the violation of §§
111.01 through
111.09 shall be in accordance with the general penalty found in §
10.99. In addition to, or in place of, any or all criminal actions that may be
undertaken, the city may seek enforcement of division (B) through whatever
civil remedies may be available, including without limitation, the filing of a
civil action for the collection of such license fees that are due.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-10)
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §
111.09 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-9)
CHAPTER 112: PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   License requirement
   
112.03   Application procedure
   
112.04   Standards for issuance
   
112.05   Revocation procedure
   
112.06   Standards for revocation
   
112.07   Appeal procedure
   
112.08   Exhibition of identification
   
112.09   Policy on soliciting
   
112.10   Notice regulating soliciting
   
112.11   Duty of solicitors to ascertain notice
   
112.12   Prohibited solicitation
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler or solicitor as defined in this section.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the city and who, in
the furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure, vehicle or any
place within the city.
   PEDDLER. Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale,
making sales or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the city.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a SOLICITOR is not
a peddler.
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the city.
   (B)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as set from
time to time by the City Council.
   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
   (D)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days after the
date of issuance thereof.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an
application with the City Administrator. This application shall be signed by
the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by the
president if a corporation. The applicant may be requested to provide
information concerning the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the city;
      (3)   The local address of such individual;
      (4)   The permanent address of such individual;
      (5)   The capacity in which such individual will act;
      (6)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation;
      (7)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
applicant’s business;
      (8) The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services to be
offered for sale or delivered;
      (9)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by
sample as well as from stock;
      (10)   If goods, where and by whom such goods are manufactured or grown,
and where such goods are at the time of application;
      (11)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the
business; and
      (12)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual identified in
division (A)(2) through (A)(5) above, or the person identified in division (A)
(6) has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of
each offense and the penalty assessed for each offense.
   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to that
requested under division (A) above:
      (1)   A description of the applicant; and
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall attach to
their application, if required by the city, credentials from the person, if
any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant
to act as such representative.
   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to their
application, in addition to any attachments required under division (C) above,
a statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days prior to
the date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious or
communicable disease.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence that the applicant has done any of the following
will constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors, and the like;
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts.
§ 112.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the City
Administrator after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in §
112.06. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or her last known
address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 112.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or general welfare
of the public.
§ 112.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
112.04 or
112.06 shall have the right to appeal to the City Council. The appeal shall be
taken by filing with the City Council, within 14 days after notice of the
decision has been mailed to such person’s last known address, a written
statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The City Council shall set the
time and place for a hearing, and notice for such hearing shall be given to
such person in the same manner as provided in §
112.05.
   (B)   The order of the City Council after the hearing shall be final.
§ 112.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall
be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more
than one place within the city shall be used to conduct the business licensed,
separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall issue a license to each peddler or
solicitor licensed under this chapter. The license shall contain the words
“Licensed Peddler” or “Licensed Solicitor”, the expiration date of the license
and the number of the license. The license shall be kept with the licensee
during such time as he or she is engaged in the business licensed.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.09 CITY POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the occupants of the
residences in the city shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall
be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.
§ 112.10 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence,
shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four
inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows:
“NO SOLICITORS INVITED”
   (B)   The letters shall be at least one-third-inch in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Chief of Police to
persons requesting, at the cost thereof.
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
§ 112.11 DUTY OF SOLICITORS TO ASCERTAIN NOTICE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the city upon which a residence is located to first examine the notice
provided for in §
112.10 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”, then the solicitor,
whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.12 PROHIBITED SOLICITATION.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in defiance of the notice exhibited
at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
112.10 above.
Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   WEAPONS
      
132.   FIREWORKS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Exposure in food and/or beverage establishments
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 EXPOSURE IN FOOD AND/OR BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EXPOSE. Unclothed or uncostumed or not covered by a fully opaque
material.
      THEATER. Means the following:
         (a)   A building, playhouse, hall or other place having a permanent
stage upon which movable scenery and theatrical or vaudeville or similar
performances are given and permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of
spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage;
         (b)   A building, room, hall or other place whose primary function is
to present movies or motion pictures and which has a permanent movie screen and
permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an
unobstructed view of said screen; or
         (c)   An open air or drive-in movie having a permanently affixed movie
screen and permanently affixed devices for broadcasting the soundtracks of
movies or motion pictures inside of the patrons’ vehicles.
   (B)   Prohibited.
      (1)   It is unlawful, and punishable as a misdemeanor, for any person
who, while acting as a waiter, waitress, entertainer, salesperson or in any
other capacity as an owner, manager or employee, in an establishment which
serves food, beverages or food and beverages, including, but not limited to,
alcoholic beverages, for consumption on the premises of such establishment:
         (a)   To expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum,
anal region or pubic hair region; or
         (b)   To expose any portion of the female breast at or below the
areola thereof.
      (2)   It is unlawful, and punishable as a misdemeanor, for any person to
cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist any person to expose himself or
herself as prohibited in division (B)(1) above.
      (3)   A person shall be deemed a salesperson, waiter, waitress or
entertainer if such person acts in that capacity without regard to whether or
not such person is paid any compensation by the establishment in which the
activity is performed or by any other person.
   (C)   Exemption. This section does not apply to a theater or similar
establishment, which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances or the
presentation of movies.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-1) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99. Each day that such unlawful act or violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-1)
CHAPTER 131: WEAPONS
Section
   
131.01   Definition
   
131.02   Discharge prohibited
   
131.03   Exceptions; permit required
§ 131.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIREARMS. Any instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell or bullets or
other harmful objects by the action of gunpowder exploded within it, or by the
action of compressed air within it, or by the power of springs and including,
but not necessarily limited to, what are commonly known as air rifles, BB guns
and pellet guns.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-1)
§ 131.02 DISCHARGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firearms of any kind or
description within the limits of the city; provided, however, that this shall
not apply to police officers in the discharge of their duties. Any violation of
this section shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-2)
§ 131.03 EXCEPTIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   The Council may, upon application, grant permits to shooting galleries, gun
clubs and others for shooting within the city limits in fixed localities and
under fixed rules. Such permits shall be in writing, attested by the Clerk,
conforming to such requirements as the Council shall demand, and the permit
thus issued shall be subject to revocation, at any time, by action of the
Council. Bows and arrows shall be used only with a back stop and target.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-3)
CHAPTER 132: FIREWORKS
Section
   
132.01   Definitions
   
132.02   Limitation against detonation of fireworks
   
132.03   Permitted times for fireworks detonation
   
132.04   Exemptions
   
132.05   Sale of fireworks prohibited
   
132.06   Display fireworks prohibited
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Plentywood.
   DETONATE or DETONATION. The act of detonating, exploding, firing,
discharging, lighting, setting off or otherwise causing the said detonation,
explosion, firing, discharging, lighting or setting off of fireworks.
   FIREWORKS. Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance,
combination of substances or articles or devices prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect, or both, by combustion, explosion,
deflagration or detonation; and includes, but is not necessarily limited to,
sky rockets, roman candles, daygo bombs, blank cartridges, toy cannons, toy
canes or toy guns in which explosives other than toy paper caps are used, the
type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel them; firecrackers,
torpedoes, fountains, sparklers or other fireworks of like construction; any
fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound; or any tablets or
other device containing any explosive substance; any devices consisting of
combustible or explosive materials detonated for entertainment or amusement
purposes, designed to generate colored lights, smoke, noise or any other
pyrotechnic effects or displays.
(Ord. 22-05172021, passed 5-17-2021)
§ 132.02 LIMITATION AGAINST DETONATION OF FIREWORKS.
   The detonation of fireworks within the city limits is prohibited, except on
the dates and during the times when permitted, as provided in §
132.03.
(Ord. 22-05172021, passed 5-17-2021) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.03 PERMITTED TIMES FOR FIREWORKS DETONATION.
   Fireworks are permitted to be detonated within the city on the following
days of the year, at or during the times specified below:
   (A)   Summer – Fourth of July:
      (1)   From June 24 of each year through July 3 of each year, between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of each of the dates during the said
specified period of time;
      (2)   On July 4 of each year, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and midnight
of the said specified date; and
      (3)   On July 5 of each year, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. of the said specified date.
   (B)   New Year’s Eve:
      (1)   On December 29 and December 30 of each year, between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of each of the said specified dates; and
      (2)   On December 31 of each year, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
midnight of the said specified date.
(Ord. 22-05172021, passed 5-17-2021) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   By state law, the following acts are exempt from the above controls,
prohibitions and regulations within the city when used for the stated bona fide
and legitimate purposes:
   (A)   The use of explosives for industrial purposes, such as blasting or
quarrying, by qualified or licensed personnel;
   (B)   The use of devices by railroads or other transportation agencies for
signal or illumination purposes;
   (C)   Use of blank cartridges for a show or theatrical presentation;
   (D)   Blank cartridges used for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics
or sports;
   (E)   Blank cartridges used by peace officers or for ceremonial purposes by
military or U.S. armed forces veterans organizations; and
   (F)   Use of toy paper caps containing less than one-fourth of a grain of
explosive composition per cap.
(Ord. 22-05172021, passed 5-17-2021) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.05 SALE OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FIREWORKS. Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance,
combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation
and includes sky rockets, Roman candles, dago bombs, blank cartridges, toy
cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives other than toy paper caps
are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel them,
firecrackers, torpedoes, sparklers or other fireworks of like construction, any
fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound or any tablets or
other device containing any explosive substance.
      RETAIL. Relates to the sale of fireworks directly to the consumer or the
person who will use or consume the fireworks.
      SALE. Offering for sale for money or other valuable consideration,
selling, exchanging for any valuable consideration, bartering or giving away
fireworks from an inventory, stock or supply of fireworks that is located
within the city. The term SALE shall also include the storage, presence or
placement of any fireworks within the city when such fireworks are being kept
for eventual sale in the city or elsewhere on a wholesale or retail basis.
      WHOLESALE. Relates to the sales of fireworks to persons for resale to
others, or sales to persons who are not consumers or users of the fireworks
sold. The term also covers sales of fireworks to persons who purchase for
resale to other wholesalers.
   (B)   Prohibition. The sale of fireworks, whether on a wholesale or retail
basis, is prohibited within the city.
   (C)   Exemptions. This prohibition shall not apply to toy paper caps
containing less than one-fourth of a grain of explosive composition per cap or
to the sale of blank cartridges for athletic, sports or theatrical events or
for military or veterans ceremonies or presentations.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-1) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.06 DISPLAY FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibition. DISPLAY FIREWORKS, as defined in division (B) below,
shall not be possessed, stored, kept or placed within the city, with the
exception of the brief and continuous transportation of such fireworks through
the city to or from displays or other locations without any stopping of such
transportation, except for momentary pauses for traffic or traffic signs.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Any small fireworks designed primarily to produce
visible effects by combustion that complies with the current construction,
chemical composition and labeling regulations of the U.S. Consumer Product
Safety Commission for CONSUMER FIREWORKS, as found in the Code of Federal
Regulations. Some small devices designed to produce audible effects are
included, such as whistling devices, ground devices containing 0.8 grains (50
mg) or less of explosive composition (salute powder) and aerial devices
containing two grains (130 mg) or less of explosive composition (salute powder)
per explosive unit.
      DISPLAY FIREWORKS. Large fireworks designed to produce visible or audible
effects for entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration or detonation.
This term includes, but is not limited to, salutes or firecrackers containing
more than two grains (130 mg) of explosive composition (salute powder), aerial
shells containing more than 60 grams (2.1 oz.) of total pyrotechnic and
explosive composition and other display pieces that exceed the limits for
classification as consumer fireworks.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-2) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation
violating §§
132.01 through
132.04 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor criminal offense and, upon conviction,
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
      (2)   Fines shall be imposed as follows:
         (a)   First violation: mandatory minimum fine of $50;
         (b)   Second violation: mandatory minimum fine of $100; and
         (c)   Third or subsequent violation: mandatory minimum fine of $250.
      (3)   For purposes of determining the number of multiple violations, any
violation occurring within one year from the previous court disposition or
conviction date shall be counted for second, third or subsequent violations.
   (C)   A violation of §§
132.05 and
132.06 is a municipal infraction or civil offense. Citations shall be issued
and proceeding thereon shall be conducted in accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-3)
(Ord. 22-05172021, passed 5-17-2021)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
152.   TREES
      
153.   ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Moving Buildings
   
150.01   Permit required
   
150.02   Permit restrictions
   
150.03   Moving without permit
   
150.04   Removal of buildings
   
150.05   Demolition permit required
Corner Lots; Intersections
   
150.20   Obstruction prohibited
   
150.21   Visibility triangle
   
150.22   Sample diagram
 
   
150.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Application for Moving Building Permit
MOVING BUILDINGS
§ 150.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall move, or cause to be moved, into the city, or within
the city, any building unless a permit is obtained.
   (B)   Any person desiring to move into, or move within the city, a building
shall apply to the City Council for a permit and shall furnish a written
statement showing the intended location, dimensions and type of construction,
along with pictures of the said building.
   (C)   If satisfied with such proposed move into or within the city, the
Council shall grant a permit. A fee set by the Council shall be charged for
such permit.
   (D)   A BUILDING shall be as defined in §
153.002.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-1) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.02 PERMIT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued by said City Council to any person for
moving into, or within the city, a building, the placement or design of which
would violate applicable zoning ordinances.
   (B)   Prior to issuance of said permit, an agent of the City Council shall
personally inspect the building unless such inspection is waived by the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-2) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.03 MOVING WITHOUT PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person who is engaged or hired to move a building into, or within
the city, by the owner or agent of owner of such building must first ascertain
from the City Council if the owner or agent of owner has obtained a permit to
move said building.
   (B)   If said owner or agent of owner has not obtained said permit, then
said building shall not be moved until such time as the owner or agent has
secured such permit.
   (C)   The person who is engaged or hired to move the building shall be
subject to the same fines as owner or agent of owner of said building.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-3) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.04 REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Any building moved or brought into the city from without the city
limits without a permit from the City Council shall be immediately removed from
the city.
   (B)   If the owner or agent of the owner of such building shall fail to
remove the same after a three days’ notice from the City Council, then the city
shall move the same at the owner’s expense.
   (C)   Such costs of moving are collectible by the city through a civil
remedy.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-4)
§ 150.05 DEMOLITION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner of premises within the city shall not demolish, tear down or
destroy a building thereon, or cause or allow the same to be done, without
applying for and obtaining from the city a demolition permit.
   (B)   The City Council shall set a fee for such permit.
   (C)   A BUILDING, as used herein, shall be defined according to §
153.002 and shall include, but not be limited to, a part of a building, where
the other part has been previously destroyed or demolished.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-5) Penalty, see §
150.99
CORNER LOTS; INTERSECTIONS
§ 150.20 OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED.
   On a corner lot or a lot comprising an intersection, nothing shall be
erected, placed or allowed to grow so as to materially interfere with or impair
vision between a height of three feet and ten feet above center line street
grades of intersecting streets.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-1) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.21 VISIBILITY TRIANGLE.
   (A)   Maximum height. Within the visibility triangle, no structure,
building, hedge, shrub, fence, tree or other stationary object shall be higher
than three feet.
   (B)   Defined.
      (1)   The visibility triangle is the area bounded by the backside of a
curb and line A in the sample diagram contained in §
150.22.
      (2)   This area is defined by:
         (a)   Fixing a point at the back side of the curb, at the center of
the curb radius;
         (b)   Measuring a distance of 25 feet parallel to the side curbs;
         (c)   Then proceeding at an angle of 90 degrees to the back side of
side curbs; and
         (d)   Connecting the two points to form line A.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-2) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.22 SAMPLE DIAGRAM.
   The sample diagram is included below.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-3)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violations of §§
150.20 through
150.22 are a municipal offense or civil offense. Citations shall be issued and
proceedings thereon shall be conducted in accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-4)
APPENDIX A: APPLICATION FOR MOVING BUILDING PERMIT
 
CITY OF PLENTYWOOD
APPLICATION FOR MOVING PERMIT
 
   Application is made by the undersigned for a permit to move a structure as described below. All of the following information, as well as all accompanying information, is represented to be true
and complete and is submitted for the City’s reliance in considering this request.
   It is understood that permits are issued subject to the condition that any misstatement, expression, or omission of material fact, whether or not known or intended, such as would or might cause a
disapproval of this application, or any material change in the specifications or structure made subsequent to the issuance of the permit, without the approval of the Council, constitutes sufficient
ground for the revocation of such permit.
 
   Moving Application No.                                       Date                            Fee $10.00 Paid           
 
Owner(s)                                                                Mailing Address                                                
 
Proposed Location of Structure                                                                                           
 
Zoning:      R-1                     R-2                     M.H.               
 
C-1                     C-2                     L.I.               
 
TYPE OF BUILDING TO BE MOVED
 
House              IRC Modular House              Garage              Shed              Other             
 
HUD Manufactured Home or Mobile Home                Year             
 
IRC or HUD Documentation Attached             
 
USE – CONSTRUCTION TYPE – DESIGN
 
Principal Use                                       Occupant(s)                Photographs Attached                      
 
Building Size:                Width                Length
 
Building Height                 Ft.      Accessory Building Sidewall Height                Ft.
 
TYPE: Siding                Roofing                Frame                Foundation               
 
Before moving any building into the City of Plentywood, the building may be inspected.
 
SIGNATURE OF OWNER(S):                                                                                                   
 
Approved                Denied                                                                                                   
                           Mayor                  Date
 
Revised 2/21/2012
 
CHAPTER 151: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Definition
   
151.002   Duty to maintain
   
151.003   Reports of unsafe sidewalks
   
151.004   Width, slope and grade
   
151.005   Order to construct, replace or repair
   
151.006   Notice of order
   
151.007   Work performed by city
   
151.008   Duties regarding sidewalk construction, replacement or repair
   
151.009   Order of suspension
   
151.010   Barricades
   
151.011   Wheelchair ramps
   
151.012   Enforcement authorization
   
151.013   Absence of notice of no defense
Excavations
   
151.025   Scope of city’s authority
   
151.026   Definitions
   
151.027   Restoration and filling of excavations
   
151.028   Compliance with safety and health laws
   
151.029   Access to excavation project
   
151.030   Safety measures at work site
Removal of Snow, Ice or Other Materials
   
151.045   Removal required
   
151.046   Prohibited dumping
   
151.047   Responsibility for compliance
   
151.048   Complaints
   
151.049   Absence of notice no defense
Merchandise and Wares
   
151.060   Prohibited
Drainage Ditches
   
151.075   Interference
 
   
151.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 DEFINITION.
   OWNERS, TENANTS, OCCUPANTS and PERSONS, either in the singular or plural
form, shall be construed to include not only natural persons or human beings,
but also companies, corporations, associations, partnerships or other entities.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-1)
§ 151.002 DUTY TO MAINTAIN.
   It is the duty of the owners of all premises within the city to keep the
sidewalks in front of and adjoining their premises in good, safe and
substantial repair and condition. The owners shall see that all breaks and
unsoundness of any character resulting from natural deterioration or any other
cause are repaired or corrected with reasonable dispatch. Where premises are
leased, rented or otherwise occupied by a party who is not the owner, the
aforesaid duties shall be the responsibility of all such non-owner occupants in
addition to being the responsibility of such owner.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-2) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.003 REPORTS OF UNSAFE SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Reports. Reports of unsafe or defective sidewalks shall be directed
toward and received by the City Clerk.
   (B)   Contents of report. All reports shall include at least the following
information: street address adjacent to the sidewalk; the particulars of any
accidents that have occurred by reason of any defective or unsafe conditions;
names and addresses of all injured parties; and the names and addresses of all
witnesses.
   (C)   Investigation. Upon receipt of any such report, the Clerk shall cause
an investigation to be made of the sidewalk. The Clerk shall advise the Mayor
and Council of all reports of defective or unsafe sidewalks and the results of
all investigations conducted thereof.
   (D)   Action of Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council shall review all
such reports and investigation results and, if necessary, cause further
investigations to be conducted. If, in the opinion of the Council, a sidewalk
is unsafe, defective and/or dangerous to passersby or is otherwise in need of
replacement or repair, then the Council may proceed to order such replacement
or repair as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-3)
§ 151.004 WIDTH, SLOPE AND GRADE.
   Sidewalk construction or replacement on improved or graded streets must
conform with the established grade, slope and width.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-4) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.005 ORDER TO CONSTRUCT, REPLACE OR REPAIR.
   (A)   The City Council may order sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters in front of
or adjacent to any lot or parcel of land to be constructed, replaced or
repaired when conditions have become dangerous to pedestrians or when
conditions otherwise make such construction, replacement or repair necessary in
the judgment of the Council.
   (B)   Any such order shall be entered in the minutes of the Council and
shall name the street along which the sidewalk, curb and/or gutter is located;
the number of the block; and the number or description of the lot adjacent to
such ordered work.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-5)
§ 151.006 NOTICE OF ORDER.
   (A)   Written notice. After the making of such order, written notice thereof
shall be given to the owner or holder of record title, or to the agent of the
owner, and to the purchaser under contract for deed of property in front of
which or adjacent to which the sidewalk, curb and/or gutter has been ordered to
be constructed, replaced or repaired.
   (B)   Service of notice. Service of the written notice shall be made by
certified mail, return receipt requested, directed to the owner or agent of the
owner at the owner’s last known address and deposited in the United States Post
Office along with all necessary postage fees prepaid thereon; or by publication
thereof once a week for two successive weeks in the official newspaper of the
city. The date of the service shall, in the case of notice by mail, be deemed
to be the date of the mailing of such notice, or, in the case of service by
publication, the date of the first publication of notice and service shall be
deemed complete on such dates.
   (C)   Contents of notice.
      (1)   The notice shall refer to the order and the date thereof and shall
describe the nature of the work ordered, designating the name of the street
along which the sidewalk, curb and/or gutter is located and specifying the
number of the block and the number or description of the lot or parcel adjacent
to which such work is ordered.
      (2)   The notice shall further state that if the owner or agent of such
owner of the property in front of which or along which the sidewalk, curb and/
or gutter has been ordered constructed, replaced or repaired shall fail, refuse
or neglect to construct, replace or repair such sidewalk, curb and/or gutter
within a period of 30 days from and after the date of service of the notice,
the city shall cause such construction, replacement or repair to be done and
the cost of such work, together with all incidental and necessary costs and
expenses connected therewith (including, without limitation, costs for
engineering, notice, publication, inspection, grade, fill, preparation of
assessment rolls, plans, specifications, superintendence and postage) will be
assessed against the parcel of land or lot in front of which or along which the
sidewalk, curb and/or gutter is situated and that the assessment will become a
lien upon such parcel or lot.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-6)
§ 151.007 WORK PERFORMED BY CITY.
   (A)   Failure to comply. If the owner or agent of the owner of any lot or
parcel of land in front of which or along which a sidewalk, curb and/or gutter
has been ordered constructed, replaced or repaired, as provided herein, shall
fail, neglect or refuse to construct, replace or repair the same within the 30
days from and after the date of service of notice, the City Council may cause
such work to be done by letting a contract for such construction, replacement
or repair.
   (B)   Letting of contract. The contract may be for one or more specified
projects or it may be a general contract for any or all such work that may
arise or be ordered within a period of one year. Any such contract shall be let
to the lowest responsible bidder, in accordance with applicable state law. The
solicitation for bids and the contract shall be subject to and governed by all
applicable state laws pertaining to public contracts or municipal contracts, or
both. The terms of the contract shall be determined by the Council and shall,
without limitation, include such things as a provision for bid bonds,
performance bonds, payment bonds and the amounts thereof; liability insurance;
workers’ compensation; and a provision for indemnification of the city against
any loss or damages caused by the contractor and/or its employees.
   (C)   Assessment of costs. The total cost and expense of the construction,
replacement or repair of any sidewalk, curb and/or gutter caused to be
constructed, replaced or repaired by the Council under this subchapter shall be
assessed as a special assessment against the property, lot or parcel of land in
front of which or along which the sidewalk, curb and/or gutter lies. The
property occupying street corners shall be assessed for that part of any such
sidewalk, curb and/or gutter which is within the street intersection. The total
cost shall include that of the construction, replacement or repair of the
sidewalk, curb and/or gutter, together with all incidental and necessary costs
and expenses connected therewith, including, without limitation, costs for
engineering, notice, publication, inspection, grade, fill, preparation of
assessment rolls, plans, specifications, superintendence and postage.
   (D)   Levy of assessment. The Council shall annually, and before the first
Monday of October of each year, pass and adopt a resolution levying an
assessment and tax against each lot or parcel of land in front of which or
along which sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters have been constructed, replaced or
repaired under orders of the Council. Such resolution shall be in every manner
prepared and certified the same as resolutions levying assessments for the
making of improvements in special improvement districts. Such resolution shall
be delivered to the appropriate county official, who shall collect such
assessments in the same manner as that used in the collection of assessments on
or for improvements in a special improvement district. The collection procedure
for the assessed costs shall unless otherwise provided herein, be the same as
that provided in state law for the collection of assessments for improvements
in special improvement districts.
   (E)   Special fund; warrants.
      (1)   Fund created. There is hereby created a fund to be known as the
Special Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter Fund. All monies hereafter collected from
assessments made for construction, replacement or repair of sidewalks, curbs
and/or gutters ordered by the Council shall be placed to the credit of this
special fund. When any sidewalk, curb and/or gutter is constructed, replaced or
repaired by or under the direction of the Council pursuant to the provisions of
this subchapter, payment for such work shall be made by special warrants drawn
or issued upon this special fund.
      (2)   Insufficient funds.
         (a)   In the event the fund balance is not sufficient to pay such
warrant, such warrant shall be registered in accordance with applicable law and
shall bear interest from the date of such registration until the date the
warrant is called for redemption or payment, as provided by law. The rate of
interest on such warrants shall be three basis points above the New York prime
interest rate level that is in effect as of the date of such warrant.
         (b)   Such NEW YORK PRIME INTEREST is defined as the base rate on
corporate loans posted by at least 75% of the nation’s 30 largest banks.
      (3)   Special warrants. The special warrants shall be substantially in
the following form:
 
CITY OF PLENTYWOOD, MONTANA
SPECIAL SIDEWALK, CURB, AND GUTTER WARRANT
 
No.
 
Presented and Registered
 
                                           , 2                         
Not Paid For Want Of Funds
 
By:                                                  , Treasurer
 
For                                 Date                   , 2        
                                                          $             
Montana State Bank–Plentywood, Montana
 
Pay to the Order of:
 
                                                                     
Signature
 
                                                                     
Signature
 
This Warrant bears interest at the rate of                    percent (         %) per annum from the date of its registration as expressed
hereon, until the date called for redemption by the Treasurer. This Warrant is payable out of money in the City Treasury belonging to the
Special Sidewalk, Curb, and Gutter Fund. The principal and interest of this Warrant are payable at the office of the City Treasurer at
Plentywood, Montana. This Warrant is payable from the collection of a special tax or assessment and is redeemable at the option of the City
of Plentywood, at any time there is money to the credit of the said Special Sidewalk, Curb, and Gutter Fund and in the manner provided for
the redemption of the same.
 
   (F)   Acceptance of warrants by contractor. The special warrants must be
accepted by the contractor as payment in full at their face value. The
contractor will be required to sign a certificate on his or her claim and in
his or her contract that he or she will accept such warrants as settlement in
full on all claims against the city on account of work done or materials used.
   (G)   Assessment lien upon property. The costs and expenses of the
construction, replacement or repair of sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters under
this subchapter shall be a lien upon the lot or parcel of land in front of
which or along which the same is constructed, replaced or repaired. When any
one of the payments assessed and levied by the Council shall become delinquent,
the property against which the same is levied and assessed shall be sold by the
County Treasurer the same as the sale of property for non-payment of
assessments and levies for the making of improvements in special improvement
districts.
   (H)   Payment of assessment and interest.
      (1)   Payment in installments. Such assessments to defray the cost of
construction, replacement or repair of sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters shall be
payable in installments extending over a period of years with the duration for
such payments dependent upon the principal amount of the assessment with
respect to each lot or parcel of land as follows:
 
Principal Amount of Assessment Number of Years for Payments
$0 - $750                      3 years
$750.01 - 2,000                8 years
$2,000.01 or more              12 years
 
      (2)   Method of payment. Payments shall be made in equal annual
installments, together with interest as hereinafter provided. All such
assessments shall be payable to the County Treasurer and shall be payable as
follows:
         (a)   One-half of the payment on or before 5:00 p.m. on November 30 of
each year; and
         (b)   One-half of the payment on or before 5:00 p.m. on May 31 of the
following year.
      (3)   Delinquent payments. In the event assessments are not paid on or
before the said dates, the same shall be subject to the same interest and
penalties for non-payment as delinquent real property taxes under state law.
Such assessments shall bear simple interest and the interest payable with each
installment shall be the interest on the whole amount of the principal balance
of such assessment remaining unpaid, and shall be calculated to January 1 of
year following the year for which such installment is due. Such interest shall
be calculated from the date specified in the resolution, as passed and adopted
by the City Council, levying such assessment. Such assessments may be paid in
full, at any time, by the payment of the whole amount thereof remaining unpaid
together with interest thereon to the date of payment. The interest rate on
such assessments shall be 7% per annum. In the event that registered warrants
are used to pay the costs for the work done, then the interest rate shall be
the same as that paid on such registered warrants.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-7) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.008 DUTIES REGARDING SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION, REPLACEMENT OR REPAIR.
   It shall be the duty of any owner or person constructing, replacing or
repairing a sidewalk, curb and/or gutter to re-set any or all signs or other
appurtenances; to repair or replace any pavement or other street surfacing
material removed or disturbed; and to backfill curbs, sidewalks and streets, as
directed by the city. Any and all costs associated with such construction,
replacement or repair shall be the responsibility of the person performing the
work and the owner of the premises in front of which or along which such work
is being done.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-8) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.009 ORDER OF SUSPENSION.
   When sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters are not being constructed, replaced or
repaired in accordance with this subchapter, the Council has the authority to
order the person doing such work or the owner of the premises in front of or
along which such work is being done to suspend work thereon until such work
shall be made to conform with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-9)
§ 151.010 BARRICADES.
   Persons constructing, replacing or repairing sidewalks are responsible for
using barricades or any other necessary measures to prevent interference with
the project and the workers and for the safety and convenience of the traveling
public.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-10) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.011 WHEELCHAIR RAMPS.
   Any person constructing or replacing a sidewalk shall construct complete
wheelchair ramps at street corners, either as a portion of a new sidewalk
construction or replacement of an existing sidewalk. Complete wheelchair ramps
shall be constructed whenever any portion of the sidewalk is constructed or
replaced within the limits of the curb radius. A wheelchair ramp shall be
constructed in accordance with specifications and standards laid down by the
City Council. Any or all costs associated with such construction shall be the
responsibility of the person performing the construction or the owner of the
premises.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-11) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.012 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORIZATION.
   The Council shall be in charge of the enforcement of this subchapter. The
Council, or any person authorized by it, shall have the authority to do or
perform any or all necessary acts to enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
The City Police Department, or any other person chosen by the Council, shall be
authorized to deliver, serve or provide whatever notices, notices to appear,
summons, warrants or other documents necessary to enforce or effectuate the
terms of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-12)
§ 151.013 ABSENCE OF NOTICE OF NO DEFENSE.
   Absence of notice to owners, tenants or occupants to repair or remedy a
dangerous sidewalk or to remove obstructions therefrom shall not constitute a
valid excuse against the payment of any fine or damage by such owners, tenants
or occupants, and nothing contained in any of the sections of this subchapter
shall be so construed as to release the owners, tenants or occupants of real
estate from the duty of keeping the sidewalks in front of or adjoining their
respective premises, at all times, in a safe and passable condition, and in
good and thorough state of repair, but such duty is hereby expressly enjoined
and imposed upon all such owners, tenants and occupants.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-13)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 151.025 SCOPE OF CITY’S AUTHORITY.
   All excavations within publicly dedicated places are subject to the consent
of the city, with the exception that excavations within the rights-of-way or
thoroughfares owned and controlled by the state shall be governed by applicable
state rules and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-1)
§ 151.026 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXCAVATION. Any excavating, digging or opening up, including, but not
limited to, such things as EXCAVATIONS for connecting, installing, repairing,
replacing, removing, placing or locating a water or sewer main, service line,
pipe or other conduit; electrical, telephone, telecommunications, transmission
or cable television lines; for providing, maintaining or locating any other
utility service or apparatus; or an excavation for any other useful, reasonable
and lawful purpose.
   PUBLICLY DEDICATED. A place shall be regarded as PUBLICLY DEDICATED when
shown to be dedicated for the use of the public according to instruments or
records filed with the County Clerk and Recorder.
   PUBLICLY DEDICATED PLACE. Includes any street, road, alley, right-of-way or
other place that is dedicated for the use of the public.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-2)
§ 151.027 RESTORATION AND FILLING OF EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   Duty to restore. All excavation sites in publicly dedicated places
shall be restored. Restoration shall include refilling holes, resurfacing
excavated portions and any and all other things necessary to return the site to
a condition that approximates, as reasonably close as possible, the condition
existing prior to the excavation work. All surplus and waste materials shall be
removed from the site. All holes or trenches shall be refilled in a good and
workpersonlike manner with proper material to prevent sinking, caving in,
settling or deterioration of the surface. The surface of the affected area
shall be made substantially even with the surrounding surface. Where a paved or
asphalt surface has been excavated, the affected area shall be resurfaced with
asphalt or cement when conditions allow such work to be done. Any settling or
sinking attributable to an excavation shall be filled or corrected.
   (B)   Standards for work. Specifications, requirements and standards for
refilling, backfilling, resurfacing or other restoration necessary for
excavations in publicly dedicated places shall be adopted by the City Council
and shall govern and apply to all restorations of such excavations. Excavations
in areas of state highways or rights-of-way shall be restored according to any
standards and regulations of the state governing such excavations.
   (C)   Owner responsibility. The owner of the real property for whose benefit
the excavation was done is responsible for the refilling, resurfacing or other
restoration of excavations in publicly dedicated places, as provided in this
subchapter. Multiple owners of such property are jointly and severally
obligated. Where ownership of the benefitted property is transferred prior to
completion of restoration, the responsibility for restoration is held jointly
and severally by those who owned the property at the time of the excavation and
subsequent owners acquiring the property prior to the completion of
restoration. When the excavation is done by a utility and not on behalf of or
for the benefit of a particular parcel or landowner, the utility shall be
responsible for the restoration of the excavation as provided in this
subchapter.
   (D)   City may do work. Where an excavation in a publicly dedicated place
has not been restored, or sufficiently restored, or where the surface has
settled following excavation, the city may, upon the failure of the responsible
owner(s) to complete the restoration work, cause such corrective work to be
done or completed. The responsible property owner(s) shall be billed for such
work and shall be obligated to the city for its payment. When the excavation is
done by a utility and not on behalf of or for the benefit of a particular
parcel or landowner, the utility shall be responsible for the completion of the
restoration and, upon its failure to do so, shall be billed for such work by
the city and obligated for its payment.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-3) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.028 COMPLIANCE WITH SAFETY AND HEALTH LAWS.
   All persons, while engaged in any excavation work in any publicly dedicated
places, shall comply with all federal or state laws, rules, standards or
regulations concerning hazards or conditions affecting workers’ safety and
health that apply to such work.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-4) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.029 ACCESS TO EXCAVATION PROJECT.
   The city’s personnel shall be allowed access to all excavation projects in
any publicly dedicated places at reasonable times and under reasonable
conditions for the purpose of observing or inspecting such projects to
determine compliance with applicable city laws, requirements and standards.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-5) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.030 SAFETY MEASURES AT WORK SITE.
   (A)   All excavations in publicly dedicated places shall be sufficiently and
properly barricaded to prevent motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic from
interfering with or endangering those working on the project and for the safety
and convenience of the traveling public. Where necessary, signs shall be placed
to warn passersby and to direct traffic around or away from the site. Such
signs shall comply with applicable uniform signage standards and requirements.
   (B)   Appropriate measures shall be taken by those engaged in the excavation
work to prevent unpermitted access to equipment and to keep children or
unauthorized parties away from the project area at all times.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-6) Penalty, see §
151.999
REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE OR OTHER MATERIALS
§ 151.045 REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   Sidewalks in front of and adjoining premises within the city limits
shall be kept clean and safe for pedestrians. Snow, ice, mud, slush or other
impediments to safe and convenient foot travel shall be removed as soon as is
reasonably possible and, in any event, no later than 24 hours after such snow,
ice, slush, mud or other impediment accumulates thereon.
   (B)   Continuous accumulation of snow or other impediments shall be
prevented.
   (C)   When from freezing of water, snow or slush thereon, or by reason of
compaction resulting from the wear of foot travel, or from any cause
whatsoever, sidewalks in front of or adjoining premises within the city are
rendered dangerous, unsafe or difficult to the passage of pedestrians, it is
the duty of the owner and, where applicable, the tenant or occupant of such
premises to forthwith remedy such conditions by sprinkling sand or de-icing
agents on the sidewalks or by chipping, or by any other safe and efficient
means.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-1) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.046 PROHIBITED DUMPING.
   (A)   Snow, ice, slush or mud removed from sidewalks, driveways, parking
lots or areas on private property shall not be dumped, deposited or placed onto
or into sidewalks, streets, alleys or rights-of-way of the city, except when
the snow or other such materials are removed from premises that have no
immediately available lawn, yard or parking space where the same can be
deposited.
   (B)   When snow or the other materials are removed from sidewalks or other
portions of private property, it is the responsibility of the owner and, where
applicable, the tenant or occupant to see that such snow or other materials are
placed or deposited within the confines of the premises from which they are
removed, except where there is no immediately available lawn, yard or private
parking space on which to place the same.
   (C)   Any snow or other materials that are deposited into or onto streets or
alleys shall be done so in such manner as to not create a hazard to vehicles,
vehicle traffic or pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-2) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.047 RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   All owners of premises or property within the city shall comply with
the terms and duties set forth in §§
151.060 and
151.999(E).
   (B)   In those instances where the premises is leased or rented or is
otherwise occupied by persons or entities other than the owner, it shall also
be the duty and responsibility of such tenant or occupant to comply with the
requirements and obligations of §§
151.060 and
151.999(E).
(Prior Code, § 7-3-3)
§ 151.048 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Filing with Clerk. All reports or complaints of snow, ice, slush or
other impediments that have not been removed from a sidewalk, as required
herein, shall be directed toward and received by the City Clerk.
   (B)   Investigation. Upon receiving such a report or complaint, the Clerk
shall cause an investigation to be made of the sidewalk that is the subject of
such report or complaint.
   (C)   Notice to remove. Upon determining from such investigation that snow
or other such materials have not been removed as required, or that the
conditions of the sidewalk, because of the presence of snow or other materials,
is unsafe for pedestrian travel, the Clerk shall provide a written notice to
the tenant, occupant and/or owner of the premises on which the sidewalk fronts
or abuts to remove such snow, ice, slush or other impediment within 24 hours
from and after the receipt of such notice. Such notice may either be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested or personally delivered by a member of
the personnel of the city.
   (D)   Failure to comply; removal by city. Upon failure of the owner, tenant
or occupant to comply with the request in such notice, or in the event that
such notice cannot be sent or delivered for whatever reason despite a
reasonably diligent attempt to do so, or in the event that especially hazardous
conditions require emergency action making such prior notice not feasible or
practical, the city shall have the right to cause the removal of such snow,
ice, slush or other impediment. The city may either contract or engage such
removal work to be done by a party not otherwise employed by the city or may
have such work done by personnel of the city.
   (E)   Costs.
      (1)   Assessed. All costs of the removal of such snow or other materials,
together with all costs incurred by the city to provide notice, shall be
assessed, as a special tax or assessment, against the lot on which the sidewalk
fronts or abuts. In the event that such removal work is done by city personnel,
the costs of labor shall be prorated based upon the wage or salary of the
personnel involved as calculated by the City Clerk.
      (2)   Liability for payment. The owner of such lot shall be personally
liable for the amount of such costs, in addition to the assessment as provided
herein. Multiple owners shall be liable for such costs on a joint and several
basis. The city shall collect such costs either through the assessment
procedure or through judicial proceedings filed in an appropriate court, or
both.
      (3)   Statement of costs. A statement of such costs shall be sent to the
owner, and an additional copy may be sent to the tenant or occupant. The costs
shall be paid within 30 days of the date of the statement.
      (4)   Failure to pay. If such costs are not paid within the said 30 days,
then and in that event such costs shall be subject to collection by either a
civil action filed in the appropriate court or by assessment against the
property, or both. The City Clerk shall keep a record of all delinquent
accounts for the payment of such costs.
      (5)   Resolution of Council; lien. At least once a year, the Clerk shall
prepare and present to the Council a resolution containing a list of all
delinquent accounts regarding such charges for costs of removal. Such
resolution shall identify the parcel or lot having the sidewalks abutting or
fronting thereon from which such snow, ice or other materials were removed and
shall state the names of all owners thereof and the costs of such removal
together with the balance owing. Upon passage of such resolution by the
Council, the assessments therein provided shall constitute a lien upon and
against such parcel or lot described. A copy of such resolution shall be
certified by the City Clerk and Treasurer and shall be forwarded to the County
Assessor and Treasurer for collection in the same manner as other taxes
together with all remedies for enforcement as with other taxes.
      (6)   Interest. Upon non-payment within 30 days of the date of the
statement, such costs for removal, or the balances thereof, shall bear and
accrue interest from the date of the initial statement at the rate provided by
law for delinquent real property taxes.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-4)
§ 151.049 ABSENCE OF NOTICE NO DEFENSE.
   Absence of notice to owners, tenants or occupants to remove snow, ice or
other impediments from sidewalks fronting or abutting their premises shall not
constitute a valid excuse or defense against the payment of any fine, damages
or assessments by such owners, tenants or occupants; and nothing contained in
any of the preceding sections shall be so construed as to release the owners,
tenants or occupants of real estate from the duty of keeping the sidewalks in
front of and abutting their respective premises in a clean and safe condition,
but such duty is hereby expressly enjoined and imposed upon all such owners,
tenants and occupants.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-5)
MERCHANDISE AND WARES
§ 151.060 PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, any
merchandise, wares or goods for sale on a public sidewalk in the city, except
in the instance of any city-wide promotional event wherein the Council has
given prior approval for such use of public sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-1) Penalty, see §
151.999
DRAINAGE DITCHES
§ 151.075 INTERFERENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, interfere with or tamper
with any drainage ditch within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 9-5-1) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violations of §§
151.001 through
151.013 are a municipal infraction or civil offense. Citations shall be issued
and proceedings thereon shall be conducted in accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-14)
   (C)   (1)   Violations of §§
151.025 through
151.030 are a municipal infraction or civil offense. Citations shall be issued
and proceedings thereon shall be conducted in accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-7)
      (2)   In addition to other penalties provided, the city may take such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of §§
151.025 through
151.030. In the case of an excavation being conducted or completed in violation
of this subchapter, the Council may initiate any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful excavation or the completion thereof; to
prevent, restrain, enjoin, correct or abate such violation; or to prevent any
illegal, unsafe or detrimental act, condition or conduct on or about such
excavation project or site in violation of §§
151.025 through
151.030.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-8)
   (D)   Violations of §§
151.045 through
151.049 are a municipal infraction or civil offense. Citations shall be issued
and proceedings thereon shall be conducted in accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-6)
   (E)   Violations of §
151.060 are a municipal infraction or civil offense. Citations shall be issued
and proceedings thereon shall be conducted in accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-2)
   (F)   Violations of §
151.075 are a municipal infraction or civil offense. Citations shall be issued
and proceedings thereon shall be conducted in accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 9-5-2)
CHAPTER 152: TREES
Section
   
152.01   Definition
   
152.02   Duty to trim
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OWNER. Any occupant, tenant or lessee of the real property in addition to
the owner.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-1)
§ 152.02 DUTY TO TRIM.
   The owner of any real property shall trim all trees, shrubbery and hedges
situated or growing thereon so that branches thereof do not overhang or extend
into sidewalks, streets and alleys and interfere with pedestrian or motor
vehicle traffic. The owner of real property shall trim all trees, hedges and
shrubbery situated or growing thereon so that the branches thereof do not
impair or interfere with the view at intersections or on streets or otherwise
interfere with the safe movement of pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-2) Penalty, see §
152.99
Cross-reference:
   Prohibited obstructions, see §
150.20
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter are a municipal infraction or civil offense.
Citations shall be issued and proceedings thereon shall be conducted in
accordance with §
10.35.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-3)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Construction of words
   
153.002   Definitions
Zoning Map and Districts
   
153.015   Zoning map
   
153.016   Interpretation of district boundaries
   
153.017   District classifications
R-1 Low Density Requirements
   
153.030   Intent
   
153.031   Permitted uses
   
153.032   Lot area
   
153.033   Height
   
153.034   Lot frontage
   
153.035   Yards
   
153.036   Accessory buildings and structures
   
153.037   Yard encroachments
R-1A Low Density with Modified Setback
   
153.050   Intent
   
153.051   Permitted use
   
153.052   Lot area
   
153.053   Height
   
153.054   Lot frontage
   
153.055   Yards
   
153.056   Accessory buildings and structures
   
153.057   Yard encroachments
R-2 High Density Residential
   
153.070   Intent
   
153.071   Permitted uses
   
153.072   Lot area
   
153.073   Height
   
153.074   Lot frontage
   
153.075   Yards
   
153.076   Accessory buildings and structures
   
153.077   Yard encroachments
M-H Mobile Home Park District
   
153.090   Intent
   
153.091   Permitted uses
   
153.092   Other laws
   
153.093   Design standards
   
153.094   Design standards for other uses
C-1 Central Business District
   
153.105   Intent
   
153.106   Permitted uses
   
153.107   Lot area
   
153.108   Building height
   
153.109   Yards
   
153.110   Off-street parking and loading
C-2 Highway Business District
   
153.125   Intent
   
153.126   Permitted uses
   
153.127   Lot area
   
153.128   Yards
   
153.129   Building height
   
153.130   Off-street parking and loading
L-I Light Industrial District
   
153.145   Intent
   
153.146   Permitted uses
   
153.147   Prohibited uses
   
153.148   Lot area and width
   
153.149   Yards
   
153.150   Building height
   
153.151   Off-street parking and loading
Off-Street Parking and Loading
   
153.165   Intent
   
153.166   Requirements
   
153.167   Joint use
   
153.168   Spaces required
   
153.169   Off-street loading
Signs
   
153.180   Applicability
   
153.181   General requirements
   
153.182   Residential uses
   
153.183   Churches; other public institutions
   
153.184   Highway signs
   
153.185   Commercial districts
   
153.186   Industrial districts
Supplementary Regulations
   
153.200   Fences and walls
   
153.201   Basements
   
153.202   Access
   
153.203   Outside storage
   
153.204   Home occupations
   
153.205   Transition zone
   
153.206   Annexation of additional territory
   
153.207   Purpose and intent of zoning
Accessory Structures
   
153.220   Accessory structure permitted
   
153.221   Definitions
   
153.222   Discretion in granting exception and appeal
   
153.223   Yard setback requirements
   
153.224   Size restrictions
Non-Conforming Rights
   
153.235   Non-conforming; definition
   
153.236   Non-conforming lots
   
153.237   Non-conforming uses
   
153.238   Elimination of non-conforming uses
   
153.239   Non-conforming structures
   
153.240   Maintenance
   
153.241   Mobile homes as non-conforming uses
   
153.242   Dwellings as non-conforming uses
Board of Adjustment
   
153.255   Created
   
153.256   Membership; appointment; term; compensation
   
153.257   Officers and proceedings
   
153.258   Office
   
153.259   Powers and duties
   
153.260   Procedure
   
153.261   Hearing and notice
   
153.262   Criteria for granting variance
   
153.263   Conditions for approval
   
153.264   Definition of public interest
   
153.265   Appeals
   
153.266   Time decision effective
Amendments and Changes
   
153.280   Initiation
   
153.281   Investigation
   
153.282   Hearing
Administration and Enforcement
   
153.295   Administer
   
153.296   Notification of violations; corrective action
   
153.297   Zoning permit requirement
   
153.298   Application, review and permit issuance
   
153.299   Expiration of zoning permit
   
153.300   Conformity of construction and use
   
153.301   Schedule of fees, charges and expenses
   
153.302   Compliance regarding violations
 
   
153.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Application for Zoning Permit
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS.
   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular
number shall include the plural and the plural the singular.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-1)
§ 153.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING AND STRUCTURE. An attached or detached subordinate
building or structure on the same lot as, or part of, the main building, and
occupied by or devoted to a use incidental to the main use.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use subordinate to the main use on a lot and for purposes
customarily incidental to those of the main use.
   ALLEY. A narrow serviceway providing a secondary public means of access to
abutting properties.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE AREA OR ESTABLISHMENT. See definition of GARAGE, REPAIR.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. Any building or premises used for the dispensing
or sale of automobile fuels, lubricating oil or grease, tires, batteries or
minor automobile accessories. Services offered may include the installation of
tires, batteries and minor accessories; minor automobile repairs; and greasing
or washing of individual automobiles. When sales, services and repairs as
detailed here are offered as incidental to the conduct of a parking garage, the
premises shall be classified as a parking garage. This definition includes
gasoline service station.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a building partly underground and having at least
one-half of its height below the average finished grade adjoining the building.
   BOARDING, LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE. A building, or portion thereof, other
than a hotel, where lodging and/or meals for two or more unrelated persons are
provided for compensation.
   BUILDING. Any structure designed or intended for support, enclosure and/or
shelter of persons, animals, chattels or property.
   BUILDING AREA. The portion of the lot that can be occupied by structures,
excluding the front, rear and side yards.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average elevation
of the finished grade adjoining the building to the highest point of the coping
of a flat roof, the deck line of a mansard roof or to the mean height level
between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
   CLINIC. A building designed and used for the medical, dental or surgical
diagnosis or treatment of patients under the care of doctors and/or nurses.
   COVERAGE. The percent of the plot or lot area covered by the building’s
area.
   DISTRICT, ZONE. An area within the city and jurisdictional area of the size
and shape shown on the official zoning map in which the regulations governing
the area, height and use of buildings and associated lots are the same.
   DRIVE IN EATING ESTABLISHMENTS. A building or structure from which persons
are served prepared food and drink in their automobile or at curbside, but
which may or may not have an area for customers to receive and/or eat food
outside of an automobile.
   DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for
residential occupancy and providing housekeeping facilities. As used in this
chapter, the term DWELLING shall refer to single-family, two-family or multi-
family buildings, along with modular homes or mobile homes. The term does not
include hotels, motels, boarding or lodging houses, campgrounds, facilities for
recreational vehicles or trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles,
pickup campers, motor homes, tents or any type of mobile living quarters not
qualifying as a mobile home.
      (1)   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, designed
for and occupied by three or more families living independently of each other,
including apartment houses.
      (2)   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building designed for and occupied
exclusively by one family.
      (3)   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A building designed for and occupied
exclusively by two families living independently of each other.
   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood or marriage or
a group of not more than four persons who need not be related by blood or
marriage living together as a single housekeeping unit.
   FRONT LOT LINES. The boundary line separating the lot from the street as
officially platted or shown in the records of the County Clerk and Recorder.
Where a lot has more than one adjacent street, the FRONT LOT LINE shall be that
which has the narrowest street frontage.
   GARAGE, PARKING. A building, or portion of a building, except any herein
defined as a PRIVATE GARAGE or as a REPAIR GARAGE, used for the storage of
motor vehicles, or where any such vehicles are kept for remuneration or hire,
in which any sale of gasoline, oil and accessories is only incidental to the
principal use.
   GARAGE, REPAIR. A building or space for the repair or maintenance of motor
vehicles, but not including factory assembly of such vehicles, auto wrecking
establishments, machine shops or junkyards. This definition includes automobile
service areas and establishments.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation which is carried on in a dwelling unit.
   HOME; REST, CONVALESCENT, FOR THE AGED. A home operated similarly to a
boarding house but not restricted to any number of guests or guest rooms, and
in which nursing, dietary and other personal services are furnished to
convalescents, invalids and aged persons, but in which homes are kept no
persons suffering from an acute mental sickness or from a contagious or
communicable disease, and in which homes are performed no surgery or other
primary treatments such as are customarily provided in hospitals and in which
no persons are kept or served who normally would be admitted to a mental
hospital.
   HOSPITAL. An establishment which provides accommodations, facilities and
services over a continuous period of 24 hours for observation, diagnosis and
care of two or more individuals, not related by blood or marriage to the
operator, who are suffering from illness, injury, deformity or abnormality, or
from any condition requiring obstetrical, medical or surgical services.
   HOTEL; MOTEL. Any building or portion thereof containing five or more rooms
that are rented or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping
purposes for compensation, whether the compensation be paid directly or
indirectly. A central kitchen and dining room and accessory shops and services
catering to the general public can be provided. Not included are institutions
housing persons under legal restraint or requiring medical attention or care.
   JUNKYARD. Land or buildings where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are
brought, sold, stored, exchanged, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled,
including, but not limited to, scrap, metal, rags, paper, hides, rubber
products, glass products, lumber products and products resulting from the
wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles.
   KENNEL. A place where three or more dogs or cats are kept whether as pets or
commercially.
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a principal
building for the parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise and which has direct access from a public street or alley.
   LOT. Land held as an individual unit of ownership shown on a certificate of
survey, subdivision plat, deed or other instrument of record. This definition
includes the words PLOT, PIECE and PARCEL.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection.
   LOT, DEPTH OF. The mean distance between the front and rear lot lines.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
   LOT, LINES. The lines bounding a lot as described on the deed or other
record of conveyance, or recorded plat or survey.
   LOT, WIDTH OF. The mean width measured at right angles to its depth.
   MACHINE SHOP. A place for the repair of mechanical equipment, including, but
not limited to, automobiles, trucks, farm equipment and construction equipment
where major repairs, fabrication of parts and fabrication of equipment are
usual items of business.
   MOBILE HOME. A factory built single-family dwelling unit, designed for human
occupancy, larger than 256 square feet, which is wholly or in substantial part
built at an off-site location and designed for transportation on its own
chassis, or a removable chassis, to a building site. The unit may be used, or
designed to be used, with or without a permanent foundation so that it can
either be moved from time to time or can be set on a permanent foundation. The
unit may contain one or more components that can be retracted for towing
purposes and subsequently expanded for additional capacity; or two or more
units separately towable but designed to be joined into one integral unit; or
it may be comprised of a single unit. MOBILE HOMES are sometimes referred to as
“manufactured” homes or housing. MOBILE HOMES are not built in compliance with
the Uniform Building Code or the International Residential Code. MOBILE HOMES
must be built in compliance with or according to the applicable federal
manufactured home construction and safety standards and requirements adopted by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, which is known as the
“HUD Code”. A MOBILE HOME must have a HUD insignia on the structure that
certifies that it has been built in accordance with the “HUD Code”. Applicants
seeking a zoning permit for a MOBILE HOME STRUCTURE must submit, with such
application, satisfactory proof that the structure is built in compliance with
the HUD Code.
   MOBILE HOME LOT. A designated portion of a mobile home park designed for the
accommodation of one mobile home and its accessory buildings or structures for
the exclusive use of the occupants.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile homes,
occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether
or not a charge is made for accommodation.
   MOBILE HOME STAND. The area of a mobile home lot which has been prepared for
the placement of a mobile home.
   MODULAR BUILDING UNIT. A factory-built structure intended to be transported
to a site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. A unit may be used by
itself or may be incorporated with one or more other similar units in final
assembly at the building site. The structure may be used for commercial,
residential or industrial purposes depending upon the permitted uses assigned
to the zoning district where it is to be located. Modular homes or modular
units to be used for residential purposes are permitted only in residential
zoning districts: R-1, R-2 or MH. Modular units to be used for commercial or
industrial purposes are permitted only in C-1, C-2 or L-1 zoning districts. A
MODULAR BUILDING UNIT and the component systems (electrical, plumbing,
mechanical, heating) shall be constructed in accordance with the minimum
standards and specifications applicable to factory-built modular buildings set
by the Building Codes Bureau of the State Department of Labor and Industry for
the particular structure in question. A MODULAR BUILDING UNIT must bear a State
Insignia of Approval certifying that the structure, together with its component
systems (heating, plumbing, electrical and mechanical), are constructed in
compliance with the codes and standards adopted by the state and applicable to
factory built modular buildings or structures. Depending upon the type of
structure and its intended use, a modular building shall meet the requirements
of the latest applicable edition, as adopted by the state, of either the
International Residential Code (IRC) or the International Building Code (IBC).
Modular buildings intended to serve as single-family or two-family dwellings
shall comply with the International Residential Code, as adopted in accordance
with the rules and standards administered by the State Building Codes Bureau.
MODULAR BUILDINGS to be used for multi-family dwellings of a greater number
shall comply with the current applicable edition of either the International
Residential Code or the International Building Code, depending upon the
requirements of the State Building Codes Bureau and regulations. Applicants
seeking a zoning permit from the city for a MODULAR STRUCTURE must submit, with
such application, satisfactory proof that the structure is built in compliance
with the required code specifications and standards applicable to that
particular structure according to the state laws and regulations as
administered by the State Building Codes Bureau.
   OFF-STREET PARKING. Parking facilities for vehicles on other than a public
street or alley.
   PRIMARY USE. The principal or predominant use to which a lot or piece of
property is or may be devoted and to which all other uses on the premises are
accessory.
   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. Offices maintained and used as a place of business by
persons engaged in a profession.
   RESTAURANT. A public eating house which does not provide curbside or in
automobile food service.
   SCHOOL. Elementary, junior or senior high, including public, private or
parochial. An institution of learning which offers instruction in the several
branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools by
the Board of Education.
   SHALL. Mandatory and not directory.
   SIDE STREET. Any street being intersected by an alley at a right angle.
   SIGNS. Any outdoor advertising having a permanent location on the ground or
attached to or painted on a building, including bulletin boards, billboards and
poster boards, or any device designed to inform or attract attention.
   STORY. The portion of a building, other than a basement, included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if
there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling
next above it.
   STREET. Any thoroughfare or public space which has been dedicated to public
or private use as the principal means of access to properties.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. The modification of a building or structure that
changes its exterior dimensions or its roof line(s).
   STRUCTURE. That which is constructed or erected at a fixed location on the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground by
permanent means, such as a foundation, but may rest on the ground with or
without blocks, skids, boards or other means of support. A STRUCTURE includes,
but is not necessarily limited to, buildings, mobile homes, modular building
unit, sheds, kennels, garages, walls, fences, signs, billboards, carports,
breezeways and decks.
   TEMPORARY. Not having or requiring permanent attachment to the ground or
involving structures, which have no required permanent attachment to the
ground.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed
to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having
a body length not exceeding 32 feet while in transit and licensed as such.
   USE. The purpose for which land or a building structure thereon is designed,
arranged, intended or maintained or for which it is or may be used or occupied.
   USE, ACCESSORY. See definition of ACCESSORY USE.
   VARIANCE. The means by which an adjustment is made in the application of the
specific regulations of this chapter to a particular piece of property.
   VETERINARY CLINIC. A building or premises for the medical or surgical
treatment of animals or pets, including dogs and cats; veterinary hospitals,
including the boarding of hospitalized animals, but excluding the boarding of
animals not subjected to medical or surgical treatment.
   WELDING SHOP. A place of business where welding and cutting are the major
means of accomplishing repairs or fabricating metal items.
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with the principal building, unoccupied
or unobstructed by any portion of a structure, except as otherwise provided by
this chapter.
      (1)   FRONT YARD. An open space extending across the full width of the
front of the lot from the front line of the building proper to the front lot
line, and occupied only by covered steps and open porches.
      (2)   REAR YARD. An open, unoccupied space between the rear line of a
building and rear lot line for the full width of the lot and unoccupied except
by accessory buildings.
      (3)   SIDE YARD. An open space extending from the side building line to a
side lot line running between the front yard and the rear yard.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-2) (Ord. 9-080210, passed 8-2-2010; Ord. 10-080210, passed
8-2-2010; Ord. 11-080210, passed 8-2-2010; Ord. 12-080210, passed 8-2-2010)
Cross-reference:
   Home occupations, see §
153.204
ZONING MAP AND DISTRICTS
§ 153.015 ZONING MAP.
   The city is hereby divided into districts, or zones, as shown on the
official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-1)
§ 153.016 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply.
   (A)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately the center
lines of streets or highways, street lines or highway rights-of-way lines, such
center lines, street lines or highway rights-of-way lines shall be construed to
be such boundaries.
   (B)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
   (C)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to the center lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be
construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated
on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined
by the scale of the map.
   (D)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are
different from those shown on the official zoning map, or where circumstances
arise not covered by the rules above, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret
the district boundaries.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-2)
§ 153.017 DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided and classified
into the following use districts:
   (A)   R-1 Low Density Residential;
   (B)   R-1A Low Density with Modified Setback;
   (C)   R-2 High Density Residential;
   (D)   M-H Mobile Home Park District;
   (E)   C-1 Central Business District;
   (F)   C-2 Highway Business District; and
   (G)   L-I Light Industrial District.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-3)
R-1 LOW DENSITY REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.030 INTENT.
   The R-1 Single- and Two-Family Dwelling District is established for the
purpose of low density dwelling control and to allow certain public facilities.
It is intended that no use be permitted in this district that will tend to
devalue property for residential purposes or interfere with the health, safety,
order or general welfare of persons residing in the district. Regulations are
intended to control density of population and to provide adequate open space
around buildings and structures in the district to accomplish these purposes.
(Prior Code, § 10-2A-1)
§ 153.031 PERMITTED USES.
   In an R-1 zone, no building or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged, intended or
designed for other than one of the uses listed below:
   (A)   Accessory uses and buildings to uses listed in this section;
   (B)   Churches or similar places of worship;
   (C)   Home occupations by permission of City Council;
   (D)   Public parks, playgrounds, recreation areas and community buildings
owned and operated by a public agency;
   (E)   Signs;
   (F)   Single-family dwellings;
   (G)   Telephone exchanges, electric substations, regulator stations or other
public utilities where no public business, repair or storage facilities are
maintained;
   (H)   Temporary structures incidental to construction work, but only for the
period of such work;
   (I)   Two-family dwellings; and
   (J)   Permitted uses shall include modular building units, but not mobile
homes.
(Prior Code, § 10-2A-2) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.032 LOT AREA.
   The minimum lot area shall be not less than 5,000 square feet for a single-
family dwelling. For a two-family dwelling (duplex), there shall be a minimum
lot area of 7,000 square feet.
(Prior Code, § 10-2A-3) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.033 HEIGHT.
   No building shall exceed 35 feet in height nor more than two stories in
height, except for one or more of the following uses or exceptions: chimneys,
cooling towers, elevator headhouse, fire towers, monuments, stage towers or
scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers, spires, church steeples,
radio and television towers or necessary mechanical appurtenances may be
erected to exceed the maximum height limitation if approved by the Board of
Adjustment.
(Prior Code, § 10-2A-4) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.034 LOT FRONTAGE.
   There shall be a minimum lot frontage of not less than 60 feet.
(Prior Code, § 10-2A-5) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.035 YARDS.
   (A)   Front yards. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than 25 feet. However, in blocks where residential buildings have been erected
on 40% or more of the lots, the front yard shall not be less than the average
front yard thus established; provided that no front yard shall be less than 25
feet nor more than 35 feet for interior lots and not less than 20 feet for
corner lots. Where buildings front on a side street (a street not parallel to
the alley), the front yard shall have a depth of not less than ten feet.
   (B)   Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
20 feet. When a building fronts on a side street, the rear yard may be reduced
to ten feet. When the two side yards have a combined depth of ten feet or
greater, the rear yard depth may be reduced to ten feet.
   (C)   Side yards.
      (1)   A side yard abutting an interior lot line shall have a depth of not
less than eight feet. Where a building fronts on a side street (a street not
parallel to the alley or the street on which the interior lots front), the
setbacks for the side yards shall be as follows:
         (a)   The setback for the side yard adjacent to the street on which
the interior lots front shall be the same as what would be required for the
front yard if the building fronted on the street on which the interior lots
front; and
         (b)   The setback of the other side yard or the one adjacent to the
alley shall be the same as what would be required for the rear yard if the
building fronted on the street on which the interior lots front.
      (2)   Where a building on a corner lot fronts on the street parallel to
the alley or on the street on which the interior lots front, the side yard not
abutting an interior lot line and abutting the street not parallel to the alley
shall have a minimum depth of ten feet.
(Prior Code, § 10-2A-6) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.036 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   When an accessory building or structure is attached to the main
building, the extreme portion of the roof overhang shall be not less than eight
feet back from the side property line. Where an accessory building or structure
is located in the rear of the front lot line by 50 feet or more and is not
closer than 12 feet from any building used for residential purposes on the same
or adjoining property, it may be placed so that the most exterior portion of
the building or structure is not closer than two feet from the side property
line. In all cases, the building shall be no closer than two feet from the rear
property line.
   (B)   In the case of corner lots, the most exterior portion of an accessory
building or structure, whether or not it is attached to the main building,
shall be no closer than ten feet from the property line on the side street (the
street not parallel to the alley) and no closer than 20 feet from the property
line on the street parallel to the alley.
      (1)   Consistency with residential district. Accessory buildings and
structures shall not be inconsistent with the established and prevailing
patterns and character of construction, architectural design and appearance of
other existing buildings and structures in the neighborhood. Accessory
buildings or structures whose overall or dominant construction, architectural
design or appearance is more characteristic of or identifiable with industrial,
commercial or agricultural buildings or structures shall be considered
inconsistent with the district’s intended use and shall not be allowed.
      (2)   Size limitations. Accessory buildings or structures, including, but
not limited to, garages, shall not exceed the following sizes with respect to
the corresponding size of the lot on which they are situated:
 
Lot Size                Maximum Building Size
0 - 10,000 square feet  1,200 square feet
Over 10,000 square feet 1,600 square feet
 
      (3)   Sidewall height limitations. The exterior sidewalls of accessory
buildings or structures, including, but not limited to, garages, shall not
exceed a height of ten feet. Sidewalls shall be measured from the ground to the
roof line whether or not the roof has an overhang or eave.
      (4)   Established principal use. An accessory building or structure is an
attached or detached subordinate building or structure on the same lot as, or
part of, the main building and occupied by or devoted to a use incidental to
the main use. An accessory use is a use that is subordinate to the main use on
a lot and for purposes customarily incidental to those of the main use.
Accessory buildings or structures are not permitted unless the lot has a main,
principal or primary building or structure having a bona fide principal, main
or primary use. A lot having a principal or main building or structure with a
principal or primary use that is proven to be established and currently active
on a bona fide basis shall be considered as having a bona fide principal use. A
residence shall be considered a bona fide principal use if the dwelling is
actually occupied on a bona fide basis by at least one natural person who is a
bona fide permanent resident of the lot.
      (5)   Multi-level or multi-use accessory structures. The definitions,
restrictions and criteria for permitting accessory buildings or structures in
residential areas, including, but not limited to, those governing appearance,
size and sidewall height, shall apply to and include buildings or structures
having one level or part thereof devoted to a main or non-accessory use and
another level or part thereof devoted to an accessory use, such as a building
serving primarily as a garage, shop or vehicle storage on the ground level and
having bedrooms, recreational rooms or other living space on the second or
upper level.
(Prior Code, § 10-2A-7) (Ord. 4-120406, passed 12-4-2006; Ord. 12-080210,
passed 8-2-2010) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.037 YARD ENCROACHMENTS.
   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed by any
part of any structure with the exception of the following:
   (A)   Projection of sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features
which do not project more than 12 inches from the principal building;
   (B)   Open, unenclosed porch or uncovered steps may project into the front
yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet;
   (C)   Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental features, which
do not extend more than three feet above the floor level of the ground story
may project into a required rear yard; provided these projections be at least
five feet from the property line; and
   (D)   Driveways, parking spaces, sidewalks, uncovered patios and terraces of
noncombustible materials and ornamental objects are allowed in all yards.
(Prior Code, § 10-2A-8) Penalty, see §
153.999
R-1A LOW DENSITY WITH MODIFIED SETBACK
§ 153.050 INTENT.
   The R-1A Single- and Two-Family Dwelling District (Low Density with Modified
Setback) is established for the purpose of low density dwelling control and to
allow certain public facilities, as with R-1, but to provide for a lesser side
setback minimum distance. It is intended that no use be permitted in this
district that will tend to devalue property for residential purposes or
interfere with the health, safety, order or general welfare of persons residing
in the district. Regulations are intended to control density of population and
to provide adequate open space around buildings and structures in the district
to accomplish these purposes.
(Prior Code, § 10-2B-1)
§ 153.051 PERMITTED USE.
   In an R-1A zone, no building or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged, intended or
designed for other than one of the uses listed below:
   (A)   Accessory uses and buildings to uses listed in this section;
   (B)   Churches or similar places of worship;
   (C)   Home occupations by permission of City Council;
   (D)   Public parks, playgrounds, recreation areas and community buildings
owned and operated by a public agency;
   (E)   Signs;
   (F)   Single-family dwellings;
   (G)   Telephone exchanges, electric substations, regulator stations or other
public utilities where no public business, repair or storage facilities are
maintained;
   (H)   Temporary structures incidental to construction work, but only for the
period of such work;
   (I)   Two-family dwellings; and
   (J)   Permitted uses shall include modular building units, but not mobile
homes.
(Prior Code, § 10-2B-2) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.052 LOT AREA.
   The minimum lot area shall be not less than 5,000 square feet for a single-
family dwelling. For a two-family dwelling (duplex), there shall be a minimum
lot area of 7,000 square feet.
(Prior Code, § 10-2B-3) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.053 HEIGHT.
   No building shall exceed 35 feet in height nor more than two stories in
height, except for one or more of the following uses or exceptions: chimneys,
cooling towers, elevator headhouses, fire towers, monuments, stage towers or
scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers, spires, church steeples,
radio and television towers or necessary mechanical appurtenances may be
erected to exceed the maximum height limitation if approved by the Board of
Adjustment.
(Prior Code, § 10-2B-4) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.054 LOT FRONTAGE.
   There shall be a minimum lot frontage of not less than 60 feet.
(Prior Code, § 10-2B-5) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.055 YARDS.
   (A)   Front yards. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than 25 feet. However, in blocks where residential buildings have been erected
on 40% or more of the lots, the front yard shall not be less than the average
front yard thus established; provided that no front yard shall be less than 25
feet, nor more than 35 feet for interior lots, and not less than 20 feet for
corner lots. Where buildings front on a side street (a street not parallel to
the alley), the front yard shall have a depth of not less than ten feet.
   (B)   Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
20 feet. When a building fronts on a side street, the rear yard may be reduced
to ten feet. When the two side yards have a combined depth of ten feet or
greater, the rear yard depth may be reduced to ten feet.
   (C)   Side yards.
      (1)   A side yard abutting an interior lot line shall have a depth of not
less than four feet. Where a building fronts on a side street (a street not
parallel to the alley or the street on which the interior lots front), the
setbacks for the side yards shall be as follows:
         (a)   The setback for the side yard adjacent to the street on which
the interior lots front shall be the same as what would be required for the
front yard if the building fronted on the street on which the interior lots
front; and
         (b)   The setback of the other side yard or the one adjacent to the
alley shall be the same as what would be required for the rear yard if the
building fronted on the street on which the interior lots front.
      (2)   Where a building on a corner lot fronts on the street parallel to
the alley or on the street on which the interior lots front, the side yard not
abutting an interior lot line and abutting the street not parallel to the alley
shall have a minimum depth of ten feet.
(Prior Code, § 10-2B-6) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.056 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   When an accessory building or structure is attached to the main
building, the extreme portion of the roof overhang shall be not less than four
feet back from the side property line. Where an accessory building or structure
is located in the rear of the front lot line by 50 feet or more and is not
closer than 12 feet from any building used for residential purposes on the same
or adjoining property, it may be placed so that the most exterior portion of
the building or structure is no less than two feet from the side property line.
In all cases, the building shall be no closer than two feet from the rear
property line.
   (B)   In the case of corner lots, the most exterior portion of an accessory
building or structure, whether or not it is attached to the main building,
shall be no closer than ten feet from the property line on the side street (the
street not parallel to the alley) and no closer than 20 feet from the property
line on the street parallel to the alley.
      (1)   Consistency with residential district. Accessory buildings and
structures shall not be inconsistent with the established and prevailing
patterns and character of construction, architectural design and appearance of
other existing buildings and structures in the neighborhood. Accessory
buildings or structures whose overall or dominant construction, architectural
design or appearance is more characteristic of or identifiable with industrial,
commercial or agricultural buildings or structures shall be considered
inconsistent with the district’s intended use and shall not be allowed.
      (2)   Size limitations. Accessory buildings or structures, including, but
not limited to, garages, shall not exceed the following sizes with respect to
the corresponding size of the lot on which they are situated:
 
Lot Size                Maximum Building Size
0-10,000 square feet    1,200 square feet
Over 10,000 square feet 1,600 square feet
 
      (3)   Sidewall height limitations. The exterior sidewalls of accessory
buildings or structures, including, but not limited to, garages, shall not
exceed a height of ten feet. Sidewalls shall be measured from the ground to the
roof line whether or not the roof has an overhang or eave.
      (4)   Established principal use. An accessory building or structure is an
attached or detached subordinate building or structure on the same lot as, or
part of, the main building and occupied by or devoted to a use incidental to
the main use. An accessory use is a use that is subordinate to the main use on
a lot and for purposes customarily incidental to those of the main use.
Accessory buildings or structures are not permitted unless the lot has a main,
principal or primary building or structure having a bona fide principal, main
or primary use. A lot having a principal or main building or structure with a
principal or primary use that is proven to be established and currently active
on a bona fide basis shall be considered as having a bona fide principal use. A
residence shall be considered a bona fide principal use if the dwelling is
actually occupied on a bona fide basis by at least one natural person who is a
bona fide permanent resident of the lot.
      (5)   Multi-level or multi-use accessory structures. The definitions,
restrictions and criteria for permitting accessory buildings or structures in
residential areas, including, but not limited to, those governing appearance,
size and sidewall height, shall apply to and include buildings or structures
having one level or part thereof devoted to a main or non-accessory use and
another level or part thereof devoted to an accessory use, such as a building
serving primarily as a garage, shop or vehicle storage on the ground level and
having bedrooms, recreational rooms or other living space on the second or
upper level.
(Prior Code, § 10-2B-7) (Ord. 4-120406, passed 12-4-2006; Ord. 12-080210,
passed 8-2-2010) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.057 YARD ENCROACHMENTS.
   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed by any
part of any structure with the exception of the following:
   (A)   Projection of sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features
which do not project more than 12 inches from the principal building;
   (B)   Open unenclosed porch or uncovered steps may project into the front
yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet;
   (C)   Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental features which
do not extend more than three feet above the floor level of the ground story
may project into a required rear yard; provided these projections be at least
five feet from the property line; and
   (D)   Driveways, parking spaces, sidewalks, uncovered patios and terraces of
non-combustible materials and ornamental objects are allowed in all yards.
(Prior Code, § 10-2B-8) Penalty, see §
153.999
R-2 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
§ 153.070 INTENT.
   The R-2 zone is intended for the purpose of allowing high residential
density land use with the commingling of compatible single-family and two-
family dwellings, apartments, home occupations and community facilities yet
retaining the basic residential quality.
(Prior Code, § 10-2C-1)
§ 153.071 PERMITTED USES.
   In an R-2 zone, no building or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged, intended or
designed for other than one of the uses listed below:
   (A)   Accessory uses to the uses listed below;
   (B)   Any use permitted in the R-1 and R-1A zones;
   (C)   Clubs and fraternity houses;
   (D)   Home occupation by permission of City Council;
   (E)   Hospitals, homes for the aged;
   (F)   Lodging and boarding houses;
   (G)   Multiple-family dwellings (apartment houses);
   (H)   Schools and other public buildings; and
   (I)   Permitted uses shall include modular building units, but not mobile
homes.
(Prior Code, § 10-2C-2) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.072 LOT AREA.
   The minimum lot area shall be not less than 5,000 square feet for a single-
family dwelling. For a two-family dwelling (duplex), there shall be a minimum
lot area of 7,000 square feet. For multiple-family dwellings (three or more
units), there shall be a minimum lot area of 9,000 square feet, plus an
additional 500 square feet for each additional unit above the minimum of three
units provided that only 50% of the lot area is covered by the structure.
(Prior Code, § 10-2C-3) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.073 HEIGHT.
   No building shall exceed 45 feet in height nor more than three stories in
height, except chimneys, cooling towers, elevator headhouse, fire towers,
monuments, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental
towers, spires, church steeples, radio and television towers or necessary
mechanical appurtenances, may be erected to exceed the maximum height
limitation if approved by the Board of Adjustment.
(Prior Code, § 10-2C-4) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.074 LOT FRONTAGE.
   There shall be a minimum lot frontage of not less than 60 feet.
(Prior Code, § 10-2C-5) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.075 YARDS.
   (A)   Front yards. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than 25 feet. However, in blocks where residential buildings have been erected
on 40% or more of the lots, the front yard shall not exceed the average front
yard line thus established; provided that no front yard shall be less than 15
feet for interior lots and not less than 20 feet for corner lots. Where
buildings front on a side street (a street not parallel to the alley), the
front yard shall have a depth of not less than ten feet.
   (B)   Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
20 feet. When a building fronts on a side street, the rear yard may be reduced
to ten feet. When the two side yards have a combined depth of ten feet or
greater, the rear yard depth may be reduced to ten feet.
   (C)   Side yards.
      (1)   A side yard abutting an interior lot line shall have a depth of not
less than four feet. Where a building fronts on a side street (a street not
parallel to the alley or the street on which the interior lots front), the
setbacks for the side yards shall be as follows.
         (a)   The setback for the side yard adjacent to the street on which
the interior lots front shall be the same as what would be required for the
front yard if the building fronted on the street on which the interior lots
front.
         (b)   The setback of the other side yard or the one adjacent to the
alley shall be the same as what would be required for the rear yard if the
building fronted on the street on which the interior lots front.
      (2)   Where a building on a corner lot fronts on the street parallel to
the alley or on the street on which the interior lots front, the side yard not
abutting an interior lot line and abutting the street not parallel to the alley
shall have a minimum depth of ten feet.
(Prior Code, § 10-2C-6) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.076 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   When an accessory building or structure, such as a garage, is attached
to the main building, the extreme portion of the roof overhang shall be not
less than four feet back from the side property line. Where an accessory
building or structure is located in the rear of the front lot line by 50 feet
or more and is not closer than 12 feet from any building used for residential
purposes on the same or adjoining property, it may be placed so that the most
exterior portion of the building or structure is no less than two feet from the
side property line. In all cases, the building or structure shall be no closer
than two feet from the rear property line.
   (B)   In the case of corner lots, the most exterior portion of an accessory
building or structure, whether or not it is attached to the main building,
shall be no closer than ten feet from the property line on the side street (the
street not parallel to the alley) and no closer than 20 feet from the property
line on the street parallel to the alley.
      (1)   Consistency with residential district. Accessory buildings and
structures shall not be inconsistent with the established and prevailing
patterns and character of construction, architectural design and appearance of
other existing buildings and structures in the neighborhood. Accessory
buildings or structures whose overall or dominant construction, architectural
design or appearance is more characteristic of or identifiable with industrial,
commercial or agricultural buildings or structures shall be considered
inconsistent with the district’s intended use and shall not be allowed.
      (2)   Size limitations. Accessory buildings or structures, including, but
not limited to, garages, shall not exceed the following sizes with respect to
the corresponding size of the lot on which they are situated:
 
Lot Size                Maximum Building Size
0 - 10,000 square feet  1,200 square feet
Over 10,000 square feet 1,600 square feet
 
      (3)   Sidewall height limitations. The exterior sidewalls of accessory
buildings or structures, including, but not limited to, garages, shall not
exceed a height of ten feet. Sidewalls shall be measured from the ground to the
roof line whether or not the roof has an overhang or eave.
      (4)   Established principal use. An accessory building or structure is an
attached or detached subordinate building or structure on the same lot as, or
part of, the main building and occupied by or devoted to a use incidental to
the main use. An accessory use is a use that is subordinate to the main use on
a lot and for purposes customarily incidental to those of the main use.
Accessory buildings or structures are not permitted unless the lot has a main,
principal or primary building or structure having a bona fide principal, main
or primary use. A lot having a principal or main building or structure with a
principal or primary use that is proven to be established and currently active
on a bona fide basis shall be considered as having a bona fide principal use. A
residence shall be considered a bona fide principal use if the dwelling is
actually occupied on a bona fide basis by at least one natural person who is a
bona fide permanent resident of the lot.
      (5)   Multi-level or multi-use accessory structures. The definitions,
restrictions and criteria for permitting accessory buildings or structures in
residential areas, including, but not limited to, those governing appearance,
size and sidewall height, shall apply to and include buildings or structures
having one level or part thereof devoted to a main or non-accessory use and
another level or part thereof devoted to an accessory use, such as a building
serving primarily as a garage, shop or vehicle storage on the ground level and
having bedrooms, recreational rooms or other living space on the second or
upper level.
(Prior Code, § 10-2C-7) (Ord. 4-120406, passed 12-4-2006; Ord. 12-080210,
passed 8-2-2010) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.077 YARD ENCROACHMENTS.
   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed by any
part of any structure with the exception of the following:
   (A)   Projection of sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features,
which do not project more than 12 inches from the principal building;
   (B)   Open, unenclosed porch or uncovered steps may project into the front
yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet;
   (C)   Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental features which
do not extend more than three feet above the floor level of the ground story
may project into a required rear yard; provided these projections be at least
five feet from the property line; and
   (D)   Driveways, parking spaces, sidewalks, uncovered patios and terraces of
noncombustible materials and ornamental objects are allowed in all yards.
(Prior Code, § 10-2C-8) Penalty, see §
153.999
M-H MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT
§ 153.090 INTENT.
   The intent of this subchapter is to provide for mobile home park development
at appropriate locations and to establish standards for development in order to
integrate mobile homes into an area without adversely affecting surrounding
properties and to provide safeguards for residents of mobile homes.
(Prior Code, § 10-2D-1)
§ 153.091 PERMITTED USES.
   In an M-H zone, no building or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged, which is arranged, intended or
designed for other than one of the uses listed below:
   (A)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the permitted
uses; no part of any park shall be used for non-residential purposes, except
such uses that are required for direct servicing and well being of park
residents and for management and maintenance of the park. Nothing in this
subchapter shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a mobile home located on
a mobile home stand and connected to the pertinent utilities;
   (B)   Any use permitted in the R-1, R-1A and R-2 zones;
   (C)   Mobile home parks;
   (D)   Mobile homes; and
   (E)   Signs in accordance with §§
153.180 through
153.186.
(Prior Code, § 10-2D-2) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.092 OTHER LAWS.
   The regulations in this district shall not be interpreted so as to supersede
or amend any state or federal regulations pertaining to mobile home park
development. These regulations are intended to be supplemental to other
established mobile home park regulations and their amendments. When the
standards and regulations in this district are more restrictive than other
established standards and regulations, the more restrictive shall be used.
(Prior Code, § 10-2D-3) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.093 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Any person desiring to enlarge or establish a mobile home park shall meet or
exceed the following design standards.
   (A)   Lot size. The minimum lot area per mobile home site shall be 5,000
square feet, including underground utility easements, private drives and
parking spaces, but excluding street rights-of-way.
   (B)   Lot arrangement. Mobile home lots shall be arranged to permit
practical placement and removal of mobile homes.
   (C)   Setbacks.
      (1)   Boundary. All mobile homes shall be located at least 25 feet from
any property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway right-of-
way and at least 15 feet from other boundary lines of the park.
      (2)   Street. The mobile home stand must be located at least ten feet
from the street that serves it.
   (D)   Lot limits. The limits of each mobile home lot shall be clearly marked
on the ground by permanent flush stakes, markers or other suitable means.
Location of lot limits on the ground shall be approximately the same as shown
on the accepted plans. The degree of accuracy obtainable by working with a
scale on the plan and then a tape on the ground is acceptable. Precise
engineering of lot limits is not required either on the plans or on the ground.
   (E)   Stand coverage. A mobile home stand may not occupy more than one-third
of the area of its lot. The total area occupied by a mobile home and its roofed
accessory buildings and structures may not exceed two-thirds of the area of a
lot.
   (F)   Distance between homes. No mobile home or its attached structures,
such as awnings or carports, may be located within 20 feet of any other mobile
home or its attached structures.
   (G)   Accessory structures. No detached structure, such as a storage shed,
may be located within five feet of any mobile home or its attached structures.
   (H)   Parking. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for each mobile home lot. Parking may be in tandem. The driveway shall be
located to allow for convenient access to the mobile home. The minimum width
shall be ten feet. One guest parking space for each ten mobile home lots shall
be provided. Group parking may be provided.
   (I)   Anchors and stands.
      (1)   Stands. Each mobile home shall provide for a minimum of three
reinforced concrete ribbons or pads at ground level. Piers and footings
sufficient to carry the weight of the mobile home should be installed under the
steel frame. A maximum pier spacing of ten feet with the end piers being no
farther than five feet from the end of the unit. Each concrete ribbon or pad
shall be a minimum of three feet long, 16 inches wide and four inches thick.
These ribbons may run crosswise of the home or at right angles to the mobile
home.
      (2)   Anchors. It is essential that some means be provided to anchor
mobile homes and secure them against forces exerted by the wind. Anchors such
as cast in place concrete, screw augers or arrowhead anchors should be used
unless the mobile home is attached permanently to a foundation.
   (J)   Skirting and canopies.
      (1)   Skirting. Each mobile home shall be skirted within 30 days after
said mobile home is moved upon a lot within the mobile home park. Said skirting
shall be of a fire resistant material similar to that of which the mobile home
exterior is constructed and attached to the mobile home.
      (2)   Canopies and awnings. Canopies and awnings may be attached to any
mobile home, if fashioned securely and if of a design that will blend with the
mobile home.
   (K)   Other standards. Standards for utilities, streets, parks and the like
shall be designed in accordance with local and state subdivision and health
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 10-2D-4) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.094 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OTHER USES.
   The lot area, height, yards and other requirements for uses other than
mobile home parks shall be the same as for the R-2 District. Mobile homes
placed on individual lots shall not be less than 12 feet by 60 feet in size.
Mobile homes placed on individual lots shall be skirted within 30 days after
the mobile home is moved upon the lot. Skirting shall be of a fire resistant
material similar to that of which the mobile home exterior is constructed.
(Prior Code, § 10-2D-5) Penalty, see §
153.999
C-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 153.105 INTENT.
   The intent of this district is to provide a central area for the community’s
business, government, service and cultural activities. Uses within this
district should be appropriate to such a focal center with inappropriate uses
being excluded. Room should be provided in appropriate areas for logical and
planned expansion of the present district.
(Prior Code, § 10-2E-1)
§ 153.106 PERMITTED USES.
   In a C-1 zone, no building or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged, which is arranged, intended or
designed for other than one of the uses listed below:
   (A)   Automobile parking lots and garages;
   (B)   Bakeries;
   (C)   Barber and beauty shops and other personal services;
   (D)   Bars, cocktail lounges;
   (E)   Bus stations;
   (F)   Clinics;
   (G)   Dressmaking;
   (H)   Financial institutions;
   (I)   Florists;
   (J)   Hotels and motels;
   (H)   Laundry and dry cleaning;
   (I)   Meeting and lodge halls;
   (J)   Museums, libraries and galleries;
   (K)   Printing offices;
   (L)   Private schools, such as dance, business, secretarial and technical,
but not private or public elementary or secondary schools;
   (M)   Professional and business offices;
   (N)   Public offices;
   (O)   Repair services for clothes, dolls, small appliances, glasses and such
other items;
   (P)   Restaurants and cafes;
   (Q)   Retail sales, such as clothing, candy, drugstores, hardware,
furniture, jewelry, food stores, but excluding heavy machinery and implements,
motorized vehicles (automobiles, boats, cycles), mobile homes;
   (R)   Signs;
   (S)   Temporary buildings for and during construction only;
   (T)   Theaters, except drive in theaters;
   (U)   Uses customarily accessory to those listed; and
   (V)   Wholesale establishments that use samples, but do not store stock on
premises.
(Prior Code, § 10-2E-2) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.107 LOT AREA.
   No minimum lot area prescribed.
(Prior Code, § 10-2E-3)
§ 153.108 BUILDING HEIGHT.
   The maximum building height in this district shall be 45 feet.
(Prior Code, § 10-2E-4) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.109 YARDS.
   No minimum yards prescribed.
(Prior Code, § 10-2E-5)
§ 153.110 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided in accordance with §§
153.165 through
153.169.
(Prior Code, § 10-2E-6) Penalty, see §
153.999
C-2 HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 153.125 INTENT.
   The intent of this district is to provide for a broad range of retail and
service functions especially those needing orientation to major thoroughfares.
(Prior Code, § 10-2F-1)
§ 153.126 PERMITTED USES.
   In a C-2 zone, no building or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged, which is arranged, intended or
designed for other than one of the uses listed below:
   (A)   Accessory uses to the uses listed below;
   (B)   All uses permitted in the C-1 District;
   (C)   Automobile, boat and motorcycle sales and service areas;
   (D)   Frozen food storage and locker rental;
   (E)   Gasoline service stations;
   (F)   Heavy equipment and implement sales and service;
   (G)   Liquor stores;
   (H)   Mobile home and travel trailer sales and service;
   (I)   Mortuaries;
   (J)   Recreation and amusement facilities (bowling alleys, billiard halls,
skating rinks and the like);
   (K)   Research and development institutions;
   (L)   Restaurants, cafes and drive in eating establishments;
   (M)   Theaters, including drive in theaters;
   (N)   Tire and muffler sales and services;
   (O)   Travel trailer parks; and
   (P)   Veterinary clinics.
(Prior Code, § 10-2F-2) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.127 LOT AREA.
   Lot area for this district shall not be less than 7,500 square feet.
(Prior Code, § 10-2F-3) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.128 YARDS.
   Every lot shall have the following minimum yards:
 
Front yard None
Rear yard  10 feet
Side yards None
 
Prior Code, § 10-2F-4)
§ 153.129 BUILDING HEIGHT.
   Maximum building height in this district shall be 35 feet.
(Prior Code, § 10-2F-5) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.130 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided in accordance with §§
153.165 through
153.169.
(Prior Code, § 10-2F-6) Penalty, see §
153.999
L-I LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 153.145 INTENT.
   The intent of this district is to provide for the community’s needs for
wholesale trade, storage and warehousing, trucking and transportation
terminals, light manufacturing and similar activities. The district should be
oriented to major transportation facilities, yet arranged to minimize adverse
effects on residential developments; therefore, some type of screening may be
necessary. Residences shall not be permitted in this district, except as a
permitted use under §
153.146.
(Prior Code, § 10-2G-1)
§ 153.146 PERMITTED USES.
   In an L-I zone, no building or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged, which is arranged, intended or
designed for other than one of the uses listed below:
   (A)   Accessory uses;
   (B)   Building contractors establishments;
   (C)   Building materials sales;
   (D)   Bulk storage of petroleum products;
   (E)   Cabinet shops;
   (F)   Enclosed warehousing;
   (G)   Flour and feed mills;
   (H)   Food processing plants;
   (I)   Gasoline service stations;
   (J)   Grain elevators;
   (K)   Greenhouses;
   (L)   Machine shops and welding shops;
   (M)   Manufacturing of light consumer goods, i.e., electronic equipment,
appliances, furniture, beverages;
   (N)   Mobile home parks (as regulated in §§
153.090 through
153.094);
   (O)   Mobile homes.
      (1)   Not including modular homes or dwellings or site-built dwellings.
      (2)   Where applicable or needed, standards from the R-2 or “High Density
Residential” zoning classification shall be used.
   (P)   Outside storage, if accessory to permitted use and if screened from
street and surrounding properties by solid fence or dense plantings at least
six feet high;
   (Q)   Paint shops;
   (R)   Repair and service establishments for light consumer goods, i.e.,
automobiles, appliances, furniture;
   (S)   Sign shops;
   (T)   Signs;
   (U)   Temporary buildings for and during construction only;
   (V)   Truck and rail terminal facilities; and
   (W)   Vehicle and boat sales.
(Prior Code, § 10-2G-2) (Ord. 20-080717, passed 8-7-2017) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.147 PROHIBITED USES.
   All uses of land, buildings and structures or industrial processes that are
noxious or injurious by reason of production or emission of dust, smoke or
refuse matter, odor, gas fumes, noise, vibration or substances or conditions.
Before issuing a zoning permit, the City Council may request that the Board of
Adjustment review the proposed use to determine whether the use is noxious or
injurious.
(Prior Code, § 10-2G-3) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.148 LOT AREA AND WIDTH.
   Lot area for this district shall not be less than 7,500 square feet.
(Prior Code, § 10-2G-4) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.149 YARDS.
   Every lot shall have the following minimum yards:
 
Front yard 20 feet
Rear yard  None1
Side yard  None1
1 Note: When a lot is adjacent or faces upon another zone, the yards shall
meet the requirements of the adjoining zone, and buildings shall be screened
with either a decorative fence or plantings. When a lot abuts a street or
alley on either side or the rear, a yard of at least 15 feet shall be provided
on the street or alley side.
 
(Prior Code, § 10-2G-5) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.150 BUILDING HEIGHT.
   Maximum building height in this district shall be 45 feet.
(Prior Code, § 10-2G-6) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.151 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided in accordance with §§
153.165 through
153.169.
(Prior Code, § 10-2G-7) Penalty, see §
153.999
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§ 153.165 INTENT.
   This subchapter is intended to reduce the need for parking on streets and
the traffic congestion and hazards caused thereby, and to provide for off-
street parking adequate to each type of development, in terms of both amount
and location.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-1)
§ 153.166 REQUIREMENTS.
   The plan of the proposed parking area shall be submitted to the City Council
at the time of the application for the zoning permit. Such plan shall clearly
indicate the proposed development, including location, size, shape, design,
curb cuts, lighting, landscaping, construction details and other features and
appurtenances required.
   (A)   Use. Accessory off-street parking, required for the uses specified
herein, shall be for use only by automobiles of employees, customers and
residents of the activity served.
   (B)   Location. Off-street parking requirements shall be met on the same lot
as the building served or on a lot within 300 feet especially reserved for such
uses, except that off-street parking facilities for separate uses may be
provided collectively on a separate lot if the spaces are not less than the
total requirements of the separate uses and provided that other requirements
are met.
   (C)   Space size. An off-street parking space shall be at least ten feet in
width and at least 20 feet in length, exclusive of access drives, yards or
ramps.
   (D)   Screening. All open parking areas with four or more parking spaces
shall be effectively screened by wall, fence or landscaping from any property
in a residential district.
   (E)   Lighting. No lighting used to illuminate a parking area shall face any
residential property in any district.
   (F)   Landscaping. Any use having more than 3,500 square feet of required
parking shall have 2% of the gross required parking area landscaped with proper
parking lot trees and shrubs having a low profile. Such landscaping will be
properly maintained at all times.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-2) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.167 JOINT USE.
   The Board of Adjustment may authorize the joint use of parking facilities
for the following uses or activities under conditions specified:
   (A)   Up to 50% of the parking facilities required by this subchapter for
primarily nighttime uses, such as theaters, bowling alleys, bars, restaurants
and related uses, may be supplied by certain types of buildings or uses herein
referred to as daytime uses such as banks, offices, retail and personal service
shops, clothing, food, furniture manufacturing or wholesale and related uses;
   (B)   Up to 50% of the parking facilities by this chapter for primarily
daytime uses may be supplied by primarily nighttime uses;
   (C)   Up to 100% of the parking facilities required by this subchapter for a
church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be
supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by uses primarily of a
daytime nature; and
   (D)   The building or use for which application is being made to utilize the
off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be
located within 300 feet of such parking facilities, in addition to the
following.
      (1)   The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in
the principal operating hours of the two buildings or uses for which joint use
of off-street parking facilities is proposed.
      (2)   The applicant shall present a properly drawn legal instrument to be
recorded with the County Clerk and Recorder, executed by the parties concerned
for joint use of off-street parking facilities and approved as to form and
manner of execution by the City Attorney; such instrument is to be filed with
the County Clerk and Recorder upon approval by the Board of Adjustment.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-3) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.168 SPACES REQUIRED.
   No building shall be erected, enlarged to the extent of increasing the floor
area by as much as 50% or changed in use unless there is provided on the lot,
space for the parking of automobiles or trucks in accordance with the following
minimum requirements:
Use Number of Spaces Required
Use                                     Number of Spaces Required
Banks, business or professional offices 1 space for each 400 square feet of
and office buildings                    floor area
Bowling alleys                          4 spaces for each alley
                                        1 parking space shall be provided for
Churches                                each 5 seats, based on maximum seating
                                        capacity of the main assembly room or
                                        sanctuary
Community centers or recreation         1 space for each 3 employees, plus 1
buildings                               space for each 3 seats
Dwellings                                
Single-family, two-family               2 parking spaces for each unit
Multiple                                A ratio of 1-1/2 parking spaces per
                                        dwelling unit shall be provided
Furniture and appliance stores; motor
vehicle sales; wholesale stores; repair 1 space for each 400 square feet of
shops for household equipment, and      floor area; 1 space for each 5
radio and television; and machinery     employees
sales and repair establishments
Gas stations                            1 space for each 2 employees
                                        Home occupations will be required to
                                        furnish 2 off-street parking spaces in
Home occupations                        the side or rear yard. These shall be
                                        in addition to those required for
                                        dwelling purposes
Hospitals                               1 parking space for each bed, plus 1
                                        parking space for each staff doctor
Hotels and motels                       1 parking space for each room for rent;
                                        1 space for each 5 employees
Libraries, art galleries or museums     2 parking spaces for each 1,000 square
                                        feet of floor area
                                        1 space for each 4 employees; 1
Motor freight companies                 additional space for each of the
                                        vehicles used in the conduct of the
                                        business at any time
                                        1 space shall be provided for each room
Private clubs and lodges                for rent; 1 space for each 100 square
                                        feet of floor area; 1 space for each 4
                                        employees
Production, manufacture, cleaning,
servicing, testing or repair of         1 parking space for each 3 employees
materials or commodities or warehousing
or storage buildings
Public utility and public service uses  1 parking space for each 3 employees,
                                        plus 5 spaces for public use
Restaurants, bars, cafeterias or other  1 space for each 100 square feet; 1
eating and drinking places              space for each 4 employees
Retail sales stores, personal service   1 parking space for each 150 square
establishments, shoe repair, barber and feet of floor area
beauty shops and the like
Schools, nursery, elementary or         1 space for each 3 employees, plus 5
boarding (except high)
Schools, high                           1 space for each 2 employees, plus 1
                                        for each 30 students
Theaters and auditoriums                1 parking space for each 4 seats
                                        For any other uses not specifically
                                        mentioned or provided for, the Board of
Other uses                              Adjustment shall determine the
                                        standards to be applied for parking,
                                        using as a guide the listed use which
                                        most closely resembles the use proposed
 
(Prior Code, § 10-3-4) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.169 OFF-STREET LOADING.
   (A)   Where a building has been newly constructed or converted to a
commercial or industrial use occupying a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet
or more, a minimum of one off-street loading space 30 feet by 12 feet in size
shall be made permanently available.
   (B)   Where more than one business use is to occupy the building, the City
Council may require additional loading spaces.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-5) Penalty, see §
153.999
SIGNS
§ 153.180 APPLICABILITY.
   The following regulations shall govern the location, area and type of signs
permitted within the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-1)
§ 153.181 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Safety. All signs shall be structurally safe and shall be securely
anchored or otherwise fastened, suspended or supported so that they will not be
a menace to the safety of persons or property.
   (B)   Nuisance. No sign, outdoor commercial advertising device or lighting
device constituting a nuisance to an adjacent residential district because of
lighting, glare, focus, animation or flashing of a sign, lighting or
advertising device shall be erected or continued in operation.
   (C)   Revolving beacon or fountain. No revolving beacon or fountain signs
shall be permitted in any district.
   (D)   Interference with traffic devices. No sign in any district shall
conflict in any manner with the clear and obvious appearance of public devices
controlling public traffic.
   (E)   Ground signs. Ground signs shall not be located on public property
except by specific approval of the City Council.
   (F)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs or banners on or over public property
are not permitted, except by specific approval of the City Council.
   (G)   Projecting signs. Signs projecting over a street, alley or other
public property may be authorized by the City Council for a period not to
exceed ten days.
   (H)   Roadside market signs. Roadside market signs advertising produce grown
and sold on the premises on which they are located shall be removed when market
is not in use.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-2) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.182 RESIDENTIAL USES.
   One sign of a temporary nature advertising availability “for sale” or “for
rent” shall be permitted for residential use. Such sign must not exceed four
square feet and shall not be lighted. Such sign may be wall, pedestal or ground
type.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-3) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.183 CHURCHES; OTHER PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS.
   (A)   Signage allowed. One illuminated sign or bulletin board shall be
permitted on each street side if located on the same site as the principal
building.
   (B)   Maximum size. No sign or bulletin board shall exceed 24 square feet in
area.
   (C)   Location.
      (1)   Side or rear property lines. No sign shall be located closer than
eight feet from any side or rear property line.
      (2)   Front yard. A sign or bulletin board located in the front yard
shall be no closer to the street line than one-half the required front yard.
   (D)   Affixed to building. A sign or bulletin board affixed to a building
shall not project higher than one story or ten feet above the ground level,
whichever is lower.
   (E)   Ground signs. Ground signs shall be permanently anchored to the ground
and shall not exceed a height of six feet.
   (F)   Corner lots. On corner lots, no sign shall be so constructed or so
located that will obstruct the view of traffic approaching the street
intersection.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-4) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.184 HIGHWAY SIGNS.
   Highway signs or other such highway oriented advertising devices shall be
permitted; provided such signs and devices comply with all state and federal
regulations and are located at least 1,000 feet from any existing advertising
sign or device, regardless of political boundaries, width of political
boundaries, width of rights-of-way, existing highways, streets, roads or
easements.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-5) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.185 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   Wall signs and one protruding or pedestal sign advertising the particular
use of the property shall be permitted; provided such sign does not exceed 50
square feet in area.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-6) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.186 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   Wall signs and one protruding or pedestal sign advertising the particular
use of the property shall be permitted; provided such sign does not exceed 200
square feet in area and does not exceed a height of 35 feet.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-7) Penalty, see §
153.999
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
§ 153.200 FENCES AND WALLS.
   (A)   Maximum height. Fences and walls in residential sections are subject
to the following maximum height requirements: along the front lot line, and
along the first 25 feet of the side lot lines as measured from the front
property line, the maximum height shall be three feet; along the balance of the
side property lines and along the rear property line, the maximum height shall
be six feet.
   (B)   Electric, barbed wire fence. It shall be unlawful for any person to
erect or maintain any electrical fence or any fence constructed in whole or in
part of barbed wire.
(Prior Code, § 10-5-1) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.201 BASEMENTS.
   No permit shall be issued for a basement residence or structure alone.
(Prior Code, § 10-5-2) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.202 ACCESS.
   Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a
public street or with access to an approved private street (approval granted by
City Council only). All structures shall be so located on lots as to provide
safe, convenient access for servicing fire protection and required off-street
parking.
(Prior Code, § 10-5-3) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.203 OUTSIDE STORAGE.
   All salvage dealers or other persons accumulating, depositing or storing
salvage material or junk within the city, when the accumulating, depositing or
storing thereof shall be without a building or not within a building, either
now stored, deposited or accumulated or hereafter so deposited, stored or
accumulated, shall fence surrounding salvage materials or junk with a solid
fence at least five and one-half feet high, sufficient to enclose the salvaged
materials from public view from outside the enclosure.
(Prior Code, § 10-5-4) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.204 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Use limited. Any home occupation must be limited to a use conducted
entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the occupants thereof, which use
is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling
purposes and does not change the character thereof, and in connection with
which there is no display, no stock in trade, no outside storage of equipment,
no signs, no inventory and no commodity sold upon the premises.
   (B)   Maximum floor area allowed. The use of the dwelling used for the home
occupation must be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for
residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25% of the floor area
of the dwelling unit may be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
   (C)   Outside appearance. There may be no change in the outside appearance
of the building or premises or other visible evidence of the conduct of the
home occupation.
   (D)   Accessory building. No home occupation, or any part thereof, may be
conducted in any accessory building or structure apart from the dwelling.
   (E)   Traffic. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in
greater volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood.
   (F)   Parking. Any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home
occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard.
   (G)   Performance standards. No equipment or process shall be used in such
home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or
electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the
occupation is conducted in areas zoned for residential uses. In the case of
electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates
visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the
premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
   (H)   Application; Council approval required. A person desiring permission
to conduct a home occupation shall submit to the city a signed and completed
application form provided by the city. The permitting of home occupations shall
be within the sole discretion of the Council. The Council shall consider all
relevant factors in addition to those above in denying or granting permission
for a home occupation.
(Prior Code, § 10-5-5) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.205 TRANSITION ZONE.
   (A)   Garage entrances. No public garage for more than five motor vehicles
shall have an entrance or exit for motor vehicles within 50 feet of a
residential district.
   (B)   Side and rear yard transition. Where a lot in a business or industrial
district abuts a lot in a residential district, there shall be provided along
such abutting lines a yard equal in width or depth to that required in the
residential district.
   (C)   Front yard transition. Where the frontage on one side of a street
between two intersecting streets is zoned partly as a residential and partly as
business or industrial, the front yard depth in the business or industrial
district shall be equal to the required front yard depth in the residential
district.
(Prior Code, § 10-5-6) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.206 ANNEXATION OF ADDITIONAL TERRITORY.
   Whenever any territory is annexed to the city, the resolution or ordinance
of annexation shall designate the zoning classification district or districts
in which the territory is to be included. The territory annexed shall be
governed by the provisions of the articles relating to the zoning district or
districts in which such land is placed.
(Prior Code, § 10-5-7)
§ 153.207 PURPOSE AND INTENT OF ZONING.
   The purpose of these zoning provisions is to adopt zoning regulations that:
   (A)   Are in accordance with a growth policy;
   (B)   Are designed to lessen congestion in the streets;
   (C)   Will secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
   (D)   Will promote health and the general welfare;
   (E)   Will provide adequate light and air;
   (F)   Will prevent overcrowding of land;
   (G)   Will avoid undue concentration of population;
   (H)   Will facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements;
   (I)   Give reasonable consideration to the character of the district;
   (J)   Give reasonable consideration to the district’s peculiar suitability
for particular uses;
   (K)   Give reasonable consideration to conserving the value of buildings;
and
   (L)   Will encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-5-8)
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
§ 153.220 ACCESSORY STRUCTURE PERMITTED.
   In an R-1, R-1A or R-2 District, an accessory structure or building may be
permitted to be placed on a lot not having principal structure or building with
a bona fide principal, main or primary use, such as a dwelling, in the
following instance:
   (A)   The accessory structure must be situated on a lot immediately adjacent
or next to a lot having a principal structure (such as a dwelling) that serves
as a bona fide principal use for the lot on which the principal structure is
situated;
   (B)   The proposed accessory structure must have a use that is subordinate
to the principal structure and use on the adjacent lot and a use whose purposes
are customarily incidental to the purposes of the principal structure and its
use on the adjacent lot;
   (C)   The lot where the principal structure is located and the adjacent lot
with the accessory structure must be in identical ownership and owned by the
same person or persons; and
   (D)   The accessory structure must otherwise comply with existing applicable
zoning standards and regulations and must not have a use or construction not
permitted for accessory structures in residential districts.
(Ord. 16-081516, passed 8-15-2016)
§ 153.221 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. Intended to refer to either an accessory “structure” or
an accessory “building”.
   BONA FIDE PRINCIPAL USE. A structure or building shall be considered to
serve as a BONA FIDE PRINCIPAL USE when its primary function, by current and
past use, is proven to be established and currently active on a good faith
basis. For a dwelling to be considered a principal structure or building with
an established and bona fide use, it must be actually occupied by one or more
natural persons who in good faith are permanent and full-time residents of the
dwelling.
   IMMEDIATELY ADJACENT. To be IMMEDIATELY ADJACENT, two lots must abut each
other or lie side-by-side, by having a common boundary line, and must front on
a common street or, in the case of a corner lot, on at least one common street.
   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. Intended to refer to a principal, main or primary
structure or building.
   PRINCIPAL USE. Intended to refer to a principal, main or primary use.
(Ord. 16-081516, passed 8-15-2016)
§ 153.222 DISCRETION IN GRANTING EXCEPTION AND APPEAL.
   (A)   The decision whether an accessory structure is permitted on a lot not
having a structure with a bona fide principal use is within the discretion of
the City Council to be based on the criteria provided above.
   (B)   As an issue involving the “use” of property, the Council’s decision,
in granting or denying the requested exception, is not subject to appeal to the
Board of Adjustments for a variance.
   (C)   Any related or incidental issues not involving this question of use,
such as setback distances or other matters of measurement, are subject to
appeal to the Board.
(Ord. 16-081516, passed 8-15-2016)
§ 153.223 YARD SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   The lot on which the accessory structure is to be situated is subject to the
following setback requirements.
   (A)   The front yard shall have a setback not less than 25 feet.
   (B)   The rear yard shall have a setback of not less than 20 feet.
   (C)   The side yards shall have a setback of not less than ten feet.
   (D)   On corner lots, the yard fronting or abutting the side street shall
have a setback of not less than ten feet.
(Ord. 16-081516, passed 8-15-2016) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.224 SIZE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The accessory structure or building shall be subject to the zoning
restrictions limiting its square footage and sidewall height.
   (B)   The size of the lot on which the accessory structure or building is
proposed to be situated shall govern the maximum size in square footage of the
accessory structure or building.
(Ord. 16-081516, passed 8-15-2016) Penalty, see §
153.999
NON-CONFORMING RIGHTS
§ 153.235 NON-CONFORMING; DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. The time of the adoption of the original zoning ordinances
or amendments thereto by the city and the date after which such lot, building,
structure or use failed to conform with the regulations for its district.
   NON-CONFORMING. Those lots, buildings, structures or uses of land existing
prior to the effective date of the adoption of the original zoning ordinances
or amendments thereto by the city that did not conform following such effective
date with the regulations of the district or area in which they were situated.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-1)
§ 153.236 NON-CONFORMING LOTS.
   A non-conforming parcel of land that did not comply with the requirements of
the district in which it is located after the aforesaid effective date shall be
a lawful building site provided.
   (A)   Single ownership. Any lot or parcel of land under one ownership and of
record or the subject of a contract of sale on the aforesaid effective date
and, where no adjoining land was then or now owned by the same person, may be
used as a building site even when of less area or width than that required by
the zoning regulations for the district in which it is located.
   (B)   Approved by variance. Such site is approved by the variance procedure
as outlined herein.
   (C)   Acquisition by governmental entity. Such site conforms to the code
requirements but was made non-conforming by acquisition of a portion thereof by
a governmental entity so that the parcel size is decreased not more than 20%
and the yard facing any road was decreased not more than 50%.
   (D)   Erection prior to adoption. Where buildings or structures have been
erected prior to or subsequent to the aforesaid effective date, the area on
which such buildings or structures are erected shall not be subsequently
divided so as to reduce the building site area and/or frontage below the
requirements of this chapter for the zoning district in which such building
exists.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-2) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.237 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   A lawful use of land or a building on the aforesaid effective date that is
no longer permissible by the terms of these regulations or their amendments may
be continued if it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions.
   (A)   Enlarged, increased or extended. No such non-conforming use shall be
enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land or a greater
portion of a building than was occupied by such use at the aforesaid effective
date.
   (B)   Moved. No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part
to any other portion of the lot, parcel or building being occupied by such use
at the aforesaid effective date.
   (C)   Use ceases. If any such non-conforming use ceases for a period of more
than one year, any subsequent use of land or a building shall conform to the
zoning regulations for the zone in which it is located. The term CEASES, as
used in this case, shall mean that the activity in question has not been in
operation for a period of one year.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-3) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.238 ELIMINATION OF NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this subchapter, whenever a
non-conforming structure is determined to be obsolete, dilapidated or
substandard by the City Council, the right to operate, occupy or maintain such
structure may be terminated by action of the Council and such structure shall
be demolished. Such action by the City Council shall follow the procedures for
amendments.
   (B)   Where the property owner refuses to demolish the building, the City
Council is hereby empowered to demolish the building and assess the cost of
demolition as a lien on the property with the right to recover such costs by
way of suit or other lawful means.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-4) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.239 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Non-conforming structures that existed on the aforesaid effective date may
be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, providing that the
following apply.
   (A)   Enlarged or altered. No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a
way that increases its non-conformity.
   (B)   Destruction. Should such structure be destroyed by any means in extent
of more than 50% of its assessed valuation at the time of destruction, it shall
not be reconstructed, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Moved. Should such structure be moved, it shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district to which it is relocated.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-5) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.240 MAINTENANCE.
   Any land, building or structure of non-conforming use may be maintained or
repaired; provided such repair or maintenance does not constitute an expansion
or enlargement. The Board of Adjustment may grant a permit for the enlargement
of a non-conforming building or erection on the same lot or plot of ground of
additional buildings for trade, business or industry located in the district
restricted against its use where such enlargement or expansion of facilities
will not be detrimental to or tend to alter the character of the neighborhood.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-6) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.241 MOBILE HOMES AS NON-CONFORMING USES.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of these regulations, the following
special requirements shall apply to mobile homes and lots providing space for
mobile homes where such use is not permitted within the district following the
aforesaid effective date.
   (A)   Ownership. Where the mobile home and the lot upon which it is located
are under separate ownership, the mobile home may only be replaced with another
mobile home if it will be under the same ownership as the lot.
   (B)   Rental or lease. Where the mobile home and the lot upon which it is
located are under the same ownership, the mobile home cannot be rented or
leased.
   (C)   Replacement. An existing mobile home may only be replaced by another
mobile home if it is of equal or greater size.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-7) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.242 DWELLINGS AS NON-CONFORMING USES.
   Regardless of any other provision of this chapter, the following applies to
dwellings classified as “non-conforming” where such use as dwellings is not
permitted within the district following the effective date of the adoption of
the original zoning ordinances or the adoption of subsequent zoning amendments
or reclassifications.
   (A)   An accessory building or structure may be placed or constructed by
permit to serve as an incidental or subordinate use to a dwelling that is a
non-conforming use or structure.
   (B)   A non-conforming dwelling that is destroyed totally or partially by
fire, natural disaster or other cause unintended by the owner may be
reconstructed, replaced or rebuilt by permit as a dwelling. By being
reconstructed, replaced or rebuilt, the dwelling does not lose its status as an
allowed non-conforming use or structure.
   (C)   A dwelling may be enlarged or expanded by permit beyond its originally
non-conforming size or area, as long as the enlargement or expansion is not
otherwise in violation of any setbacks or other zoning regulations.
(Ord. 17-121916, passed 12-19-2016) Penalty, see §
153.999
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 153.255 CREATED.
   The Board of Adjustment is hereby established to act on appeal and variance
applications as herein detailed.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-1)
§ 153.256 MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM; COMPENSATION.
   The Board shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor for three-
year terms (with staggered terms), subject to confirmation by the Council.
Members of the Board may be removed from office by the City Council for cause
upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies on the Board shall be
filled for the unexpired term of any member whose position becomes vacant.
Members shall be compensated in an amount determined by the Council for their
participation in hearings.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-2)
§ 153.257 OFFICERS AND PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Chairperson; Vice Chairperson. The Board shall select one of its
members as Chairperson and may select another member to be Vice Chairperson.
The Chairperson or, in the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson or
acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses
for meetings and hearings. Meetings shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine.
   (B)   Meetings and hearings. All meetings and hearings of the Board shall be
open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
Board. The minutes and records of the Board shall be a public record that is
available for public inspection.
   (C)   Further rules. The Board may adopt further rules necessary to conduct
its business, as long as such rules are consistent with this chapter and other
provisions of the law.
   (D)   City Clerk’s assistance. The City Clerk shall be at the disposal of
the Board to receive and process applications of appeal and to give assistance
to the Board.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-3)
§ 153.258 OFFICE.
   The Board’s office shall be that of the City Hall and all files of the Board
shall be held therein.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-4)
§ 153.259 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall have the following powers:
   (A)   Hear appeals. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official or body in the enforcement of this chapter;
   (B)   Special exceptions. To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms
of this chapter upon which the Board is expressly required to pass under the
provisions of this chapter;
   (C)   Variances.
      (1)   Authority to grant.
         (a)   To grant variances from the terms and standards of this chapter
where the Board determines:
            1.   That granting the variance will not be contrary to the public
interest;
            2.   Where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship; and
            3.   Where the spirit of this chapter will be observed and
substantial justice done.
         (b)   Hardship refers to circumstances peculiar to the particular
property. Financial or economic difficulties, or consequences of actions by the
property owner, are not hardships for zoning purposes.
      (2)   Types of variances. More specifically, the Board may approve,
conditionally approve or deny any request to grant variances from the following
requirements of this chapter:
         (a)   Setback requirements;
         (b)   Yard requirements;
         (c)   Area requirements;
         (d)   Height requirements;
         (e)   Parking requirements;
         (f)   Fence and hedge requirements; and
         (g)   Sign requirements, including area, location or height.
   (D)   Action on appeals. In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board
may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly; or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from; and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as ought to be made and to that end shall have the powers of the officer(s)
from whom the appeal is taken; and
   (E)   Required vote. The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall
be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of
any administrative official or body; to decide in favor of the applicant on any
matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter; or to grant any
variance; or to effect any variation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-5)
§ 153.260 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Who can file. A notice of appeal or a request for variance may be
filed by any person aggrieved by the decision or by any officer, body or board
of the city affected by such decision.
   (B)   Time to file. An appeal must be filed within 60 days of the date the
subject decision was made.
   (C)   Written application. Written applications for appeals or variances
shall be filed in the office of the Clerk on forms provided for that purpose.
   (D)   Fee. The applicant shall pay a fee for the purpose of defraying
expenses incidental to the proceedings, including the costs of the publication
of the notice of hearing and the Board members’ compensation. Such fee for the
appeal shall be determined by the Council. No application will be regarded as
having been filed until such fee has been paid in full.
   (E)   Investigation. The Board shall cause to be made such investigation of
facts bearing on the application as will provide necessary information to
assure that the action on each such application is consistent with the intent
and purpose of this chapter.
   (F)   Stay of construction and proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings
and construction in furtherance of the action appealed unless the body or
administrative official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board
after the appeal is filed that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a
stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed other than by restraining order which may be granted on due
cause shown by the Board or by a court of record on application with prior
notice to the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken with an opportunity
to be heard prior to issuance.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-6)
§ 153.261 HEARING AND NOTICE.
   (A)   Hearing required. There shall be a hearing for each application for
appeal or variance. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for such hearing and
shall give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the applicant and any
other parties in interest. The Board shall decide the appeal within a
reasonable time.
   (B)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be published once a
week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the
city, with the first publication to be at least 15 days prior to the hearing
date.
   (C)   Testimony. At the hearing, testimony shall be taken from persons
interested in the application.
   (D)   Appearance. Any party to the hearing may appear in person, by attorney
or by authorized agent.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-7)
§ 153.262 CRITERIA FOR GRANTING VARIANCE.
   (A)   (1)   To grant a variance, the Board must find that:
         (a)   The granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter;
         (b)   Will not be injurious to the neighborhood;
         (c)   Is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable
use of the land, building or structure; and
         (d)   Will not be detrimental to the public welfare.
      (2)   The fact that the subject property may be utilized more profitably
will not be an element of consideration before the Board.
   (B)   To grant a variance, the Board shall additionally determine:
      (1)   That special conditions and circumstances exist that are peculiar
to the land (such as size, shape or topography), structure or building involved
and that are not applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same
district;
      (2)   That literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this chapter;
      (3)   That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from
the action of the applicant;
      (4)   That granting the requested variance will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands,
structures or buildings in the same district;
      (5)   That granting the variance will not allow a use that is not
permissible under the terms of this chapter in the district involved, or a use
that is expressly or by implication prohibited in the said district;
      (6)   That the proposed variance will not amount to a rezoning of the
land in question or constitute a change in the district boundaries; and
      (7)   That the proposed variance will not be injurious to the property
and improvements in the vicinity and district in which the subject property is
situated.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-8)
§ 153.263 CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards that will ensure that the purpose and
intent of this chapter shall not be violated.
   (B)   Violation of such conditions and safeguards when made part of the
terms under which the variance is granted shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter and punishable under §§
153.295 through
153.302.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-9)
§ 153.264 DEFINITION OF PUBLIC INTEREST.
   With respect to uses of land, buildings and other structures, this chapter
is declared to be a definition of the public interest by City Council.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-10)
§ 153.265 APPEALS.
   Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the
Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or
bureau of the city may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified,
setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying
the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court
within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-11)
§ 153.266 TIME DECISION EFFECTIVE.
   The decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be final, except as provided
in §
153.265.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-12)
AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES
§ 153.280 INITIATION.
   (A)   Proposals. Proposals to amend, supplement, modify or repeal any of the
provisions of this chapter or any district boundaries may be initiated by the
City Council or by petition of any interested resident or property owner.
   (B)   Property owner. Whenever the property owner of any land or building
desires a reclassification of the owner’s property or change in the regulations
applicable thereto, the owner may file with the City Clerk, on forms provided
by the city for this purpose, a petition duly signed requesting an amendment or
change of regulations prescribed for such property.
   (C)   Filing fee. There shall be a fee paid to the city by the owner filing
any such petition for the purpose of defraying expenses of the proceedings on
the petition. The fee shall be set by the Council and no petition shall be
considered to be filed until it is paid.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-1)
§ 153.281 INVESTIGATION.
   Upon initiation of an amendment by the City Council or upon petition from a
property owner, the City Council shall cause to be made such an investigation
of facts bearing on such initiation or petition as will provide necessary
information to assure that the action on each such petition is consistent with
the intent and purpose of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-2)
§ 153.282 HEARING.
   (A)   Hearing required. The Council shall hold a public hearing on all
proposed amendments, supplements, modifications or repeals of this chapter or
changes in district boundaries at which time interested parties and citizens
shall have an opportunity to be heard.
   (B)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be published once a
week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city with the first publication to be at least 15 days prior to the hearing
date.
   (C)   Protest; required vote. An amendment or reclassification affecting
property may not become effective, except upon a favorable vote of two-thirds
of the present and voting members of the City Council if a protest against such
amendment or reclassification is signed by the owners of 25% or more of either:
      (1)   The area of the lots included in the proposed change; or
      (2)   Those lots 150 feet from a lot included in a proposed amendment or
reclassification.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-3)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.295 ADMINISTER.
   (A)   Designation. The City Council shall be the Zoning Administrator and
shall administer and enforce this chapter. The Council may direct city
personnel to provide assistance or carry out administrative and enforcement
activities.
   (B)   Duties. The Council shall receive and review all applications for
zoning permits, issue zoning permits and coordinate inspection of premises and
property.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-1)
§ 153.296 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATIONS; CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   Where the Council finds that any of the provisions of this chapter are being
violated, the Council shall notify, in writing, the person(s) responsible for
such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it. The Council may order the discontinuance of illegal
use of land, structures or buildings; removal of illegal buildings or
structures or of additions, alterations or structural changes thereto;
discontinuance of any illegal construction, alteration or other work being
done; or may take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure
compliance with or to prevent violations of this chapter’s provisions. The
Council may delegate to the City Clerk the authority to issue notifications of
violations, order corrective action or take any other steps to ensure
compliance with this chapter or prevent violations thereof.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-2)
§ 153.297 ZONING PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Definition. The words ADDED TO shall refer to instances in which there
is an increase in the square footage of enclosed space or change in the outside
dimensions resulting from an increase in enclosed space.
   (B)   Permit required. A zoning permit must be obtained from the City
Council before any building or other structure may be constructed, erected,
placed, moved, added to, expanded or structurally altered.
   (C)   Compliance required. The Council may issue a zoning permit only when
the proposed building, structure or use will meet the requirements of this
chapter.
   (D)   Non-residential change in use. The use of any building, structure or
land shall not be changed, in whole or in part, from residential to non-
residential purposes until a zoning permit is obtained if it is situated in a
district or zone that does not allow the non-residential use or purpose in
question.
   (E)   Interpretation of distances. When determining compliance with
prescribed setbacks or any other distance requirements, distances involving a
structure or building shall be measured or construed with reference to the
outermost or most exterior part of such structure or building.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-3)
§ 153.298 APPLICATION, REVIEW AND PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Application.
      (1)   To obtain a zoning permit, a person shall submit a completed
application. The application shall be on a form provided by the City Clerk and
approved by the City Council. The application shall include all matters
necessary to determine conformance with this chapter, including, without
limitation, the following information:
         (a)   Plans clearly showing the dimensions and shape of the lot;
         (b)   The sizes and locations of existing and proposed buildings or
other structures, or alterations thereto; and
         (c)   The distances between lot lines and proposed buildings or
structures, or alterations to existing buildings or structures.
      (2)   To determine compliance with this chapter, the Council may request
and the applicant shall provide such further information as may be necessary to
determine conformance with this chapter.
   (B)   Review. The Council shall review the application to ensure the
required information is submitted and complete. Upon the submission of a
completed application with the required information, the Council shall
determine whether the proposed building, structure or use is permitted at the
proposed location and whether the proposal will comply with the requirements of
the applicable district and the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Permit. If the Council finds that the proposal is permitted in the
applicable district and will conform to all requirements, a zoning permit shall
be issued to the applicant. If the Council finds that the proposal either is
not permitted in the applicable district or will not conform to all
requirements of this chapter, the application shall be denied and the reasons
for such denial shall be noted. The applicant shall be immediately notified of
the denial and the reasons therefor.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-4)
§ 153.299 EXPIRATION OF ZONING PERMIT.
   (A)   A zoning permit shall be in effect for one year from the date of
approval and shall be deemed to expire one year from such date.
   (B)   In the event that a zoning permit expires prior to the completion of
work permitted thereby, a new zoning permit shall be obtained for the work not
completed.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-5)
§ 153.300 CONFORMITY OF CONSTRUCTION AND USE.
   (A)   All construction, installation, alteration, placement, use or other
work must comply with the plans and other information provided with the
application that is approved by the Council and upon which a permit is granted.
   (B)   Any construction, installation, alteration, placement, use or other
work at variance with the plans or proposals submitted with the application
shall constitute a violation of this chapter and punishable by §
153.999.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-6)
§ 153.301 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES.
   (A)   Schedule established. The City Council shall establish a schedule of
fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for zoning permits,
appeals, variances, zoning amendments and other matters pertaining to this
chapter.
   (B)   Posting; amendment. The schedule of fees shall be available from the
Clerk and may be altered or amended, from time to time, by the Council.
   (C)   Payment required. No permit, zoning change or variance shall be issued
unless or until such fees, charges or expenses have been paid in full, nor
shall any action be taken on proceedings before the Board of Adjustments or
Council until such fees have been paid in full.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-7)
§ 153.302 COMPLIANCE REGARDING VIOLATIONS.
   Complaints or reports of suspected or alleged violations of this chapter
shall be received by the City Clerk. The Clerk is authorized to take any
appropriate enforcement action on such complaints or reports, including, but
not limited to, an investigation thereof. Complaints or reports may also be
referred to the City Attorney for enforcement action.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-8)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation. Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with the granting of variances or any of
the requirements for conditions imposed by the Board of Adjustments and/or City
Council, are municipal infractions or civil offenses. Citations or complaints
shall be issued and proceedings conducted in accordance with §
10.35. Besides imposing any monetary civil penalty for violations, the court
may order or grant any or all other kinds of relief authorized in §
10.35 or otherwise permitted under state law.
   (B)   Continuing violation. Each day or part of a day any violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense and subject to separate
enforcement, liability or penalty.
   (C)   Separate offense. The owner or tenant of any building, structure,
premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or
other person who commits, participates in, assists or maintains such violation
may each be liable for a separate offense and subject to the penalties provided
by the city code.
   (D)   Additional remedies. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building,
structure, lot or land is used in violation of this chapter, the Council may,
in lieu of or in addition to any other remedies, initiate in the city court any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful use, action or
violation; to restrain, enjoin, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the
occupancy of such building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in, on or about such premises.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-9) (Ord. 15-061812, passed 6-18-2012)
APPENDIX A: APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMIT
 
CITY OF PLENTYWOOD
APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMIT
 
   Application is made by the undersigned for a permit to place/construct/alter/demolish the structure described below. All of the following information, as well as all accompanying information, plans and specifications, are represented to be true and complete and are
submitted for the City’s reliance in considering this request.
   It is understood that permits are issued subject to the condition that any misstatement, expression, or omission of material fact, whether or not known or intended, such as would or might cause a disapproval of this application, or any material change in the
accompanying plans, specifications, or structure made subsequent to the issuance of the permit in accordance with this application, without the approval of the Council, constitutes sufficient ground for the revocation of such permit. This permit is valid for one year
from the date of approval.
 
Zoning Application No.                            Date                            Fee $10.00  Paid              
 
Owner(s)                                                                Property Address                                                       
 
Mailing Address                                                                                                                                       
 
Zoning:      R-1                     R-2                     M.H.               
 
C-1                     C-2                     L.I.               
 
Commercial only--off street parking spaces provided               
 
DISTANCE FROM PROPERTY LINES
 
Font                  Right Side                     Left Side                  Rear               
 
CLASS OF WORK
 
   New house             Addition             Garage             Porch/Steps             Patio/Deck            
 
Mobile home               Fence             Sign               Demolition             Other                                   
 
Principal Lot Use                                      Occupant(s)                                                                           
 
Lot Size          x                        Square Ft.    Building Size            x                              Square Ft.
 
CONSTRUCTION & DESIGN
 
Siding                     Roofing                       Frame                     Sidewall Height              Ft.
 
Fence Height             Ft. Design of Structure (Sketch Attached)                               
 
SIGNATURE OF OWNER(S):                                                                                                             
 
Approved              Denied                                                                                                 
Mayor               Date
Revised 2012
 
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Montana Code Annotated
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MONTANA CODE ANNOTATED
MCA Cites Code Section
MCA Cites                      Code Section
3-11-103                       10.35
7-1-4150                       10.35
7-1-4151                       10.35
7-1-4152                       10.35
7-3-203                        30.25
7-3-214                        30.27
7-3-220                        30.02
7-4-4102(4)(b)                 31.20
7-4-4303                       30.24
7-4-4305                       30.26
7-4-4401                       30.01
7-4-4402                       30.01
7-4-4403                       30.02
7-4-4601                       31.50
7-4-4602                       31.50
7-4-4604                       31.51
7-5-106                        30.27
7-5-4102                       30.22,
                               30.23
7-5-4206                       30.27
7-32-4109                      33.03
Title 16, Chapters 1 through 4 111.20
16-3-306(1)                    111.23
16-3-309                       111.23
Title 16, Chapter 6            111.20
Title 61, Chapter 12, Part 4   91.02
Title 75, Chapter 10, Part 5   91.02
                               
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2022 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2022 Code Section
1-1-1              10.01
1-1-2              10.02
1-1-3              10.20
1-1-4              10.21
1-2-1              10.15
1-2-2              10.16
1-2-3              10.17
1-2-4              10.09
1-3-1              10.07
1-3-2              10.08
1-3-3              10.06
1-4-1              10.99
1-4-2              10.35
1-4-3              10.36
1-5-1              30.20
1-5-2              30.21
1-5-3              30.22
1-5-4              30.23
1-5-5              30.24
1-5-6              30.25
1-5-7              30.26
1-5-8              30.27
1-6-1              30.01
1-6-2              30.02
1-6-3              30.03
1-6-4              30.04
1-6-5              30.05
1-6-6              30.06
1-7-1              31.01
1-7-2              31.02
1-7-3              31.03
1-7-4              31.04
1-7-5              31.05
1-7A-1             31.20
1-7A-2             31.21
1-7B-1             31.35
1-7C-1             31.50
1-7C-2             31.51
1-8-1              11.01
1-8-2              11.02
1-9-1              34.01
1-9-2              34.02
1-9-3              34.03
1-10-1             32.01
1-10-2             32.02
1-10-3             32.03
1-11-1             35.01
2-1-1              111.01
2-1-2              111.02
2-1-3              111.03
2-1-4              111.04
2-1-5              111.05
2-1-6              111.06
2-1-7              111.07
2-1-8              111.08
2-1-9              111.09,
                   111.99
2-1-10             111.99
2-3-1              110.01
2-3-2              110.02
2-3-3              110.99
3-1-1              91.20
3-1-2              91.21
3-2-1              53.01
3-2-2              53.02
3-2-3              53.03
3-2-4              53.04
3-2-5              53.05
3-2-6              53.06
3-2-7              53.07
3-2-8              53.08
3-2-9              53.09
3-2-10             53.10
3-2-11             53.99
4-1-1              33.01
4-1-2              33.02
4-1-3              33.03
4-2-1              130.01,
                   130.99
4-3A-1             90.01,
                   90.02
4-3A-2             90.03
4-3A-3             90.04
4-3A-4             90.05
4-3A-5             90.06
4-3A-6             90.07
4-3A-7             90.08
4-3A-8             90.09
4-3A-9             90.99
4-3B-1             90.20
4-3B-2             90.21
4-3B-3             90.99
4-4-1              131.01
4-4-2              131.02
4-4-3              131.03
5-1-1              70.01
5-1-2              70.02,
                   70.99
5-1-3              70.03,
                   70.99
5-2-1              71.01
5-2-2              71.02
5-2-3              71.99
6-1-1              33.15
6-1-2              33.16
6-1-3              33.17
6-1-4              33.18
6-3-1              132.05
6-3-2              132.06
6-3-3              132.99
6-4-1              92.20,
                   92.99
6-4-2              92.21,
                   92.99
6-4-3              92.22,
                   92.99
7-1-1              151.001
7-1-2              151.002
7-1-3              151.003
7-1-4              151.004
7-1-5              151.005
7-1-6              151.006
7-1-7              151.007
7-1-8              151.008
7-1-9              151.009
7-1-10             151.010
7-1-11             151.011
7-1-12             151.012
7-1-13             151.013
7-1-14             151.999
7-2-1              151.025
7-2-2              151.026
7-2-3              151.027
7-2-4              151.028
7-2-5              151.029
7-2-6              151.030
7-2-7              151.999
7-2-8              151.999
7-3-1              151.045
7-3-2              151.046
7-3-3              151.047
7-3-4              151.048
7-3-5              151.049
7-3-6              151.999
7-4-1              151.060
7-4-2              151.999
7-5-1              152.01
7-5-2              152.02
7-5-3              152.99
8-1-1              150.01
8-1-2              150.02
8-1-3              150.03
8-1-4              150.04
8-1-5              150.05
8-2-1              150.20
8-2-2              150.21
8-2-3              150.22
8-2-4              150.99
9-1-1              51.01
9-1-2              51.02
9-1-3              51.03
9-1-4              51.99
9-2-1              51.15
9-3-1              52.01
9-3-2              52.02
9-3-3              52.03
9-3-4              52.04
9-3-5              52.05
9-3-6              52.99
9-4-1              50.01
9-4-2              50.02
9-4-3              50.03
9-4-4              50.04
9-4-5              50.05
9-4-6              50.06
9-4-7              50.07
9-4-8              50.08
9-4-9              50.09
9-4-10             50.10
9-4-11             50.11
9-4-12             50.12
9-4-13             50.13
9-4-14             50.14
9-4-15             50.15
9-4-16             50.99
9-5-1              151.075
9-5-2              151.999
10-1-1             153.001
10-1-2             153.002
10-2-1             153.015
10-2-2             153.016
10-2-3             153.017
10-2A-1            153.030
10-2A-2            153.031
10-2A-3            153.032
10-2A-4            153.033
10-2A-5            153.034
10-2A-6            153.035
10-2A-7            153.036
10-2A-8            153.037
10-2B-1            153.050
10-2B-2            153.051
10-2B-3            153.052
10-2B-4            153.053
10-2B-5            153.054
10-2B-6            153.055
10-2B-7            153.056
10-2B-8            153.057
10-2C-1            153.070
10-2C-2            153.071
10-2C-3            153.072
10-2C-4            153.073
10-2C-5            153.074
10-2C-6            153.075
10-2C-7            153.076
10-2C-8            153.077
10-2D-1            153.090
10-2D-2            153.091
10-2D-3            153.092
10-2D-4            153.093
10-2D-5            153.094
10-2E-1            153.105
10-2E-2            153.106
10-2E-3            153.107
10-2E-4            153.108
10-2E-5            153.109
10-2E-6            153.110
10-2F-1            153.125
10-2F-2            153.126
10-2F-3            153.127
10-2F-4            153.128
10-2F-5            153.129
10-2F-6            153.130
10-2G-1            153.145
10-2G-2            153.146
10-2G-3            153.147
10-2G-4            153.148
10-2G-5            153.149
10-2G-6            153.150
10-2G-7            153.151
10-3-1             153.165
10-3-2             153.166
10-3-3             153.167
10-3-4             153.168
10-3-5             153.169
10-4-1             153.180
10-4-2             153.181
10-4-3             153.182
10-4-4             153.183
10-4-5             153.184
10-4-6             153.185
10-4-7             153.186
10-5-1             153.200
10-5-2             153.201
10-5-3             153.202
10-5-4             153.203
10-5-5             153.204
10-5-6             153.205
10-5-7             153.206
10-5-8             153.207
10-6-1             153.235
10-6-2             153.236
10-6-3             153.237
10-6-4             153.238
10-6-5             153.239
10-6-6             153.240
10-6-7             153.241
10-7-1             153.255
10-7-2             153.256
10-7-3             153.257
10-7-4             153.258
10-7-5             153.259
10-7-6             153.260
10-7-7             153.261
10-7-8             153.262
10-7-9             153.263
10-7-10            153.264
10-7-11            153.265
10-7-12            153.266
10-8-1             153.280
10-8-2             153.281
10-8-3             153.282
10-9-1             153.295
10-9-2             153.296
10-9-3             153.297
10-9-4             153.298
10-9-5             153.299
10-9-6             153.300
10-9-7             153.301
10-9-8             153.302
10-9-9             153.999
                   
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
05152023 5-15-2023   92.01
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.    Date Passed Code Section
                        153.036,
4-120406    12-4-2006   153.056,
                        153.076
5-030209    3-2-2009    111.20-
                        111.23
6-050409    5-4-2009    10.35
                        90.01,
                        90.02,
7-050409    5-4-2009    90.04,
                        90.06-
                        90.09,
                        90.99
                        10.35,
08-051710   5-17-2010   92.01-
                        92.06,
                        92.99
9-080210    8-2-2010    153.001
10-080210   8-2-2010    153.001
11-080210   8-2-2010    153.001
                        153.002,
12-080210   8-2-2010    153.036,
                        153.056,
                        153.076
                        71.15-
14-061812   6-18-2012   71.18,
                        71.99
15-061812   6-18-2012   153.999
16-081516   8-15-2016   153.220-
                        153.224
17-121916   12-19-2016  153.242
18-041717   4-17-2017   91.01-
                        91.08
20-080717   8-7-2017    153.146
21-031918   3-19-2018   50.30-
                        50.35
                        132.01-
22-05172021 5-17-2021   132.04,
                        132.99
                       
 
