CITY OF RONAN, MONTANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code current through:
Ord. 2023-04, passed 9-13-2023
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2021-01
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE RONAN, MONTANA CODE OF ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, the City of Ronan adopted the general ordinances of the City of
Ronan, Montana, as codified, on July 20, 1992.
   WHEREAS, on June 28, 2019, the City of Ronan entered into a contract with
Sterling Codifiers, Inc., for recodification of the Ronan Ordinances. During
the term of the contract, Sterling Codifiers, Inc. became a member of American
Legal Publishing Corporation.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF RONAN, MONTANA:
   1.   From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City Code of
the City of Ronan, Montana, prepared by American Legal Publishing Corporation,
copyright 2020, containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general
nature together with the changes made to said ordinances under the direction of
the governing body of the City, including, but not limited to changes in the
numbers of the ordinances, shall be adopted as the official code of the City of
Ronan, and further, accepted in all courts as the official code and law of the
City of Ronan, as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
   2.   There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the
loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by American Legal Publishing Corporation, whereby each newly adopted
ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding to, or
deleting provisions of the official city code is identified by the proper
catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies,
one copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk,
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
   3.   All ordinances, of a general or special nature, shall continue in full
force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the
City code.
   4.   All ordinances, or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to
the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   5.   This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full force
and effect thirty (30) days after passage and approval.
   FIRST READING: March 15, 2021.
    6  Ayes    0  Nays    0  Absent
   SECOND READING: April 5, 2021.
   
    6  Ayes    0  Nays    0  Absent
   NOW, THEREFORE, the foregoing Ordinance shall become effective on May 5,
2021.
                                    CITY OF RONAN
                                    _________________________________
                                    Kim Aipperspach, Mayor
ATTEST:
__________________________________
Kaylene Melton, City Clerk
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
__________________________________
Benjamin R. Anciaux
Ronan City Attorney
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 2022-06
 
 
AN ORDINANCE TO PROHIBIT VEHICLES WITH GROSS WEIGHT IN EXCESS OF TEN TONS FROM
BEING OPERATED UPON THIRD AVENUE NORTHWEST BETWEEN ROUND BUTTE ROAD AND HIGHWAY
93, AND PROVIDING FOR APPROPRIATE SIGNAGE AND PENALTIES
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF RONAN, MONTANA:
 
   WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Ronan is empowered to manage and
organize public assets; and
 
   WHEREAS, the City owns and maintains a network of roads and rights-of-way,
including the public right-of-way known as Third Avenue Northwest; and
 
   WHEREAS, the City desires to diminish wear upon Third Avenue Northwest by
prohibiting operation thereon of vehicles in excess of ten (10) tons gross
weight.
 
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF RONAN,
MONTANA:
 
1.    The foregoing recitals are not mere recitals but are part and parcel of
this Ordinance.
 
2.    Vehicles in excess of ten (10) tons gross weight shall be prohibited from
operation upon Third Avenue Northwest along that portion of its length between
Round Butte Road and Highway 93, except for local deliveries within the above-
described area.
 
3.    Signage to this effect shall be erected at both ends and at intersections
of Third Avenue Northwest by the City Public Works Department.
 
4.    Violation of this Ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by
a fine not to exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).
 
   REPEALING CLAUSE: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict here
within are hereby repealed.
  
   BE IT FURTHERMORE ORDAINED: That the City Clerk is instructed to file this
Ordinance in the Book of Ordinances.
 
FIRST READING: October 12, 2022:     6  Ayes  0  Nays  0  Absent
 
SECOND READING: October 26, 2022:    _4_ Ayes __0_ Nays __2_ Absent
   
NOW, THEREFORE, the foregoing Ordinance shall become effective on November 25,
2022.
 
                      CITY OF RONAN
 
 
 
                     Chris Adler, Mayor       
ATTEST:
 
 
 
_____________________________________
Kaylene Melton, Clerk-Treasurer
 
 
 
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
 
 
 
_____________________________________
Benjamin R. Anciaux
Ronan City Attorney
 
 
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
1.    RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
2.    CITY STANDARDS
      
3.    MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
      
4.    OFFICIALS, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
      
5.    ORDINANCES
      
6.    FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
7.    FEE SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 1: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
General Provisions
   
1-1-1   Title and citation
   
1-1-2   Acceptance
   
1-1-3   Construction of words
   
1-1-4   Definitions
   
1-1-5   Effect of headings
   
1-1-6   Continuation of provisions
   
1-1-7   Effect of code on past actions and obligations
   
1-1-8   Severability
Savings Clause
   
1-1-20   Repeal of general ordinances
   
1-1-21   Public utility ordinances
   
1-1-22   Pending suits
General Penalty
   
1-1-35   Violation; penalty
   
1-1-36   References to general penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1-1 TITLE AND CITATION.
   This compilation and codification of the general ordinances of the City of
Ronan is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official
“Municipal Code of the City of Ronan”. Any reference to the number of any
section contained under its appropriate title heading, its chapter heading, and
its section heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as
well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in
any legal document.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-101)
§ 1-1-2 ACCEPTANCE.
   This municipal code of the city, as hereby presented in printed form, shall
hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all
administrative tribunals of the state as the ordinances of a general and
permanent effect of the city.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-102)
§ 1-1-3 CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS.
   Whenever any word in any section is used, in describing or referring to any
matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed
to be included, although distributive words may not have been used.
   (A)   Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   (B)   Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular.
   (C)   Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future tense includes the present tense.
   (D)   Shall and may. “Shall” is mandatory. “May” is permissive.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-103)
§ 1-1-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Ronan, Montana.
   CODE or THIS CODE. The Municipal Code of City of Ronan.
   COUNCIL. The Council of the City of Ronan.
   MCA. The abbreviation for the Montana Code Annotated (2015).
   MUNICIPAL. The City of Ronan, Montana.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Ronan.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock
company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, fraternal
organization, business, trust or their manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer
or employee or any of them.
   STATE. The State of Montana.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-104)
§ 1-1-5 EFFECT OF HEADINGS.
   Title, chapter and section headings within this code shall not be deemed to
govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of
any title, chapter or section of this code.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-105)
§ 1-1-6 CONTINUATION OF PROVISIONS.
   Ordinances and resolutions heretofore adopted by the municipality which are
not contradicted or duplicated as to subject matter by ordinances codified in
this code shall remain in full force and effect as laws of the municipality.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-106)
§ 1-1-7 EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS.
   Neither the adoption of this code nor the consequent repeal or amendment of
any ordinance shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of
ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of this
code.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-107)
§ 1-1-8 SEVERABILITY.
   If any portion of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by any court or competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The Council
declares that it would have adopted this code and each section, division,
sentence or portion thereof, whether or not any one or more sections,
divisions, sentences or portions is declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-108)
SAVINGS CLAUSE
§ 1-1-20 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption herein as
being still in force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from
repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in § 1-1-21 of this chapter),
from which are excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and
all special ordinances.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-201)
§ 1-1-21 PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and
other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of
public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by
virtue of §
1-1-20 of this chapter, excepting as this code may contain provision for such
matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinances in respect of such provisions only.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-202)
§ 1-1-22 PENDING SUITS.
   (A)   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the part
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   (B)   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance. Nothing contained in this
section or §
1-1-21 of this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending
under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed; or as
discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue,
or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving
any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the
time of adoption of this code.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-203)
GENERAL PENALTY
§ 1-1-35 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Unless a different penalty is specifically provided elsewhere in this code,
any person who violates any of the provisions of this code shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $500. Every day that a violation
continues after the first day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-601; Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 1-1-36 REFERENCES TO GENERAL PENALTY.
   When any section of this code declares that a violator is subject to the
general penalty, that person shall be subject to fine as provided in §
1-1-35 of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-602; Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-6-2020)
CHAPTER 2: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
1-2-1   City limits
   
1-2-2   City seal
   
1-2-3   City wards
§ 1-2-1 CITY LIMITS.
   The city limits are hereby defined to be as set forth on the official map on
file in the office of the Clerk and by specific reference is made a part of
this section.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-301)
§ 1-2-2 CITY SEAL.
   The city shall have a corporate seal of circular form, capable of making an
indenture of the following description: on the upper side of the outer circle
thereof, shall be the words “CITY OF RONAN” and on the lower side of the outer
circle thereof shall be the words “STATE OF MONTANA” and across the center of
the inner circle thereof, shall be the seal of the city, to be used in all
cases required by law or ordinance.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-401)
§ 1-2-3 CITY WARDS.
   The city shall be divided into three wards, as set forth in this section.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-701)
   (A)   Ward No. 1. Ward No. 1 shall include all that part of the city lying
and being east of the east line of U.S. Highway 93 and extensions thereof.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-702)
   (B)   Ward No. 2. Ward No. 2 shall include all that part of the city lying
and being between the east line of U.S. Highway 93 and extensions thereof and
the east line of 5th Avenue and extensions thereof.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-703)
   (C)   Ward No. 3. Ward No. 3 shall include all that part of the city lying
and being west of the east line of 5th Avenue and extensions thereof.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-704)
CHAPTER 3: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Section
Mayor
   
1-3-1   Duties and qualifications
   
1-3-2   Term of office
   
1-3-3   Powers of Mayor related to municipal officers, personnel and citizens
   
1-3-4   Effect of failure to obey call from Mayor for assistance
   
1-3-5   Power to grant pardons
   
1-3-6   Extraterritorial powers
   
1-3-7   Procedure to veto ordinance or resolution
   
1-3-8   Accounts of officers
   
1-3-9   Other powers
Council
   
1-3-20   Qualifications of Alderman
   
1-3-21   Powers of Council
   
1-3-22   Meetings; regular and special; time
   
1-3-23   Quorum
   
1-3-24   President
   
1-3-25   Order of business
   
1-3-26   Rules of the Council
   
1-3-27   Standing committees
   
1-3-28   Ordinance book maintenance
   
1-3-29   Keeping of journal
MAYOR
§ 1-3-1 DUTIES AND QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The Mayor, the superintending and administrative officer of the
municipality, shall devote so much of his or her time to the duties of his or
her office as an efficient and faithful discharge thereof may require. He or
she shall preside at all meetings of the Council and shall have a vote when the
Council is tied and his or her vote is necessary. He or she shall appoint all
officers and employees of the municipality, subject to the approval of the
Council, and have such other powers as the Council may prescribe. He or she
shall from time to time provide for the Council such information and recommend
such measures as he or she may deem beneficial to the municipality. He or she
shall examine the grounds of all complaints against any officer of the
municipality to determine existence of a violation or neglect of duty and
report to the Council the evidence thereof, if deemed sufficient for the
removal of said officer. He or she shall require that every officer, on the
expiration of his or her term of office or resignation or removal, deliver to
his or her successor all assets belonging to such office. He or she shall
perform all other duties required and necessary for the efficient operation of
the business of the municipality.
   (B)   No person shall be eligible for the office of Mayor unless:
      (1)   He or she is at least 21 years old;
      (2)   He or she has been a resident of the state for at least three
years; and
      (3)   He or she has been a resident for at least two years preceding the
election to office of the city or an area which has been annexed by the city.
   (C)   The office of Mayor of the city is considered vacant if the individual
elected as Mayor ceases to be a resident of the city.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-101)
§ 1-3-2 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor shall hold office for a term of four years and until the
qualification of his or her successor.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-102)
§ 1-3-3 POWERS OF MAYOR RELATED TO MUNICIPAL OFFICERS, PERSONNEL AND CITIZENS.
   The Mayor has power to:
   (A)   Nominate and, with the consent of the Council, appoint all non-
elective officers of the city provided for by the Council, except as provided
in this subchapter;
   (B)   Suspend and, with the consent of the Council, remove any non-elective
officer, stating at the time of the suspension or removal the cause thereof;
   (C)   Supervise the discharge of official duty by all subordinate officers;
   (D)   Require of any of the officers of an exhibit of such officer’s books
and papers;
   (E)   Call on every citizen of the city over the age of 18 years to aid in
the enforcement of the laws and ordinances in case of riot; and
   (F)   Call out the militia to aid the Mayor in suppressing riots or other
disorderly conduct, preventing and extinguishing fires, securing the peace and
safety of the city, or carrying into effect any law or ordinance.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-103)
§ 1-3-4 EFFECT OF FAILURE TO OBEY CALL FROM MAYOR FOR ASSISTANCE.
   Any person who does not obey a call from the Mayor forfeits to the city a
fine not exceeding $25 per call.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-104)
§ 1-3-5 POWER TO GRANT PARDONS.
   The Mayor has power to grant pardons and remit fines and forfeitures for
offenses against city ordinances when, in the Mayor’s judgment, public justice
would be thereby subserved. The Mayor must report all pardons granted, with the
reasons therefor, to the next Council.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-105)
§ 1-3-6 EXTRATERRITORIAL POWERS.
   The Mayor has power to exercise such power as may be vested in the Mayor by
ordinance of the city ordinances, in and over all places within five miles of
the boundaries of the city for the purpose of enforcing the health and
quarantine ordinances and regulations thereof.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-106)
§ 1-3-7 PROCEDURE TO VETO ORDINANCE OR RESOLUTION.
   (A)   In case an ordinance or resolution does not meet the Mayor’s
approbation, the Mayor has power to return the same to the next regular meeting
of the Council, with all objections in writing. No ordinance or resolution so
vetoed by the Mayor must go into effect unless the same be afterwards passed by
two-thirds vote of the whole number of members of the Council.
   (B)   If the Mayor fails to return any resolution or ordinance as aforesaid,
the same takes effect without further action.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-107)
§ 1-3-8 ACCOUNTS OF OFFICERS.
   The Mayor shall have the power to require any officer of the municipality to
exhibit his or her accounts or other papers and to make reports to the Council
in writing on any subject or matter pertaining to the office.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-108)
§ 1-3-9 OTHER POWERS.
   The Mayor shall have all other powers provided by state statute or by
specific provisions of this code.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-109)
COUNCIL
§ 1-3-20 QUALIFICATIONS OF ALDERMAN.
   No person is eligible for the office of Alderman unless he or she is a
resident for at least 60 days preceding the election to office of the ward
electing him or her or of an area which has been annexed by the city and placed
in the ward.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-201)
§ 1-3-21 POWERS OF COUNCIL.
   The City Council has the power to:
   (A)   Determine the rules of its proceedings, punish its members for
improper conduct;
   (B)   Make and pass all by-laws, ordinances, orders and resolutions not
repugnant to the Constitution of the United States or of the state, or of the
provisions of state law, necessary for the government or management of the
affairs of the municipality, for the execution of the powers vested in the body
corporate by the state;
   (C)   Fix compensation for, and prescribe the duties of, all officers and
other employees of the municipality, subject to the limitations set forth in
the laws of Montana;
   (D)   Require a report in detail from any officer of the municipality at any
time regarding the transactions of his or her office, or any matter connected
therewith;
   (E)   Make any and all contracts necessary to carry into effect the powers
granted by the laws of Montana, and to provide for the manner of executing the
same;
   (F)   Make regulations authorizing the police of the municipality to make
arrests of persons charged with crime, within the limits of the municipality
and within five miles thereof, and along the line of the water supply of the
municipality; and
   (G)   Impose fines and penalties for the violation of any municipal
ordinance, but no fine or penalty shall exceed $500 and no imprisonment shall
exceed six months for any one offense.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-202)
§ 1-3-22 MEETINGS; REGULAR AND SPECIAL; TIME.
   (A)   (1)   The Council shall hold regular meetings for the transaction of
municipal business on the first and third Monday of each month, and such other
meetings to which the Council, by order, may adjourn, or which may be called.
      (2)   Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, or at the written
request of three members of the Council, filed with the City Clerk, on their
requisition, giving at least three days’ notice thereof, in writing, to all
members of the Council present in the city.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-203)
   (B)   (1)   The Council shall convene at 6:00 p.m. unless otherwise ordered.
      (2)   The Mayor shall call the Council to order and the City Clerk shall
proceed to call the roll and record in the minutes the names of all members
present and note the members absent. The Clerk shall then announce whether or
not a quorum is present.
      (3)   All meetings shall be held in the City Hall unless otherwise
ordered.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-204)
§ 1-3-23 QUORUM.
   A majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, but a lesser number may meet and adjourn to any time
stated, and may compel the attendance of absent members under such rules and
penalties as the Council may prescribe.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-205)
§ 1-3-24 PRESIDENT.
   At its first meeting succeeding the annual election, the Council shall elect
one of its members as President of the Council. In the absence of the Mayor,
the President shall be the presiding officer of the Council and may perform the
duties of the Mayor.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-206)
§ 1-3-25 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise directed by special order of the Council entered in
the journal, the order of business for Council meetings shall be:
      (1)   First: reading, correcting, if necessary, and approving the minutes
of the last meeting;
      (2)   Second: reports of officers;
      (3)   Third: reports of standing committees;
      (4)   Fourth: presentation of petitions and communications;
      (5)   Fifth: unfinished business; and
      (6)   Sixth: new business.
   (B)   All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided by
the Mayor without debate.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-207)
§ 1-3-26 RULES OF THE COUNCIL.
   The proceedings of the Council shall in all cases be governed by the
following rules, unless the same are suspended temporarily by a vote of
majority of the Council.
   (A)   The Mayor or, in his or her absence, the President of the Council
shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide all questions of order,
subject to appeal to the Council.
   (B)   Prior to speaking, every person shall address the Mayor, and shall not
proceed until recognized by him or her.
   (C)   Every person shall rise while addressing the Council, if requested.
   (D)   When two or more persons address the presiding officer, the first
arising shall have precedence.
   (E)   While a question is being put, no member shall speak or walk across
the Council room or leave the room.
   (F)   When any member is addressing the Council, no other member shall
engage in private conversation or do any act to divert or interrupt the
speaker.
   (G)   No member shall speak more than twice on the same subject without
leave of the Council, nor more than once until every member desiring to speak
on the pending question has had an opportunity to do so.
   (H)   No motion shall be debated or put unless the same is seconded. It
shall then be stated by the presiding officer and, at the request of any
member, shall be reduced to writing.
   (I)   After a motion has been stated by the presiding officer, it shall be
deemed in possession of the Council, but may be withdrawn at any time before
amendment or decision by the mover with the consent of his or her second.
   (J)   If a question under consideration contains more than one distinct
proposition, any member may demand a division.
   (K)   (1)   When a question is under debate, no motion shall be entertained,
except the following motions:
         (a)   To adjourn;
         (b)   To lay on the table;
         (c)   For the previous question;
         (d)   To postpone to a certain day;
         (e)   To commit to a standing committee;
         (f)   To amend; and
         (g)   To postpone indefinitely.
      (2)   These motions shall take precedence in the order in which they are
stated.
   (L)   A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, save when a member is
addressing the chair or a vote is being taken. Motions to adjourn and lay on
the table shall not be debatable.
   (M)   Every member of the Council present shall vote upon every question
submitted to the Council, unless excused or unless directly interested.
   (N)   No motion or proposition on a subject different from that under
consideration shall be admitted under color of amendment.
   (O)   No motion for a reconsideration shall be in order unless made at the
same meeting or the meeting following that on which the decision was made, nor
shall such motion be made save by one who voted with the majority upon the
adoption.
   (P)   In all cases, the name of the member proposing a motion or resolution
shall be entered with it in the journal of the proceedings.
   (Q)   The yeas and nays shall be called and recorded on the final passage of
any ordinance, by-law, resolution or the making of any contract.
   (R)   The voting on the election or appointment of any officer shall be done
orally. A majority of the whole number of the members elected is required to
appoint or elect an officer. Such vote shall be recorded in the journal of the
proceedings.
   (S)   The Mayor shall vote only in the case of a tie and, by his or her
vote, all ties shall be decided.
   (T)   All petitions, communications, ordinances and resolutions shall be
reduced to writing before being submitted to the vote of the Council.
   (U)   In all parliamentary practice not herein provided for, the Mayor, with
the consent of the Council, shall select a standard work on rules of order and
shall see that a copy of this work is present and available at all meetings of
the Council.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-208)
§ 1-3-27 STANDING COMMITTEES.
   The Mayor may appoint any standing committees that he or she deems necessary
for the orderly processing of business of the city.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-209)
§ 1-3-28 ORDINANCE BOOK MAINTENANCE.
   All ordinances, by-laws and resolutions passed by the Council and approved
by the Mayor, or the person acting in his or her stead, shall be recorded in a
book kept by the Clerk called “the ordinance book” and numbered in the order in
which they are passed.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-210)
§ 1-3-29 KEEPING OF JOURNAL.
   The Council shall cause a journal to be kept of its proceedings, which shall
be open to inspection.
(1992 Code, § 2-1-211)
CHAPTER 4: OFFICIALS, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
1-4-1   Civil rights
   
1-4-2   Political activity
Appointive Officers
   
1-4-15   Appointments
   
1-4-16   Terms of office
   
1-4-17   Removal from office
   
1-4-18   Bonds of officers
   
1-4-19   Disposition of fines and fees collected
Salaries, Holidays and Hours of Work
   
1-4-30   Elective officers
   
1-4-31   Appointive officers
   
1-4-32   Employees’ wages
   
1-4-33   Hours and work week
   
1-4-34   Legal holidays
Sick Leave
   
1-4-50   Accruing sick leave
   
1-4-51   Eligibility
   
1-4-52   Leave in excess of three days
   
1-4-53   Part-time and seasonal employees
   
1-4-54   Lump sum payment upon termination
   
1-4-55   Fraudulent claims
   
1-4-56   Probationary employees
Vacation
   
1-4-70   Annual vacation leave
   
1-4-71   Illness; not chargeable
   
1-4-72   Entitlement upon retirement
   
1-4-73   Payment for unused vacation
   
1-4-74   Date of annual vacation
   
1-4-75   Pay after separation
Specific Officers and Employees
   
1-4-90   City Judge
   
1-4-91   Clerk
   
1-4-92   City Attorney
   
1-4-93   Chief of Police
   
1-4-94   Fire Chief
   
1-4-95   Building Inspector
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-4-1 CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (A)   Compliance required. The city will comply with Title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. §§ 2000d et seq.) and the regulations issued
pursuant thereto (24 C.F.R. part 1), which provides that no person in the
United States shall on the grounds of race, creed or color, or national origin,
be excluded from participation in, be denied in the benefits of or be otherwise
subjected to discrimination under any program or activity for which the city
received federal financial assistance and will immediately take any measures
necessary to effectuate this assurance. All employees of the city are ordered
to so comply.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-201)
   (B)   Record keeping. The Clerk shall establish a file for each city
employee and for each program or activity referred to in §
1-4-2  of this chapter in which all records relating to the compliance required
in this section shall be maintained.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-202)
   (C)   Hiring procedures. On the occasion of the next hiring by the city
following the enactment of the ordinance codified in this section, the Clerk,
in conjunction with the City Attorney, shall develop a procedure by which civil
rights compliance may be assured in the hiring process.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-203)
   (D)   Posting of rights; violation reports. The Clerk shall post a copy of
this section in a conspicuous location in each building where city employees
are employed, and the Clerk shall be responsible to report allegations of
violations of the civil rights to the Mayor, whose responsibility it shall be
to act thereon.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-204)
§ 1-4-2 POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
   (A)   The city will comply with MCA 13-35-226 (1987) and with 5 U.S.C. Ch.
15, and will immediately take any measures necessary to effectuate this
compliance. All employees of the city are ordered to so comply.
   (B)   The Clerk shall post a notice in a conspicuous location in each
building where city employees are employed stating: “As an employee of the City
of Ronan, you are required to comply with MCA 13-35-226 (1987) and 5 U.S.C. Ch.
15, which control certain types of political activity by public employees.
Copies of those laws may be obtained from the City Clerk.”
   (C)   The Clerk shall establish a file for each city employee in which all
records relating to the compliance required in this section shall be
maintained.
   (D)   At the conclusion of each local, county, state or national election,
the Mayor shall survey the city’s employees to determine whether violations
have occurred. The records of the survey shall be placed in the files
established in division (C) above.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-301)
APPOINTIVE OFFICERS
§ 1-4-15 APPOINTMENTS.
   The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Council,
appoint a City Clerk, City Attorney, Chief of Police and Fire Chief, and such
officials as may from time to time be established by action of the Council and
such other appointive officers within the powers conferred by the statutes of
the State of Montana necessary to carry out the functions of the city.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-601)
§ 1-4-16 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   All appointments shall be made for a term including probationary terms. If
no specified term is included in an appointment, it shall be deemed to be for a
term of two years and until the qualification of his or her successor. If no
person is appointed to any office provided for in this code, the Mayor, with
the advice and consent of the Council, may appoint from time to time acting
officers for specified purposes. The compensation of such acting officer may be
fixed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-602)
§ 1-4-17 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   The Mayor shall have the power to suspend and, with the consent of the
Council, to remove any non-elective officer.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-603)
§ 1-4-18 BONDS OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   Certain officers shall give bonds in favor of the city. Surety bonds
may be furnished in lieu of personal bonds as follows:
      (1)   Clerk: $25,000; and
      (2)   Chief of Police: $1,000.
   (B)   Bonds so furnished in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter shall be furnished at the expense of the city.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-604)
§ 1-4-19 DISPOSITION OF FINES AND FEES COLLECTED.
   All fines, fees or other moneys received by any of the above-named officers
in the discharge of their duties as such shall be paid into the Treasury for
the credit of the city.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-605)
SALARIES, HOLIDAYS AND HOURS OF WORK
§ 1-4-30 ELECTIVE OFFICERS.
   Elective officers’ salaries shall be fixed from time to time by resolution
of the Council. No additional compensation shall be allowed.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-101)
§ 1-4-31 APPOINTIVE OFFICERS.
   The salaries of appointive officers shall be fixed from time to time by
resolution of the Council.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-102)
§ 1-4-32 EMPLOYEES’ WAGES.
   The wages of all employees of the city shall be designated by the heads of
the various departments, subject to the approval of the Council.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-103)
§ 1-4-33 HOURS AND WORK WEEK.
   All full time salaried city employees shall work a minimum of 40 hours per
week.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-104)
§ 1-4-34 LEGAL HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   Days declared to be legal holidays shall be as follows:
      (1)   January 1 (New Year’s Day);
      (2)   Third Monday in January (Martin Luther King Jr. Day);
      (3)   Third Monday of every February (Presidents Day);
      (4)   Last Monday in May (Memorial Day);
      (5)   July 4 (Independence Day);
      (6)   First Monday in September (Labor Day);
      (7)   Second Monday in October (Columbus Day);
      (8)   November 11 (Veterans Day);
      (9)   Fourth Thursday of November (Thanksgiving Day);
      (10)   December 25 (Christmas Day); and
      (11)   Every general election day for the State of Montana.
   (B)   If any of the holidays herein enumerated fall on Sunday, the Monday
following is a holiday. If any of the holidays may fall on Saturday, the Friday
proceeding shall be the holiday.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-105)
SICK LEAVE
§ 1-4-50 ACCRUING SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   Each full-time employee of the city is entitled to and shall earn sick
leave credits from the first full pay period of employment.
   (B)   For calculating sick leave credits, 2,080 hours (52 weeks times 40
hours) equals one year.
   (C)   Proportions sick leave credits shall be earned and credited at the end
of each pay period.
   (D)   Sick leave credits shall be earned at the rate of 12 working days for
each year of service without restriction as to the number of working days he or
she may accumulate.
   (E)   An employee may not accrue sick leave credits during a continuous
leave of absence without pay which exceeds 15 calendar days.
   (F)   Employees are not entitled to be paid for sick leave under the
provisions of this subchapter until they have been continuously employed for 90
days. Upon completion of the qualifying period, the employee is entitled to the
sick leave credits he or she has earned.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-401)
§ 1-4-51 ELIGIBILITY.
   No payment for absence due to sickness shall be allowed unless the employee
fulfills the following requirements:
   (A)   Prompt notification of his or her superior by telephone or otherwise
on his or her first day off duty; and
   (B)   Evidence of his or her illness or medical treatment furnished upon
request of his or her superior, the Mayor or the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-402)
§ 1-4-52 LEAVE IN EXCESS OF THREE DAYS.
   Sick leave with pay in excess of three consecutive working days for reasons
of personal leave or physical incapacity shall be granted only after
presentation of a written statement by a reputable physician certifying that
the employee’s conditions prevented him or her from the performance of the
duties of his or her position.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-403)
§ 1-4-53 PART-TIME AND SEASONAL EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Permanent part-time employees are entitled to prorated leave benefits
if they have a regularly scheduled work assignment and normally work at least
20 hours each week of the pay period and have worked the qualifying period.
   (B)   Full-time temporary and seasonal employees are entitled to sick leave
benefits; provided, they work the qualifying period.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-404)
§ 1-4-54 LUMP SUM PAYMENT UPON TERMINATION.
   (A)   (1)   An employee who terminated employment with the city is entitled
to a lump-sum payment equal to one-fourth of the pay attributed to the
accumulated sick leave.
      (2)   The pay attributed to the accumulated sick leave shall be computed
on the basis of the employee’s salary or wage at the time he or she terminates
his or her employment with the city.
   (B)   An employee of the city who receives a lump-sum payment pursuant to
this subchapter and who is again employed by the city shall not be credited
with any sick leave for which he or she has previously been compensated.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-405)
§ 1-4-55 FRAUDULENT CLAIMS.
   An employee fraudulently obtaining sick leave or a supervisor falsely
certifying sick leave payments, for reasons other than sickness or medical
treatment, may be suspended or discharged by the Mayor or the head of his or
her department, or accumulated sick leave credits of the employee or supervisor
may be canceled by the Mayor with the consent of the Council.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-406)
§ 1-4-56 PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEES.
   Employees serving a probationary period prior to appointment shall accrue
sick leave at the rate prescribed in this subchapter, but such leave shall not
be available for their use until they have successfully completed the
probationary period and have received permanent appointments.
(1992 Code, § 2-3-407)
VACATION
§ 1-4-70 ANNUAL VACATION LEAVE.
   (A)   Every employee of the city who has been in continuous employment and
service of the city for a period of one year from his or her date of employment
is entitled to and shall be granted annual vacation leave with full pay at the
rate of 15 days per working year, and such annual vacation leave may be
accumulated to a total not to exceed 30 working days.
   (B)   Every employee of the city who has been in continuous employment and
service of the city for a period of ten years from the date of employment is
entitled to and shall be granted annual vacation leave with full pay of 18
working days and such annual vacation leave may be accumulated to a total not
to exceed 36 working days.
   (C)   Every employee of the city who has been in continuous employment and
service of the city for a period of 15 years from the date of employment is
entitled to and shall be granted annual vacation leave with full pay of 21
working days and such annual vacation leave may be accumulated to a total not
to exceed 42 working days.
   (D)   Every employee of the city who has been in continuous employment and
service of the city for a period of 20 years, from the date of employment is
entitled to and shall be granted annual vacation leave with full pay of 24
working days and such annual vacation leave may be accumulated to a total not
to exceed 48 working days.
(1992 Code, § 2-4-501)
§ 1-4-71 ILLNESS; NOT CHARGEABLE.
   Absence from employment by reason of illness shall not be chargeable against
annual vacation leave.
(1992 Code, § 2-4-502)
§ 1-4-72 ENTITLEMENT UPON RETIREMENT.
   Any employee who is separated from service for reasons not reflecting
discredit on himself or herself shall be entitled on the day of separation to
cash compensation for unused vacation leave at his or her base pay at the time
of retirement.
(1992 Code, § 2-4-503)
§ 1-4-73 PAYMENT FOR UNUSED VACATION.
   Before payment is made for any vacation not actually taken, the City Council
shall determine that such payment is necessary in order to prevent an injustice
to the employee involved, and shall by resolution authorize such payment. No
such payment shall be made to any employee who fails to take his or her
vacation at the time allotted by the department head.
(1992 Code, § 2-4-504)
§ 1-4-74 DATE OF ANNUAL VACATION.
   The date when an employee’s annual vacation leave shall be granted shall be
determined by agreement between each employee and his or her department head
with regard to the best interests of the city as well as the best interests of
each employee.
(1992 Code, § 2-4-505)
§ 1-4-75 PAY AFTER SEPARATION.
   No employee shall receive vacation pay after separation from city service.
(1992 Code, § 2-4-506)
SPECIFIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 1-4-90 CITY JUDGE.
   (A)    Election. The City Judge shall be a four-year elected position.
Elections shall be held pursuant to the laws of the State of Montana. Any
person resident in and a voter registered in Lake County shall be eligible to
serve as City Judge, and to continue in office must remain resident in Lake
County during the entirety of his or her term of office.
   (B)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the City Judge to attend all mandatory
certification training; to keep the docket required by the laws of Montana to
be kept by such Court of limited jurisdiction; to hear and determine all cases
that may be instituted in the City Court under the laws of city or of the State
of Montana; to administer the judicial branch of city government; and to
perform all necessary administrative duties.
   (C)   Fines. The City Judge shall collect all fines applicable for
violations of city or state laws or ordinances and shall, in the collection and
transmittal of such moneys, adhere to such procedures as the city may from time
to time, on the advice of its auditors, require. (1992 Code, §§ 2-1-301 - 2-1-
303) (Ord. 2009-02, passed 5-11-2009; Ord. 2022-02, passed 2-23-2022)
§ 1-4-91 CLERK.
   (A)   Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint the Clerk, subject to approval of
the City Council, unless otherwise provided and specified in his or her order
of appointment, and until his or her successor in office is appointed and
qualified.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-101)
   (B)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Clerk:
      (1)   To attend all meetings of the Council, to record and sign the
proceedings thereof and all ordinances, by-laws, resolutions and contracts
passed, adopted or entered into, and to sign, number and keep a record of all
licenses, commissions or permits granted or authorized by the Council;
      (2)   To enter in a book all ordinances, resolutions and by-laws passed
and adopted by the Council;
      (3)   To enter in a book kept for that purpose the date, amount and
person in whose favor and for what purpose warrants are drawn upon the
Treasury;
      (4)   To countersign and cause to be published or posted, as provided by
law, all ordinances by-laws or resolutions passed and adopted by the Council;
      (5)   To file and keep all records, books, papers or property belonging
to the municipality and to deliver the same to his or her successor when
qualified;
      (6)   To make and certify copies of all records, books and papers in his
or her possession, on the payment of fees therefor, which fees must be paid
into the Treasury;
      (7)   To give notice of all elections as required by law and to notify
all persons of their election or appointment to office;
      (8)   To make and keep a complete index of the journal, ordinance book,
finance book and all other books and papers on file in his or her office;
      (9)   To perform such duties in and about the assessment, levy and
collection of taxes and assessment as may be prescribed by law or ordinance;
      (10)   To take and administer oaths, but must not charge or receive any
fees therefor;
      (11)   To receive all moneys that come to the municipality, either from
taxation or otherwise, and to pay the same out on the warrant of the Mayor,
countersigned by the Clerk, drawn in accordance with law;
      (12)   To perform such duties in the collection of taxes, license fees or
assessments as are or may be prescribed by law or ordinances;
      (13)   To present on the third Monday of each month to the Council a full
and detailed statement of the amounts of money belonging to the municipality,
received by him or her and by him or her disbursed during the preceding month,
and the state of each particular fund, which statement must be verified by his
or her oath;
      (14)   To keep the books and accounts of the municipality in such manner
as to correctly present the condition of the finances thereof, which must
always be open to the inspection of the Mayor, Council or any member thereof;
      (15)   To keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation and the
debits and credits thereof;
      (16)   To give every person paying to him or her money as Clerk, a
receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment, the amount and for what paid;
      (17)   To render at any time an account to the Council, showing the money
on hand and the condition of the Treasury;
      (18)   To keep a register of all warrants paid, which must show the date,
amount and number, and the person to whom, and the fund from which the same was
paid, and to deliver and file all vouchers, warrants or orders paid by him or
her;
      (19)   To annually make out and submit to the City Council, at its last
meeting prior to May 1, a detailed account of all receipts and expenditures
during the past fiscal year, file the same and abstract thereof must be
published in some newspaper in the municipality or, if none is published, such
abstract must be posted in the room or building occupied by the Council;
      (20)   To pay out, in the order which they are registered, all warrants
presented for payment, when there are funds in the Treasury to pay the same;
      (21)   To deposit all public moneys in his or her possession and under
his or her control, excepting such as may be required for current business, in
any solvent bank or banks located in such municipality, subject to national
supervision or state examination, as the Council shall designate, and no other;
and
      (22)   To perform such other and further duties as the Council may
prescribe or which may be imposed upon him or her by the laws of the State of
Montana.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-102)
§ 1-4-92 CITY ATTORNEY.
   (A)   Appointment. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council,
shall appoint a City Attorney whose term of office shall be as provided for
herein.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-201)
   (B)   Qualifications. The City Attorney shall be a person who has been
licensed to practice as an attorney in the State of Montana.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-202)
   (C)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to attend before the
Court of the city and the District Court, and prosecute on behalf of the city,
and he or she shall generally do and perform such other acts as pertain to the
office of the City Attorney. He or she shall, when required, draw for the use
of the Council contracts and ordinances for the government of the city and,
when required, give to the Mayor or Council written opinions on questions
pertaining to the duties and the rights, liabilities and powers of the city.
For such services, he or she shall receive such salary and fees as may be fixed
by the Mayor. Nothing herein shall be taken or construed as preventing the
Council from employing other and additional counsel in special cases, and
providing for the payment of such services. The City Attorney may be suspended
or removed from office by the Council for the neglect, violation or disregard
of the duties required by this section or the ordinances of the city.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-203)
§ 1-4-93 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   Appointment. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council. He or she shall hold office for a term
stated in his or her appointment or as provided by the code unless sooner
removed by the Mayor with the concurrence of the Council.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-301; Ord. 2021-03, passed 11-8-2021)
   (B)   Rank. The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Department and have
supervision over all the officers and members thereof. The Chief of Police may,
with the approval of the Mayor, appoint such special police as may be required
from time to time; however, such appointment may not be for a period of longer
than ten days and special police shall not be reappointed following the
specified ten days without the consent of the Council.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-302)
§ 1-4-94 FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   Appointment. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the Council. He or she shall hold office for a term
stated in his or her appointment or as provided by the code, or unless sooner
removed by the Mayor with the concurrence of the Council.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-401)
   (B)   Duties. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have sole command and
control over all persons connected with the Fire Department and shall possess
full power and authority over its organization, government and discipline and,
to that end, may from time to time establish such disciplinary rules as he or
she may deem advisable subject to the approval of the City Council. He or she
shall have charge of and be responsible for the apparatus and property
furnished by the city to the Department.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-402)
§ 1-4-95 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   Appointment. The Building Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to confirmation by the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-501)
   (B)   Duties. The Building Inspector shall, under the direction of the City
Council, enforce the provisions of the Building, Fire and Electrical Codes
contained in this code and he or she shall carry out the duties of the Building
Official as set forth in the Building Code. The Building Inspector shall also
be responsible for enforcing the zoning regulations of this code.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-502)
   (C)   Powers. The Building Inspector or City Clerk shall have the power to
issue building permits in the name of the city, to inspect all buildings and
construction for compliance with the municipal building, fire and electrical
codes, to examine all real property for compliance with this code and issue
citations in the name of the city for violations of those regulations which he
or she has a duty to enforce.
(1992 Code, § 2-2-503)
CHAPTER 5: ORDINANCES
Section
   
1-5-1   Form
   
1-5-2   Ordinances amending the code
   
1-5-3   Ordinances limited to one subject
   
1-5-4   Effective date of ordinances
   
1-5-5   Posting of ordinances
§ 1-5-1 FORM.
   Every ordinance or proposed ordinance shall be written in the following form
and order:
   (A)   The ordinance number, if available;
   (B)   The title of the ordinance;
   (C)   The words “Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Ronan,
Montana”;
   (D)   A statement of the purpose of the ordinance;
   (E)   A statement of the ordinances repealed or amended by the ordinance, if
applicable; and
   (F)   The text of the ordinance.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-501)
§ 1-5-2 ORDINANCES AMENDING THE CODE.
   Any ordinance or proposed ordinance which amends this code, or deals with a
subject which should properly be included within this code shall:
   (A)   Include in the text of the ordinance a verbatim statement of the new
section or sections to appear in the code, and the title of the section or
sections; and
   (B)   Assign a section number within the code to each new section. The
section number shall be chosen to place the new section as close as is
reasonably possible to similar or related sections within this code.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-502)
§ 1-5-3 ORDINANCES LIMITED TO ONE SUBJECT.
   No ordinance shall contain more than one subject, except ordinances for the
codification and revision of this code. The subject of an ordinance shall be
clearly expressed in its title.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-503)
§ 1-5-4 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance or resolution passed by the Council shall become effective
until 30 days after its passage, except general appropriation ordinances
providing for the ordinary and current expenses of the municipality and
emergency ordinances. In the case of emergency measures, the nature of the
emergency shall be expressed in the statement of the purpose of the ordinance,
and the measure shall receive a two-thirds vote of all the members elected.
Emergency ordinances shall include only such measures as are immediately
necessary for the preservation of peace, health and safety and shall not
include a franchise or license to a corporation or individual, nor any
provisions for the sale of real estate, nor any lease or letting of any
property for a period exceeding one year, nor the purchase or sale of personal
property exceeding $5,000 in value.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-504)
§ 1-5-5 POSTING OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances shall be posted for five days in three public places in city
immediately subsequent to enactment.
(1992 Code, § 1-1-505)
CHAPTER 6: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
General Provisions
   
1-6-1   Warrants
   
1-6-2   Capital Improvement Program and Fund
   
1-6-3   General levy
   
1-6-4   Financial reports
   
1-6-5   Drug Fund assessment
Purchasing Procedure
   
1-6-20   Award of contracts
   
1-6-21   Advertising for bids
   
1-6-22   Opening of bids
   
1-6-23   Exceptions to bidding requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-6-1 WARRANTS.
   (A)   Registration required. When any warrant drawn upon the treasury of the
city is presented for payment and is not paid for want of funds, the Clerk
shall comply with the provisions of MCA 7-6-4501 et seq. (2015) or the
provisions of this section.
(1992 Code, § 4-1-101)
   (B)   Interfund loan conditions. The Clerk may, in the circumstances
described in division (A) of this section, loan funds from one city account to
another at the rate of 7% per annum; provided that:
      (1)   Such loan be repaid in full with interest as above on or before
June 30 next following the date of the loan; and
      (2)   Such loan will not prevent the payment of budgeted warrants by the
funds loaned from.
(1992 Code, § 4-1-102)
§ 1-6-2 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM AND FUND.
   (A)   MCA 7-6-4134 (2015), as amended, provides for the establishment of a
separate fund known as the “Capital Improvement Program Fund” for the use in
matter and purposes specified therein.
   (B)   The program and fund shall be created, designated and funded in the
manner provided by law.
(1992 Code, § 4-1-201)
§ 1-6-3 GENERAL LEVY.
   (A)   Purpose. An all-purpose levy, in lieu of multiple levies, shall be the
manner of budgeting and levying to operate and maintain the city government and
the functions of the city. The all-purpose levy shall not include the levies
imposed for bonded indebtedness, to pay judgments or special improvement
district revolving funds of the municipality, which levies may be made in
addition to the all-purpose levy.
(1992 Code, § 4-1-301)
   (B)   Maximum rate-use of fund.
      (1)   The maximum rate of such all-purpose levy upon the taxable value of
all taxable property in the city for all city purposes shall not exceed 65
mills on the dollar, which levy shall not include any levy necessary to service
and pay bonded indebtedness, judgments or special improvement revolving funds,
in addition to such all-purpose levy. An amount not to exceed 5% of the moneys
received from and as a part of the all-purpose levy aforesaid may be placed in
a separate fund known as the “Capital Improvement Program Fund” to be earmarked
for the replacement and acquisition of property, plant or equipment costing in
excess of $5,000 with a life expectancy of five years or more; provided that, a
capital improvement program has been formally adopted by city ordinance.
      (2)   The moneys held in the Capital Improvement Program Fund shall,
whenever possible, be invested in savings or time deposits in a state or
national bank insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or in direct
obligations of the United States Government and credited back to the fund, plus
interest earned.
(1992 Code, § 4-1-302)
   (C)   Disposition. The City Council shall appropriate the levy to the
several departments of the city in its annual budget.
(1992 Code, § 4-1-303)
§ 1-6-4 FINANCIAL REPORTS.
   (A)   Within 120 days after the close of each fiscal year, the City Clerk
must make out, in duplicate, a complete statement of the financial condition of
the city for that fiscal year, showing:
      (1)   The indebtedness of the city, funded and floating; the amount of
each class of indebtedness and the amount of money in the treasury subject to
the payment of each class of indebtedness;
      (2)   The amount of money received from taxes upon real and personal
property;
      (3)   The amount of money received from fines, penalties and forfeitures;
      (4)   The amount of money received from licenses;
      (5)   The amount of money received from all other sources, each source
and the amount received from it being shown separately;
      (6)   For each fund, the amount of money, if any, on hand at the
beginning of the fiscal year, the amount received and the amount paid out
during the fiscal year;
      (7)   A concise description of all property owned by the city, with an
approximate estimate of the value of it;
      (8)   The rates of taxation and purposes for which taxes were levied
during the fiscal year; and
      (9)   Other information which may be required by the Department of
Commerce.
   (B)   The forms on which the statement shall be made shall be prescribed by
the Department of Commerce. The City Clerk must, within 120 days following the
close of each fiscal year, transmit one copy of the statement to the Department
of Commerce and must present the other copy to the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 4-1-401)
§ 1-6-5 DRUG FUND ASSESSMENT.
   Upon a person being convicted of or pleading guilty to an misdemeanor
offense of criminal possession of a dangerous drug, altering labels on
dangerous drugs, criminal possession of toxic substances, criminal possession
of drug paraphernalia, manufacturing/delivering of drug paraphernalia and
manufacture/delivery of drug paraphernalia by a person over the age of 18 to a
minor:
   (A)   The City Judge shall assess a sum of money, not less than $150 for
each case, which shall be included as a part of the fine assessed by the Judge,
but separately designated as a “City Drug Fund Assessment”. The City Drug Fund
Assessment, together with the remainder of the prescribed fine, must be in a
total amount that will not exceed the amount allowed by law for a fine for the
offense charged.
   (B)   There is hereby a fund to be called “City Drug Fund”. All moneys
designated and collected as a City Drug Fund Assessment shall be deposited into
the City Drug Fund. The money collected and placed into the City Drug Fund
shall be used for narcotic enforcement purposes.
(1992 Code, § 4-1-601) (Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-6-2017)
PURCHASING PROCEDURE
§ 1-6-20 AWARD OF CONTRACTS.
   Except as may be otherwise provided by Montana law, all contracts for the
purchase of any automobile, truck, other vehicle, road machinery, other
machinery, apparatus, appliances or equipment, for any materials or supplies of
any kind, or for construction, repair or maintenance for which must be paid a
sum exceeding $80,000, must be let to the lowest responsible bidder after
advertisement for bids.
(1992 Code, § 4-1-501)
§ 1-6-21 ADVERTISING FOR BIDS.
   If by publication, advertisement for bids shall be made once each week for
two consecutive weeks, and the second publication shall be made not less than
five days, nor more than 12 days before the consideration of the bids. If such
advertisement is made by posting, 15 days, including the day of posting, shall
elapse between the time of posting and the day set for consideration of bids.
(1992 Code, § 4-1-502)
§ 1-6-22 OPENINGS OF BIDS.
   The Council may postpone action on any contract to the next regular meeting
after bids are received and may reject any and all bids received; without cause
however, if any bid is awarded, it shall be awarded to the lowest responsible
bidder.
(1992 Code, § 4-1-503)
§ 1-6-23 EXCEPTIONS TO BIDDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The provisions as to advertisement for bids shall not apply upon the
happening of any emergency caused by fire, flood, explosion, storm, earthquake,
riot, insurrection or other similar emergency, but in such case the Council may
proceed in any manner which, in the judgment of three-fourths of the members of
the Council present at the meeting, duly recorded in the minutes of the
proceedings of the Council by aye and nay vote, will best meet the emergency
and serve the public interest. Such emergency shall be declared and recorded at
length in the minutes of the proceedings of the Council at the time the vote
thereon is taken and recorded.
   (B)   When there are sufficient funds in the budget for supplies or
equipment, the city may, without bid, purchase such supplies or equipment from
government agencies available to cities when the same can be purchased by the
city at a substantial saving to the city.
   (C)   In lieu of soliciting bids, the Council may purchase at public auction
any vehicle, machinery, appliances, apparatus, building or materials and
supplies for which must be paid a sum of $50,000 or less.
(1992 Code, § 4-1-504)
CHAPTER 7: FEE SCHEDULE
Section
   
1-7-1   Fee schedule
§ 1-7-1 FEE SCHEDULE.
Use Fee
Use                                      Fee
ANNUAL DOG AND CAT LICENSE FEES
   Neutered males and spayed females  $10                                
   Unneutered males and unspayed femal$20                                
BARS AND SALOONS
   Wine                               $50                                
   Beer                               $150                               
   Beer and wine                      $200                               
   All beverages                      $250                               
BUILDING PERMITS
Total valuation of project
   $1 to $1,999                       $35 for up to $1,999
   $2,000 to $24,999                  $50 for the first $2,000, plus $15 for each
                                         additional $1,000
   $25,000 to $49,999                 $400.00 for the first $25,000, plus $10 for
                                         each additional $1,000
   $50,000 to $99,999                 $650 for the first $50,000, plus $7 for each
                                         additional $1,000
   $100,000 to $499,999               $1,000 for the first $100,000, plus $6 for
                                         each additional $1,000
   $500,000 to $999,999               $3,250 for the first $500,000 plus $5 for each
                                         additional $1,000
   $1,000,000 and up                  $5,650 for the first $1,000,000, plus $4 for
                                         each additional $1,000
Investigation fee                        20% of cost of permit if project is over
                                         $5,000
SOLICITOR LICENSE
   Week (7 consecutive days)          $75 a week                         
   Year                               $150                               
SEWER RATE SCHEDULE (MONTHLY)
   3/4 inch base rate fee for 3,050   $27.44                             
gallons
   1 inch base rate fee for 5,155     $46.37                             
gallons
   1-3/4 inch base rate fee for 8662  $77.92                             
gallons
   2 inch base rate fee for 12,841    $115.75                            
gallons
   3 inch base rate fee for 20,700    $186.59                            
gallons
   4 inch base rate fee for 28,640    $257.66                            
gallons
   Additional usage is $2.55 per thousand gallons
SEWER SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT FEE (Note: water line connection size for sewer development
fee)
Size                                     Multiplier Development Installation Total
                                                    Fee         Cost
   3/4 inch                           1          $1,045.45   $400         $1,445.45
   1 inch                             1.69       $1,766.81   $400         $2,166.81
   1-1/2 inch                         2.84       $2,969.08   $400         $3,369.08
   2 inch                             4.21       $4,401.34   $400         $4,801.34
   3 inch                             6.80       $7,109.06   $400         $7,509.06
   4 inch                             9.39       $9,816.78   $400         $1,0216.78
$4,080.90 combined total for 3/4 inch water and sewer development fees
STORM WATER UTILITY (MONTHLY)
   Water/sewer account in the city    $5                                 
limits
WATER RATE SCHEDULE (MONTHLY)
   3/4 inch base rate fee for 3,000   $35.56                             
gallons
   1 inch base rate fee for 5,070     $60.10                             
gallons
   1-1/2 inch base rate fee for 8,520 $100.99                            
gallons
   2 inch base rate fee for 12,660    $150.06                            
gallons
   3 inch base rate fee for 20,400    $241.81                            
gallons
   4 inch base rate fee for 28,640    $333.91                            
gallons
   Additional usage is $1.86 per thousand gallons
WATER SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT FEE
Size                                     Multiplier Development Installation Total
                                                    Fee         Cost
   3/4 inch                           1          $1,118.46   $1,516.99    $2,635.45
   1 inch                             1.69       $1,890.20   $1,786.88    $3,677.08
   1-1/2 inch                         2.84       $3,176.43   *
   2 inch                             4.21       $4,708.72   *
   3 inch                             6.80       $7,605.53   *
   4 inch                             9.39       $1,0502.34  *
*actual cost
 
TITLE 2: ORGANIZATIONS
   Chapter
      
1.    BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
      
2.    PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENTS
CHAPTER 1: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Section
Water and Sewer Department
   
2-1-1   Waterworks Committee
   
2-1-2   Definitions
   
2-1-3   Property outside city limits
   
2-1-4   Rules and regulations
Court Department
   
2-1-15   Establishment
   
2-1-16   Concurrent jurisdiction
   
2-1-17   Exclusive jurisdiction
   
2-1-18   Exceptions to civil jurisdiction
   
2-1-19   Prosecutor
   
2-1-20   Naming plaintiff
   
2-1-21   Contempt; City Judge jurisdiction
   
2-1-22   Judge’s bond
Zoning Commission and Board of Adjustment
   
2-1-35   Appointment
   
2-1-36   Powers
   
2-1-37   Rules and regulations
   
2-1-38   Appeals; stays of proceedings; determining appeal
   
2-1-39   Concurring vote
   
2-1-40   Aggrieved person may present petition to court of record
   
2-1-41   Presentation of petition
   
2-1-42   Copies of papers
   
2-1-43   Determination of Court
   
2-1-44   Costs
   
2-1-45   Enforcement and remedies
   
2-1-46   Conflict with other laws
Joint Airport Board
   
2-1-60   Creation
   
2-1-61   Personnel of Board
   
2-1-62   Duties
WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT
§ 2-1-1 WATERWORKS COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint at the first regular meeting of the City
Council in May of each general election year, three members from said City
Council, who shall constitute the Committee on Waterworks; said Committee shall
serve for a term of two years and until their successors are appointed.
   (B)   The Waterworks Committee shall have the immediate control and
management of all things pertaining to the city waterworks, under the rules and
regulations from time to time may be established by the City Council and the
provisions of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-301)
§ 2-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PRIVATE SEWER.
      (1)   Sewers that serve as a drain to a building or buildings which
sewers remain in the ownership of the individual property owners.
      (2)   All PRIVATE SEWERS must be constructed as provided in this code and
under the supervision of the Superintendent of Sewers, and the city must be at
no expense in constructing, repairing or cleaning the same, but the same must
be done at the expense of the owner or owners.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-303)
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer that serves as a drain or sewage collector system.
Such sewer has been designated by the City Council as a PUBLIC SEWER and said
city has accepted the responsibility for maintenance and upkeep.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-302)
§ 2-1-3 PROPERTY OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   No permits shall be granted, and no connections may be made to any or water
mainline or lateral, now installed or hereafter to be installed, for the
purpose of serving any property lying outside of the city limits.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-304)
§ 2-1-4 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Council is given full power and authority to adopt rules and regulations
of the sewerage system and water system.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-305)
COURT DEPARTMENT
§ 2-1-15 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   A City Court is established in the city.
   (B)   The elected City Judge shall establish regular sessions of the Court.
   (C)   On judicial days, the Court shall be open for all business, civil and
criminal. On non-judicial days, as defined in MCA 3-1-302, the Court may
transact criminal business only.
   (D)   Police Court is renamed City Court, and all references to Police Court
or Police Judges in this code shall be considered amended to read City Court or
City Judge.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-501)
§ 2-1-16 CONCURRENT JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The City Court has concurrent jurisdiction with the Justice’s Court of
all misdemeanors and proceedings mentioned and provided for under MCA Title 3,
Ch. 10, Part 3.
   (B)   Applications for search warrants and complaints charging the
commission of a felony may be filed in the court. When they are filed, the City
Judge has the same jurisdiction and responsibility as a Justice of the Peace,
including the holding of a preliminary hearing. The City Attorney may file an
application for a search warrant or a complaint charging the commission of a
felony when the offense was committed within the city limits. The County
Attorney, however, must handle any action after a defendant is bound over to
District Court.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-502)
§ 2-1-17 EXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION.
   Except as provided in MCA 3-11-104, the City Court has exclusive
jurisdiction of:
   (A)   Proceedings for the violation of an ordinance of the city, both civil
and criminal;
   (B)   When the amount of the taxes or assessments sought does not exceed
$2,500, actions for the collection of taxes or assessments levied for any of
the following purposes, except that no lien on the property taxes or assessed
for the nonpayment of the taxes or assessments may be foreclosed in any such
action:
      (1)   City purposes;
      (2)   The erection or improvement of public buildings;
      (3)   The laying out, opening or improving of a public street, sidewalk,
alley or bridge;
      (4)   The acquisition or improvement of any public grounds; and
      (5)   Public improvements made or ordered by the city within its limits.
   (C)   Actions for the collection of money due to the city or from the city
to any person when the amount sought, exclusive of interest and costs, does not
exceed $2,500;
   (D)   When the amount claimed, exclusive of costs, does not exceed $2,500,
action for:
      (1)   The breach of an official bond given by a city officer;
      (2)   The breach of any contract when the city is a party or is in any
way interested;
      (3)   Damages when the city is a party or is in any way interested;
      (4)   The enforcement of forfeited recognizes given to, for the benefit
or on behalf of the city; and
      (5)   Collection on bonds given upon an appeal taken from the judgment of
the court in any action mentioned in divisions (D)(1) through (D)(4) above;
   (E)   Actions for the recovery of personal property belonging to the city
when the value of the property, exclusive of the damages for the taking or
detention, does not exceed $2,500; and
   (F)   Actions for the collection of a license fee required by an ordinance
of the city.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-503)
§ 2-1-18 EXCEPTIONS TO CIVIL JURISDICTION.
   City Courts do not have jurisdiction in civil actions that might result in a
judgment against the state for the payment of money.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-504)
§ 2-1-19 PROSECUTOR.
   Except as provided in MCA 46-17-203, the City Attorney must prosecute all
cases for the violation of any ordinance and prosecute, conduct and control all
proceedings in cases mentioned in this chapter, both in the City Court and on
appeal from the City Court to the District Court.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-505)
§ 2-1-20 NAMING PLAINTIFF.
   (A)   A criminal action brought for violation of a city ordinance must be
brought in the name of the city as the plaintiff and against the accused as the
defendant.
   (B)   A criminal action brought for violation of a state law within the city
may be brought either in the name of the state as the plaintiff or in the name
of the city as the plaintiff and must be brought against the accused as the
defendant.
   (C)   A criminal action brought for violation of a state law within the
country and within its concurrent jurisdiction with the Justice’s Court must be
brought in the name of the state as the plaintiff and against the accused as
the defendant.
   (D)   A civil action brought in the City Court must be prosecuted or
defended in the same manner as a civil action in Justice’s Courts under the
Montana Justice Courts Rules of Civil Procedure, MCA Title 25, Ch. 22.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-506)
§ 2-1-21 CONTEMPT; CITY JUDGE JURISDICTION.
   A City Judge may punish for contempt persons guilty of the following acts
and no other:
   (A)   Disorderly, contemptuous or insolent behavior toward the judge while
holding the Court tending to interrupt the due course of a trial or other
judicial proceeding;
   (B)   A breach of the peace, boisterous conduct or violent disturbance in
the presence of the Judge or in the immediate vicinity of the Court held by him
or her tending to interrupt the due course of a trial or other judicial
proceeding;
   (C)   Disobedience or resistance to the execution of a lawful order or
process made or issued by the Judge;
   (D)   Disobedience to a subpoena duly served or refusal to be sworn or to
answer as a witness; and
   (E)   Rescuing any person or property in the custody of an officer by virtue
of an order or process of the Court.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-507)
§ 2-1-22 JUDGE’S BOND.
   The City Judge shall give a fidelity $1,000 bond in favor of the city and
shall be so furnished at the expense of the city.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-508)
ZONING COMMISSION AND BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 2-1-35 APPOINTMENT.
   The Zoning Commission and Board of Adjustment, hereinafter called “the
Board”, shall consist of five members to be appointed by the Mayor subject to
confirmation by the City Council. The members shall serve for terms of three
years each, and shall be removable for cause.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-101)
§ 2-1-36 POWERS.
   (A)   The Board shall have the following power:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement of Zoning or Building Code regulations;
      (2)   To hear and decide special exceptions to Zoning or Building Code
regulations; and
      (3)   To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the
Zoning or Building Code regulations as will not be contrary to the public
interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and so that
the spirit of them shall be observed and substantial justice done.
   (B)   The Board shall have the power to recommend to the City Council such
changes in the district boundaries or regulations as it deems necessary or
desirable.
   (C)   The Board may from time to time adopt such rules and regulations as
may be deemed necessary to carry into effect the provisions of the Zoning or
Building Code regulations.
   (D)   The Board shall recommend to the City Council the use, height and area
districts in which each part of any annexation to the city shall be placed.
   (E)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal,
give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest,
and decide the same within a reasonable time. Such hearing for Building Code
appeals shall be held in conformance with the terms of the building codes
adopted by the city and its appeal process stated therein. Upon the hearing,
any party may appear in person or by attorney.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-102) (Ord. 99-2, passed - -1999)
§ 2-1-37 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of any chapter
adopted pursuant to this subchapter. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the
call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. The
Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall
be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all
of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a
public record.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-103)
§ 2-1-38 APPEALS; STAYS OF PROCEEDINGS; DETERMINING APPEAL.
   (A)   General. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved of
any decision of any officer, department, board or bureau of the city. Such
appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the
Board, by filing with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed was taken.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-104)
   (B)   Appeal stays all proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the
appeal is taken certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal shall have
been filed with him or her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a
stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In
such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
order which may be granted by the or by a court of record on application on
notice to the officer from which the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any
party may appear in person or by attorney.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-105)
   (C)   Determining of appeal. In exercising the above mentioned powers such
Board may, in conformity with the provisions of this subchapter, reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of
the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-106)
§ 2-1-39 CONCURRING VOTE.
   The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such
administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under any such chapter, or to effect any
variation in such chapter.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-107)
§ 2-1-40 AGGRIEVED PERSON MAY PRESENT PETITION TO COURT OF RECORD.
   Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the
Board, or any taxpayer, officer, department, board or bureau of the city may
present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such
decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the
illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the Court within 30 days after
the filing of the decision in the office of the Board.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-108)
§ 2-1-41 PRESENTATION OF PETITION.
   Upon the presentation of such petition, the Court may allow a writ of
certiorari directed to the Board of Adjustment to review such decision of the
Board and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must
be made and served upon the relator’s attorney which shall not be less than ten
days and may be extended by the Court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay
proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the Court may, on application,
on notice to the Board and due cause shown grant a restraining order.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-109)
§ 2-1-42 COPIES OF PAPERS.
   The Board shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by
it, but shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of
such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall
concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show
the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-110)
§ 2-1-43 DETERMINATION OF COURT.
   If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the Court that testimony is
necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or
appoint the referee to take such evidence as it may direct, and report the same
to the Court with his or her findings of fact and conclusions of law, which
shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the
Court shall be made. The Court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the decision brought up for review.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-111)
§ 2-1-44 COSTS.
   Costs shall not be allowed against the Board unless it shall appear to the
Court that it acted with gross negligence, in bad faith or with malice in
making the decision appealed from.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-112)
§ 2-1-45 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.
   A violation of this subchapter is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and
punishable as provided in this code. Civil penalties may be imposed for such
violation. The power to enforce any provisions of this subchapter is expressly
granted herein to the Council as well as the power to abate such violation,
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises within the
city.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-113)
§ 2-1-46 CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Any requirements of the Board which stipulate higher standards than provided
elsewhere in this code shall prevail. The provisions of this code or state
statute requiring higher standards than provided for in this subchapter shall
prevail.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-114)
JOINT AIRPORT BOARD
§ 2-1-60 CREATION.
   The various governmental entitles of the county, which includes the Board of
County Commissioners, the City Council of Polson, the City Council of Ronan and
the City Council of St. Ignatius, were established pursuant to authority
granted in local agreement and joint municipal airports.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-301)
§ 2-1-61 PERSONNEL OF BOARD.
   The Joint Airport Board consists of five members. Two are appointed by the
county, one from Ronan, one from St. Ignatius and one from Polson. Each person
shall serve a term of three years and shall receive $5 a day for each day
actually spent in official meetings and shall be allowed a mileage allowance in
accordance with the state per diem schedule.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-302)
§ 2-1-62 DUTIES.
   The Board shall have jurisdiction over the planning, acquiring,
establishment, development, construction, enlargement, improvement,
maintenance, equipment, operation, regulation, protection and policing of all
airports in the county. The Board shall provide the city with copies of its
meetings and budget.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-303)
CHAPTER 2: PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENTS
Section
Police Department
   
2-2-1   Establishment
   
2-2-2   Department supervision
   
2-2-3   Appointment of members
   
2-2-4   Chief of Police; duties; powers; records maintenance; regulations
   
2-2-5   Officers; duties and powers; directing traffic; jurisdiction
   
2-2-6   Special officers
   
2-2-7   Disposition of unclaimed property
   
2-2-8   Police Commission
Fire Department
   
2-2-20   Creation
   
2-2-21   Fire lines
   
2-2-22   Fire alarms
   
2-2-23   False fire alarms prohibited
   
2-2-24   Adoption of general law
Cross-reference:
   Police and Fire Regulations, see Title 6
   Public Safety; Law Enforcement, see Title 6, Ch. 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 2-2-1 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Chief of Police, together with any peace officers subordinate to him or
her, and the administrative personnel of his or her office, shall be known as
the “Police Department”.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-101)
§ 2-2-2 DEPARTMENT SUPERVISION.
   The Mayor shall have charge of and supervision over the Police Department.
He or she shall require the enforcement of and the observance of all ordinances
that regulate the management and discipline of the Police Department.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-102)
§ 2-2-3 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   The Mayor shall nominate, and with the consent of the Council, appoint one
Chief of Police and such subordinate officers of the police force as may be
required.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-103)
§ 2-2-4 CHIEF OF POLICE; DUTIES; POWERS; RECORDS MAINTENANCE; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Duties. It is the duty of the Chief of Police to execute and return
all process issued by the City Judge, or directed to him or her by any legal
authority, and to attend upon the Police Court regularly.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-104)
   (B)   Powers. The Chief of Police shall have power to:
      (1)   Execute process for the city;
      (2)   Make arrests for violations of the ordinances or codes of the
municipality or of the State of Montana;
      (3)   Have charge and control over all police officers; and
      (4)   Enforce the ordinances of the city and the State of Montana, unless
another officer of the city is given the authority to enforce them. The Chief
of Police shall have the same powers as a constable in the discharge of his or
her duties, but he or she shall not serve a process in any civil action or
proceeding, except within the municipality as a party.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-105)
   (C)   Animal records maintenance. The Chief of Police shall maintain the dog
registry, and shall maintain records of the disposition of any animals which
have been impounded. These records shall be kept for a period of five years and
shall be open to the public upon request.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-106)
   (D)   Traffic violations records maintenance.
      (1)   The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all violations of the
traffic ordinances of the city, together with a record of the final disposition
of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be maintained as to show all
types of violations and the total of each. Each record shall accumulate during
a five-year period and shall be preserved by the Chief of Police for an
additional five-year period.
      (2)   All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall
be serially numbered.
      (3)   For each month and year a written record will be kept available to
the public showing the disposal of all such forms.
      (4)   All prepared reports shall be made public records excluding
criminal justice information.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-107)
   (E)   Promulgation of regulations. The Chief of Police with the approval of
the Mayor may make regulations necessary to provide for emergencies or special
conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect
for more than 90 days.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-108)
§ 2-2-5 OFFICERS; DUTIES AND POWERS; DIRECTING TRAFFIC; JURISDICTION.
   (A)   Duties. The police officers of the municipality shall carry out the
orders of their superior officers and observe the rules and regulations
prescribed for the discipline of the police force. Within the limits prescribed
by law, they shall do all things necessary for the prevention and detection of
crime in the municipality.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-109)
   (B)   Powers.
      (1)   The authority of the police of the city shall include the power to
arrest persons charged with a crime:
         (a)   Within the limits of the city;
         (b)   Within five miles thereof; and
         (c)   Along the line of water supply of the city.
      (2)   The police of the city shall have the power to prevent and punish
intoxication, fights, riots, loud noises, disorderly conduct, obscenity and
acts or conduct calculated to disturb the public peace or which are offensive
to public morals, within three miles of the limits.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit powers
previously granted or had by the Council or the police, but shall be in
addition thereto.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-110)
   (C)   Direction of traffic. Officers of the Police Department are authorized
to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with the city
ordinances; provided, however, that, officers of the Police Department may
direct traffic as conditions require in the event of fire or other emergency.
Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or
assist the police in directing traffic in the immediate vicinity of the fire.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-111)
   (D)   Jurisdiction.
      (1)   The Ronan Police Department is hereby authorized and empowered to
effect arrests within five miles of the corporate limits of the city of persons
charged with a crime, or in such cases or circumstances within the said five-
mile limit, to stop and inquire of such persons for whom a particularized
suspicion has arisen that such person is or may be committing a crime
prohibited by the laws of Montana or of the city, in such manner as may be
otherwise provided by law.   
      (2)   The Ronan Police Department is hereby authorized and empowered to
prevent by arrest or otherwise as provided in the laws of Montana or of the
city such disturbances of the peace or offenses against the public morals that
may occur within three miles of the corporate limits of the city.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (D) shall be construed to require that the
Ronan Police Department patrol or undertake enforcement responsibilities in the
extended limits as herein provided, nor to interfere with or modify in any way
the respective jurisdictions or procedures of the several law enforcement
agencies whose jurisdictions overlap within the said extended limits.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-10-2007)
§ 2-2-6 SPECIAL OFFICERS.
   Whenever the Mayor considers it necessary to increase the police force, he
or she may employ suitable persons as special police officers, subject to the
consent of the Council.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-112)
§ 2-2-7 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Any article of personal property acquired by the Police Department in
the course of its law enforcement activities shall be held by the Department
for 30 days, unless claimed by the owner before then. If unclaimed after 30
days, the property may be sold by the Chief of Police at public auction for
cash to the highest bidder, or may be disposed of as provided for in division
(E) below.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall give notice of the time and place of the
sale of unclaimed personal property by publishing a notice thereof in a
newspaper of general circulation published within the municipality or, if none
exists, in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. If any property to
be sold is of the value of $100 or more, the notice shall contain a general
description of such property with the name of the owner thereof, if known.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall make a list, in duplicate, of the property
sold, giving as far as possible, a general description of each piece of
property sold and the name of the owner, if known, and the amount of money
derived from the sale of the property. One copy of the list shall be retained
by the Chief of Police and the other delivered to the Municipal Clerk.
   (D)   All moneys derived from sales of unclaimed personal property shall be
deposited in the General Fund of the municipality.
   (E)   When any unclaimed article of personal property is of a value less
than fifty dollars, the Chief of Police may authorize it to be given to any
organization which will use such property for public or charitable purposes. If
an unclaimed article of personal property is clearly of no worth whatsoever,
the Chief of Police may authorize it to be destroyed. For all such property
given away, the Chief of Police shall obtain a receipt, and he or she shall
file a list of all property given away or destroyed with the City Clerk,
showing the estimated value of each article.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-113)
§ 2-2-8 POLICE COMMISSION.
   There is hereby created a board to be known by the name of “Ronan Police
Commission”. Such Commission shall be organized and appointed, with all the
duties and powers as prescribed by MCA 7-32-4151 through 7-32-4164.
(1992 Code, § 3-1-501)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 2-2-20 CREATION.
   (A)   There is hereby created and established a Fire Department in and for
the city which shall be known as the “Fire Department of the City of Ronan” and
which shall consist of not less than 15 volunteer firefighters, who, at the
time of their appointment, shall be able-bodied persons between the ages of 18
years and 60 years of age and continuously residing within the city.
   (B)   The members shall manage their own organization, prescribe their own
rules and regulations, elect their own officers with the exception of the Chief
of the Fire Department, who shall be appointed as provided by this code impose
and collect their own dues and fines, if there be any; and keep and control
their own funds. All members of the Fire Department shall have police powers
while on duty.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-201)
§ 2-2-21 FIRE LINES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except as a member of the Fire
Department, or without permission of the officer in command, to enter within
the lines formed at a fire.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-202)
§ 2-2-22 FIRE ALARMS.
   It shall be the duty of the Council to provide and adopt a system of signals
for use in the Fire Department and to cause the same to be printed and posted
in a conspicuous place at the hose house, central fire station and other
stations, if any, to furnish each member of the Fire Department with a copy of
same.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-203)
§ 2-2-23 FALSE FIRE ALARMS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to send in, sound or in any manner give
or cause to be given or sounded, a fire alarm within the city mischievously,
maliciously or without any justifiable cause of reason to believe that there is
danger of fire; and it shall be unlawful for any person to refuse admittance to
the Chief of the Fire Department, while performing his or her duties, into any
building or upon any premises; and it shall be unlawful for any person to
obstruct, impede, delay or in any manner interfere with the Fire Department or
any of its members when in the performance of their duties, or in any manner
interfere with or damage any of the fire apparatus belonging to the city.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-204)
§ 2-2-24 ADOPTION OF GENERAL LAW.
   The provisions of the laws of the State of Montana relating to fire
departments of cities and firefighter’s retirement or disability funds, the
management thereof, and the power given to the Mayor and Council relating
thereto, shall govern the organization, management and control of the Fire
Department and members thereof.
(1992 Code, § 5-1-205)
TITLE 3: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
1.    BARS AND SALOONS
      
2.    SOLICITORS
      
3.    MARIJUANA USE AND SALE
CHAPTER 1: BARS AND SALOONS
Section
General Provisions
   
3-1-1   Definitions
   
3-1-2   Hours of operation
   
3-1-3   Violation; penalty
License Regulations
   
3-1-15   License required
   
3-1-16   State license required
   
3-1-17   Revocation, withdrawal or suspension
   
3-1-18   Application form
   
3-1-19   Transferability
   
3-1-20   Term
   
3-1-21   Fees and charges
   
3-1-22   Regulatory statutes adopted
   
3-1-23   License display
   
3-1-24   Inspection; right of entry
   
3-1-25   Fictitious names
   
3-1-26   License revocation; initiation; notice of complaint; hearing; renewal
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 3-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEER. Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion of
barley, malt or hops, or of any other similar products in drinkable water
containing not more than 4% of alcohol by weight.
   BOARD. The Liquor Control Board of the state, which officially is designated
as the “Montana Liquor Control Board”.
   CLUB. An association of individuals organized for social purposes and not
for profit, with permanent membership, permanent quarters or rooms and an
existence of two years prior to making application for license.
   INTERDICTED PERSON. A person to whom the sale of liquor is prohibited under
the law of Montana.
   LICENSE. A license issued by the city to a qualified person, under which it
is lawful for the licensee to sell and dispense liquor at retail as provided in
this chapter.
   LIQUOR. All kinds of alcoholic beverages sold by or in a state liquor store
and includes, but is not limited to, any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous,
fermented malt or other liquor which contains more than 1% of alcohol by
weight, but does not mean or include beer, as that term is defined in this
section.
   PERSON. Every individual, copartnership, corporation, hotel, restaurant,
club and fraternal organization and all licensed retailers of liquor, whether
conducting the business singularly or collectively.
   SALE and SELL. Include exchange, barter and traffic to, or with, any person,
as defined in this section.
   STATE LIQUOR STORE. A liquor store established and operated by the Montana
Liquor Control Board under the laws of Montana.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-301)
§ 3-1-2 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   No beer, wine or liquor shall be sold, offered for sale or given away
upon any premises licensed to sell beer or liquor at retail in the city between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day.
   (B)   Any person having a gaming license for video gambling, live bingo or
keno game, or live card game table may operate such gaming in addition to all
other times, during the hours between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day.
   (C)   Law enforcement personnel shall be granted full and unlimited access
to all gaming areas during all hours of operation.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-317) (Ord. 97-3, passed 11-19-1997)
§ 3-1-3 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the general penalty provided in Title 1 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   In addition, if such licensee is convicted of any offense under this
chapter, his or her license shall be immediately revoked.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-318)
LICENSE REGULATIONS
§ 3-1-15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall sell beer or liquor within the corporate limits of the city
unless he or she has first obtained a current license issued by the city.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-302)
§ 3-1-16 STATE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No license required by this chapter shall be issued until the applicant
therefor has produced satisfactory evidence of a valid license granted by the
Montana State Liquor Control Board.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-303)
§ 3-1-17 REVOCATION, WITHDRAWAL OR SUSPENSION.
   Any revocation, withdrawal or suspension of any license granted by the state
pursuant to the Montana Retail Liquor License Act or the Montana Beer Act shall
simultaneously operate as a revocation or suspension, as the case may be, of
any license granted by the city as set forth in this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-304)
§ 3-1-18 APPLICATION FORM.
   Application for a retail license to sell beer or liquor shall be in a form
as set by the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-305)
§ 3-1-19 TRANSFERABILITY.
   (A)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable, except as
provided in the Montana Retail Liquor License Act, and then only after the
proposed transfer has been approved by the City Council.
   (B)   The application to the City Council for transfer shall be in writing,
state the name, occupation, age and sex of the proposed transferee, his or her
residence and length of time he or she has resided there.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall charge and collect a fee to cover the cost of the
transfer.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-306)
§ 3-1-20 TERM.
   A license may be issued for a fraction of a year, but for no longer than one
year. Licenses shall expire on June 30 following the year of issue.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-307)
§ 3-1-21 FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Fees and charges for licensing of beer and liquor as set forth in the
table of fees in §
1-7-1 of this code. The fees shall be payable at the City Hall.
   (B)   All receipts from license fees and fines collected under the
provisions of this chapter shall be deposited to the credit of the General Fund
of the city, out of which fund the cost of administering this chapter shall be
paid.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-308)
§ 3-1-22 REGULATORY STATUTES ADOPTED.
   All prohibitory and regulatory provisions of the Montana Beer Act and the
Montana Retail Liquor License Act are adopted and are binding within the
meaning of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-309)
§ 3-1-23 LICENSE DISPLAY.
   Any person licensed under this chapter for the retail sale of beer or liquor
shall display such license in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall
produce it at the request of the Chief of Police.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-310)
§ 3-1-24 INSPECTION; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Chief of Police shall have the right to enter the licensed premises or
any part thereof to exercise police supervision in maintaining the public peace
and to inspect for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-311)
§ 3-1-25 FICTITIOUS NAMES.
   No business shall be carried on under any license issued under this chapter,
except in the name of the licensee.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-312)
§ 3-1-26 LICENSE REVOCATION; INITIATION; NOTICE OF COMPLAINT; HEARING; RENEWAL.
   (A)   Initiation. The City Council may, upon its own motion, and shall, upon
a written verified complaint of any other person, investigate the action and
operation of any licensee, and shall have the power to temporarily suspend or
permanently revoke a license issued under this chapter for violation of any
provision of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-313)
   (B)   Notice of complaint.
      (1)   Upon the filing with the City Council of a verified complaint
charging the licensee with the commission of any act which would be cause for
the suspension or revocation of a license, the Council shall issue a citation
directing the licensee to appear before the Council within ten days after the
date of the service of the citation and, by filing his or her verified answer,
show cause why his or her license should not be suspended or revoked.
      (2)   Service of the complaint may be effected by personal service on the
licensee by the City Marshal or by mailing a registered letter to the
licensee’s last address of record. The service shall include the citation and a
true copy of the complaint. Failure of the licensee to answer shall be grounds
for the Council to suspend or revoke the license.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-314)
   (C)   Hearing.
      (1)   Upon the filing of the answer, the Council shall fix the time and
place of the hearing on the charges made, which hearing shall be in the Council
Chamber of the City Hall and not less than five days’ notice of the hearing
shall be given to the complainant and the licensee.
      (2)   The notice of hearing shall be served in the same manner as the
citation. With the notice of the hearing to the complainant, there shall be
attached a true copy of the answer of the licensee. If either party has
appeared by counsel, the notice shall be given in like manner to the counsel of
said party.
      (3)   Upon the hearing, the Council shall hear the evidence presented,
which may be in the form of oral testimony or affidavit, or both. After the
hearing has been concluded, the Council shall, within ten days, render its
decision in writing, stating the reasons therefor. Notice of the decision with
a copy thereof shall be served upon the parties in the manner provided as to
other notices.
      (4)   When the Council has revoked or canceled a license previously
issued by it, the Council shall notify the licensee, in writing by registered
mail, of its action, giving the reasons therefor.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-315)
   (D)   Renewal after revocation. After suspension or revocation of a license,
the Council shall have the power to renew the same if, in its discretion, a
proper showing therefor has been made.
(1992 Code, § 6-1-316)
CHAPTER 2: SOLICITORS
Section
   
3-2-1   Definitions
   
3-2-2   Vendor business license required
   
3-2-3   Application
   
3-2-4   Terms and fees
   
3-2-5   Denial or revocation
   
3-2-6   Charitable organizations
   
3-2-7   Description of stand
   
3-2-8   Health permit
   
3-2-9   Permission surrounding property
   
3-2-10   Sanitation
   
3-2-11   Vendor vehicles
   
3-2-12   Signs and advertising
   
3-2-13   Driving on city property
   
3-2-14   Event fee
   
3-2-15   Exempted groups and activities
   
3-2-16   Insurance and indemnification
   
3-2-17   Penalty
§ 3-2-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. The central business district of the city
includes the streets one block north and south of Main Street from Highway 93
to the hospital and on 93 within the city limits.    
   VENDOR. Any person who goes from house to house or place to place within the
city limits, or from a stand, wagon, railcar, motor vehicle or upon any street,
or upon any public grounds, or from temporary quarters within the city, whether
such business be conducted by personal contact and interview or by use of
telephone for such purposes, selling or taking orders for or offering to sell
or take orders for goods, wares, merchandise, professional or personal
services, or for the making, manufacturing or repairing of any article or thing
whatsoever, except those selling to merchants for resale.
(1992 Code, § 6-2-101) (Ord. 2010-03, passed 5-10-2010; Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-
19-2019)
§ 3-2-2 VENDOR BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Each individual or entity engaging in vendor type business within the city
must first obtain a vendor license. The vendor license must be obtained prior
to soliciting any customer or offering any goods or products for sale. No
vendor shall park a vehicle or any other movable temporary entity on any public
street, alley or private lot between the hours of 9:00 p.m. until 9:00 a.m.
without the prior approval of the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 6-2-102) (Ord. 2010-03, passed 5-10-2010; Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-
19-2019)
§ 3-2-3 APPLICATION.
   Application for each license shall be made at city hall during regular
business hours upon payment of the usual fee therefore and completion of an
application.
(1992 Code, § 6-2-103) (Ord. 2010-03, passed 5-10-2010; Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-
19-2019)
§ 3-2-4 TERMS AND FEES.
   There shall be three forms of license. The short-term license shall be good
for one week from the date of issuance. The long-term license is good from the
issue date through December 31 of the same year. The event license shall be
good for city parks and ballfields and any other city property for the length
of the event only. Fees for each license shall be fixed from time to time by
the City Council. Farmers market is a long-term license.
(1992 Code, § 6-2-104) (Ord. 2010-03, passed 5-10-2010; Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-
19-2019)
§ 3-2-5 DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   The city reserves the right to deny a license, or to revoke a license if
issued, upon receiving citizen complaints regarding the vendor, merchandise or
practices or upon discovering any misrepresentation or falsehood in the
application.
(1992 Code, § 6-2-105) (Ord. 2010-03, passed 5-10-2010; Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-
19-2019)
§ 3-2-6 CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   License applicants representing bona-fide charitable or fraternal
organizations shall be exempt from the license requirement under this chapter.
The determination as to whether the applicant is a bona-fide charitable or
fraternal organization is within the sole discretion of the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 6-2-106) (Ord. 2010-03, passed 5-10-2010; Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-
19-2019)
§ 3-2-7  DESCRIPTION OF STAND.
   The vendor shall provide to the city a description and photograph or drawing
of any stand to be used in the operation of the business.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 3-2-8  HEALTH PERMIT.
   If selling food or beverages, vendor shall obtain and provide copies to the
city of all required health permits from the state, county and/or Confederated
Salish and Kootenai Tribe.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 3-2-9 PERMISSION SURROUNDING PROPERTY. 
   The vendor shall obtain and provide copies to the city of written permission
from the manager or owner of all property surrounding the vending location of
the vendor. Said permission shall state that the manager or owner has no
objection to the vending business being located and operated on property
abutting the manager or owner’s property.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 3-2-10  SANITATION.
   During the term of the license, the vendor shall provide and have at least
one garbage can, and more as necessary, for the use of the public at the
vending location. During the term of the license, vendor shall keep the
location free from refuse, garbage and other litter. At the end of the term of
the license, vendor shall remove all refuse, vendor property and vehicles and
leave the vending location in as good condition as at the commencement of the
license.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 3-2-11 VENDOR VEHICLES.
   The vendor shall not park vehicles at the vending location when the business
is not open to the public.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 3-2-12  SIGNS AND ADVERTISING.
   All signs or advertising of vendor shall be on the vendor's vehicle or stand
and shall not be directly on property within the city unless they do not block
sidewalks or ingress or egress from other abutting properties and businesses.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 3-2-13 DRIVING ON CITY PROPERTY.
   Other than roadways, streets and alleys, the vendor may not drive over city
property to the vending location without prior permission of the city.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 3-2-14  EVENT FEE.
   The event vendor will be defined at the time of approval and shall pay the
following fees:
   (A)   Four vendors or less: $75; and
   (B)   Five vendors or more: $150.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 3-2-15  EXEMPTED GROUPS AND ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   School and youth groups not included. The provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to school sponsored or youth group activities, including but
not limited to car washes and lemonade stands. The determination as to whether
the applicant is a school sponsored or youth group activity is within the sole
discretion of the City Council.
   (B)   Activities not covered. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to rummage, garage or estate sales. The determination as to whether the
activity is a rummage, garage or estate sale is within the sole discretion of
the City Council.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 3-2-16 INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   Vendors who are required to purchase a vendor license hereunder shall
provide insurance in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 and shall name the city
as a co-insured and shall provide written proof of said insurance and
coinsurance.
   (B)   Vendors shall indemnify the city, including attorney fees and court
costs, against all third parties claiming through the vendor or for any act of
the vendor.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 3-2-17 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or organization conducting business within the city that
fail to comply with the terms hereof shall be subject to an administrative fine
in an amount equal to double the then-existing cost of the license. A second
offense shall be punishable by an administrative fine equal to four times the
then-existing cost of the license. Third and subsequent offenses shall be
punishable as provided in the city’s general penalty municipal code.
(1992 Code, § 6-2-107) (Ord. 2010-03, passed 5-10-2010; Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-
19-2019)
CHAPTER 3: MARIJUANA USE AND SALE
Section
   
3-3-1   Purpose; applicability; failure to maintain state licensure;
definitions; locations of marijuana business; special marijuana business
license
   
3-3-2   Transportation of Marijuana
§ 3-3-1 PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY; FAILURE TO MAINTAIN STATE LICENSURE;
DEFINITIONS; LOCATIONS OF MARIJUANA BUSINESS; SPECIAL MARIJUANA BUSINESS
LICENSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this article is to implement the provisions of the
Montana Marijuana Regulation and Taxation Act MCA 16-12-101 et seq. (the
"Act"). The provisions of this article shall apply to all marijuana business
within the city, including both medical and recreational marijuana cultivation,
manufacturing, transporting, testing and dispensaries, unless otherwise stated
herein.
      (1)   Any individual or entity licensed under this article to conduct any
marijuana business, in addition to the requirements of this article, is subject
to all other requirements of this code, the Act, and any applicable
administrative rules established by the state or city. Should such rules or
laws change, any person or entity licensed under this article shall immediately
come into compliance with any newly adopted rules.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the above, nothing in this code shall be construed
to authorize any individual or entity to perform any act or conduct any
enterprise not in conformance with state law.
      (3)   Compliance with this code does not shield any person, corporation,
or other legal entity from the requirements of, or enforcement by, other
governing entities, or from civil liabilities.
   (B)   (1)   Each individual or entity issued a license under this article
shall at all times maintain authorization from the state to acquire, possess,
cultivate, manufacture, deliver, transfer, test transport, dispense or sell
marijuana. Failure to maintain applicable licensure(s) with the state is cause
for immediate suspension of a license issued under this article, may be cause
for revocation resulting in a moratorium on an individual or entity's ability
to engage in marijuana business, and may be cause for criminal prosecution as
provided by law.
      (2)   Incorporation of state law. For the purposes of this article,
words, phrases and expressions, not otherwise defined below, are subject to the
definitions set forth in MCA 16-12-102. The provisions of state code and any
rules or regulations promulgated thereunder are incorporated herein by
reference except to the extent that more restrictive or additional regulations
are set forth in this article.
   (C)   Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in
this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section.
      ADULT-USE DISPENSARY. A premises licensed by the state from which
marijuana or marijuana products may be sold and obtained by registered
cardholders, persons 21 years of age or older, or both.
      CULTIVATOR. A person licensed by the state to plant, cultivate, grow,
harvest, and dry marijuana; or a person licensed by the state to package and
relabel marijuana produced at the location in a natural or naturally dried form
that has not been converted, concentrated, or compounded for sale though a
licensed dispensary.
      DISPENSARY. Both an adult-use dispensary and/or a medical marijuana
dispensary.
      LICENSEE. A person holding a state license issued pursuant to state law
and a city marijuana license.
      MANUFACTURER. A person licensed by the state to convert or compound
marijuana into marijuana products, marijuana concentrates, or marijuana
extracts and package, repackage, label, or relabel marijuana products as
allowed under state law and this article.
      MARIJUANA. All plant material from the genus Cannabis containing
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) or seeds of the genus capable of germination. This
term does not include hemp and its derivatives as specified in MCA 16-12-102
(20)(b) or (c).
      MARIJUANA BUSINESS. A cultivator, manufacturer, adult-use dispensary,
medical marijuana dispensary, combined-use marijuana licensee, testing
laboratory, marijuana transporter or any other marijuana business or function
that is licensed by the state and city.
      MARIJUANA PRODUCT. A product that contains marijuana and is intended for
use by a consumer by a means other than smoking. The term includes but is not
limited to edible products, ointments, tinctures, marijuana derivatives, and
marijuana concentrates.
      MEDICAL MARIJUANA. Marijuana or marijuana products that are for sale
solely to a cardholder who is registered with the state.
      MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. The location from which a registered
cardholder may obtain marijuana or marijuana products.
      REGISTERED CARDHOLDER or CARDHOLDER. A Montana resident with a
debilitating medical condition who has received and maintains a valid registry
identification card issued by the state.
      TESTING LABORATORY. The qualified person licensed by the state that
provides testing of representative samples of marijuana and marijuana products;
and provides information regarding the chemical composition and potency of a
sample, as well as the presence of molds, pesticides, or other contaminants in
a sample.
   (D)   Location of Marijuana Related Businesses.
      (1)   Any business engaged in the manufacture or sale of marijuana
products shall not be located:
         (a)   Outside ½ block of Highway 93 in the zone designated commercial
mixed residential.
         (b)   Within 300 linear feet of a church, synagogue, or place of
worship within the city limits of Ronan;
         (c)   Within 300 linear feet of any building, facility, or park owned,
or operated by the City of Ronan;
         (d)   Within 1,000 linear feet of all public schools or private
schools, not including home schools, which provide instruction in the class
range from kindergarten to 12th grade and which are either subject to MCA § 20-
5-402 or listed as a kindergarten provider by the Lake County Superintendent of
Schools;
         (e)   Daycare licensed by the State of Montana; or
         (f)   The Boys and Girls Club.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, the distance shall be measured in a
straight line from the center of the nearest entrance of the church, synagogue,
or place of worship within the city limits of Ronan; building, facility, or
park owned, or operated by the City of Ronan; Daycare licensed by the State of
Montana; and the Boys and Girls Club, to the nearest entrance of the licensee's
premises.
      (3)   For the purposes of this section, the term private school shall
include where the classes range from kindergarten to 12th grade, and which are
either subject to M.C.A. § 20-5-109 or are listed as a kindergarten provider by
the Lake County Superintendent of Schools.
      (4)   Marijuana businesses who have licenses through the State of Montana
existing at the time of passage of this ordinance are not subject to the
distance requirements of this ordinance for their present location. In the
event branch establishments are opened or the marijuana business moved, the
distance requirements shall apply.
   (E)   Special Marijuana Business License. Operation of any marijuana
business authorized by Montana Initiative I-190 or HB-701 within the city
limits of Ronan must comply with the following provisions:
      (1)   Apply for a special business license;
      (2)   A manufacturer shall pay a $5,000 annual license fee at the
beginning of each calendar year. Said license is not pro-rated if new license
is obtained after January 1 of any given year;
      (3)   A cultivator, adult-use dispensary, medical marijuana dispensary,
combined-use marijuana licensee, testing laboratory, marijuana transporter, or
any other marijuana business or function that is licensed by the state and city
shall pay a $1,500 annual license fee at the beginning of each calendar year.
Said license is not pro-rated if new license is obtained after January 1 of any
given year;
      (4)   Zoning conformance approval;
      (5)   May not operate outside the hours of 9:00 AM to 8:00 PM;
      (6)   No vending machines that dispense marijuana or marijuana products
may be maintained or operated;
      (7)   May not operate with a drive-thru or drive-up window;
      (8)   May not allow any person under 21 years old to enter the marijuana
business;
      (9)   All products sold must contain all labeling, warnings, and
packaging required by the State of Montana, found at ARM Notice No. 42-1033 at
Rules X-XV.
      (10)   Product may not be sold preloaded into a syringe or other
mechanism allowing for the intravenous use of the product.
   (F)   Separate license for multiple establishments. A license must be
obtained in the manner prescribed herein for each branch establishment or
location of a marijuana business, as if each such branch establishment or
location were a separate business.
   (G)   Single license required for multiple marijuana business activities
occurring at same location with same owner except manufacture license. A
separate city marijuana license is not required for each type of marijuana
business occurring at the same location, except a manufacture license, so long
as the operations belong to and are controlled by the same legal entity for
each marijuana businesses. Applicants seeking a city marijuana license who
engage in two or more marijuana businesses at the same location must disclose
the various marijuana businesses that will occur at the location and must
provide proof of applicable state licensures for each marijuana business and
ensure compliance with the zoning ordinances prior to conducting any marijuana
business within the City. A separate manufacture license is required for
multiple marijuana business activities occurring at the same locate.
   (H)   Change of location. A licensed marijuana business may change the
location of the licensed business provided that the licensee shall comply with
zoning, building, engineering, and fire regulations. A change in location
requires a new marijuana license application and fee be submitted for approval.
   (I)   No transfer of license. City marijuana licenses may not be
transferred. Any change in ownership requires a new city license be obtained in
the manner prescribed herein.
   (J)   No license required. No marijuana license is required for individuals
or businesses engaged in professional activities related to marijuana
businesses whose work occurs in premises where marijuana or marijuana products
are not physically present or handled, including but not limited to a duly
licensed medical doctor who reviews a person's medical condition for purposes
of recommending medical marijuana and who does not provide marijuana to a
registered cardholder. No marijuana license is required for those who pass
through or enter into the city within the scope and course of their employment
related to marijuana business but who do not conduct their operations or
business in the city.
   (K)   Denial, Suspension, or Revocation of marijuana business licensure.
      (1)   The City may deny, suspend, or revoke a license for a marijuana
business if the City has reasonable cause to believe the licensee has, or the
issuance of the City license to the licensee would, violate a provision of this
code or state law. The City Mayor may suspend or revoke any marijuana license
if the City Mayor learns a licensee's state license(s) have been suspended or
revoked. A licensee's City Special marijuana Business license shall be
suspended until a final adjudication on the state license, including any
penalty imposed by the state has been satisfied and the state license is
reinstated. While a license is suspended or revoked, a marijuana business is
prohibited from engaging in marijuana business within the city. A marijuana
business operating without a license may result in criminal prosecution under
MCA Title 45.
      (2)   An applicant may appeal any decision of the city to deny, suspend,
or revoke a marijuana license provided for by this chapter to the 20th Judicial
District Court of Montana. An appeal must be made by filing a complaint setting
forth the grounds for relief and the nature of relief demanded with the
district court within 30 days following receipt of notice of the city's final
decision.
   (L)   Inspection. As a condition of receiving a marijuana license under this
article, a city employee, including but not limited to all police, fire,
building inspectors, city engineers, zoning officials, and other employees or
officials designated by the city mayor, may without notice during normal
business hours inspect any premises under license pursuant to this article to
determine compliance with the Act and any other state or local regulations. All
persons authorized herein to inspect licensees and businesses shall have the
authority to enter, with or without search warrant during normal business
hours, premises which require a marijuana license, premises holding a marijuana
license, and premises for which the marijuana license has been suspended or
revoked.
   (M)   State law superseded and applicable. The provisions of this article
shall supersede the Act in so far as this division expands the limitations on
the use of marijuana authorized under by the Act. All other provisions of state
law related to marijuana shall be applicable.
   (N)   No private right of action. Nothing in this article shall be construed
to create a private right of action regarding the acquisition, possession,
cultivation, manufacture, delivery, transfer, transport, and sale or dispensing
of marijuana.
   (O)   Number of licenses within city limits. No more than one license in
each category of marijuana business may be issued for each 1,000 people in
population within the city limits of the City of Ronan. The population shall be
determined by the last census or other official determination of population by
the State of Montana or City of Ronan.
   (P)   Automatic review of board of adjustment decision by City Council. In
the event the Board of Adjustment grants a variance to a marijuana business,
the matter shall be presented at the second regularly scheduled City Council
meeting after the decision of the Board of Adjustment. Notice shall be given as
required by law. The City Council may affirm, revoke or modify the decision of
the Board of Adjustment concerning the granting of a variance. (Ord. 2021-05,
passed 12-20-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 4-9-2022)
§ 3-3-2 TRANSPORTATION OF MARIJUANA.
   The public transport of marijuana in/on all streets, sidewalks, alleys,
rights-of-way, buildings and/or facilities owned, maintained, or otherwise the
property of the City of Ronan, must be done in opaque, child resistant
containers. (Ord. 2021-05, passed 12-20-2021)
TITLE 4: BUILDING REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
1.    BUILDING CODES
CHAPTER 1: BUILDING CODES
Section
   
4-1-1   Codes adopted
   
4-1-2   Permits required
   
4-1-3   Inspection
   
4-1-4   Occupancy of structure
   
4-1-5   Fees
   
4-1-6   Penalty
   
4-1-7   Investigation fee
§ 4-1-1 CODES ADOPTED.
   The city hereby adopts by reference and incorporates the following:
   (A)   The 2021 International Building Code, as amended by ARM 24.301.131;
   (B)   The 2021 International Residential Code, as amended by ARM 24.301.154;
   (C)   The 2021 International Existing Building Code, as amended by ARM
24.301.171;
   (D)   The 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, in the form adopted
by ARM 24.301.175(2); and
   (E)   The 2021 International Energy Conservation Code, as amended by ARM
24.301.161.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1) (Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-2-2020; Ord. 2021-02, passed 4-19-
2021; Ord. 2022-03, passed 8-24-2022)
§ 4-1-2 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   When any person shall be desirous of erecting, repairing, changing or
altering any building or structure within the city limits, that person shall
make application at the office of the City Clerk for a permit for that purpose.
Such applications shall contain a written statement of the proposed location,
with site plan, the proposed repairing, changing or altering of any building,
structure, mobile or modular home. At the time of making application, such
person shall pay to the City Clerk of Ronan a fee, including all water and
sewer connection fees, as shown on the schedule that is adopted herewith. Upon
complete application and payment of the fee, the Clerk shall issue to the
applicant a permit for the commencement of work. The site plan shall show
existing buildings and all other fixtures or improvements upon the property.
Such plan shall be drawn to approximate scale and show the appropriate zoning
setbacks.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-3) (Ord. 97-2, passed 6-4-1997)
§ 4-1-3 INSPECTION.
   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce the provisions of
the codes as adopted and to make inspections and tests required by said codes.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-4)
§ 4-1-4 OCCUPANCY OF STRUCTURE.
   No structure or portion thereof shall be occupied or used until such
building or structure shall have been certified by the Building Inspector as to
its compliance with the Building Code adopted herein.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-5)
§ 4-1-5 FEES.
   The fees adopted for all building inspections and permits are as stated in
the Building Permit Fee Schedule Worksheet, attached to the ordinance codified
herein.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-6) (Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-2-2020)
§ 4-1-6 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions hereof shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $1, nor more than $500, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a
term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-8)
§ 4-1-7 INVESTIGATION FEE.
   Whenever any work for which a permit is required by these ordinances has
been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall
be made before a permit may be issued for such work. Such fee shall be
collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. Such
investigation fee shall be in the amount equal and in addition to the amount of
the permit fee. The payment of such fee shall not exempt any person from
compliance with all other provisions of these ordinances, nor from any
penalties required by law.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-9) (Ord. 2004-05, passed - -)
TITLE 5: HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENT
   Chapter
      
1.    ANIMAL CONTROL
      
2.    COMMUNITY UPKEEP AND BEAUTIFICATION
      
3.    ABANDONED, WRECKED OR JUNKED VEHICLES
CHAPTER 1: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
   
5-1-1   Definitions
   
5-1-2   Dog licenses -- Requirements generally; fee; expiration
   
5-1-3   Dog licenses -- Exemptions from chapter applicability
   
5-1-4   Licenses; issuance and registration conditions; tag requirements
   
5-1-5   Kennel licensing requirements; limit on number of cats and dogs kept
   
5-1-6   Restraint and confinement
   
5-1-7   Rabies prevention requirements; tag
   
5-1-8   Quarantine for dogs biting persons
   
5-1-9   Rabies prevention requirements; physician and veterinarian
responsibilities
   
5-1-10   Nuisance animals prohibited; complaints
   
5-1-11   Impoundment -- Authorized when; records required
   
5-1-12   Impoundment -- Notice to owner; redemption conditions
   
5-1-13   Impoundment -- Disposition of unredeemed animals
   
5-1-14   Cleaning up after animals
   
5-1-15   Animals at large
   
5-1-16   Animal cruelty and neglect
   
5-1-17   Interference with a police dog prohibited
   
5-1-18   Enforcement; police officer authority
   
5-1-19   Enforcement for violations; liability of owner; permit transfers
   
5-1-20   Unlawful acts; penalty for violations
   
5-1-21   Schedule of fees and fines
   
5-1-22: Chickens
§ 5-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   ANIMAL. Any living vertebrate creature, other than human beings, whether
wild or domestic including, but not limited to, all livestock and any domestic
pets.
   ANIMAL IMPOUNDMENT. The taking or seizing of an animal by legally authorized
people. Authorized people may be:
      (1)   Animal control officers;
      (2)   Police officers; or
      (3)   Any person appointed or controlled by the city.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises provided by, or contracted via, the city for
impounding and caring for dogs and other animals, or any facility which
contracts with the city to provide such services.
   ANIMAL SHELTER DIRECTOR. The operator of a facility contracting with the
city to provide the services of an animal shelter.
   AT LARGE. That an animal is off the premises of the owner, keeper, or
responsible custodian of the animal and not on a leash or confined within a
kennel, cage, or motor vehicle, or otherwise under the immediate control of a
person physically capable of restraining the animal.
   BITE. A wound, laceration, bruise or puncture inflicted on a person or
animal by the teeth of an animal, or impression or bruise on the skin made by
the closure of an animal's teeth, or a seizure made by the teeth of an animal.
   CAT. Any commonly domesticated feline animal and includes both the male and
female sex of the species.
   CRUELTY. Any act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering,
or death of an animal is caused or permitted.
   DANGEROUS or VICIOUS ANIMAL. 
      (1)   Any animal that attacks, bites, or injures a human being, domestic
animal, or livestock, or which, because of its nature, temperament, training,
or other characteristics, would constitute an unreasonable danger to human life
or property if not kept, maintained, or confined in a safe and secure manner.
Any animal that has aggressively bitten or caused any physical injury to any
person shall be prima facie presumed vicious or dangerous.
      (2)   No dog may be declared dangerous for harming a person who, at the
time, was abusing or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been observed or
reported to have abused or assaulted dog.
   DOG. Any commonly domesticated canine animal that is a member of the species
canis familiaris and includes both male and female sex of the species.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. A pet; dogs, cats or other tame animals or birds and which
serve some purpose for its owner.
   KENNEL. Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding,
breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs, cats,
or other animals (excluding licensed pet shops). The term KENNEL shall also
include any noncommercial establishment or place where more than three dogs
and/or four cats are kept over the age of six months, whether for breeding or
otherwise.
   LEASH. A line, chain or leads used to control or restrain an animal and does
not include an electronic leash or shock collar.
   MUZZLE. A humane device, securely fastened over the mouth of an animal,
which prevents the animal from biting.
   NUISANCE. Any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or
health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights
of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The
term "nuisance" shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Any animal that is repeatedly (more than two separate occurrences)
found running at large;
      (2)   Any dog in any section of a park or public recreation area which is
not controlled by a leash or similar physical restraint;
      (3)   Any animal that damages, soils, defiles, or defecates on any
property other than that of its owner, with the exception of service animals
authorized under the Americans with Disabilities Act;
      (4)   Any animal that makes disturbing noises including, but not limited
to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, crowing or other
utterances causing unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others
in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored;
      (5)   Any animal in heat that is not confined so as to prevent attraction
or contact with other animals;
      (6)   Any animal which, when unprovoked, bites any person or animal;
      (7)   Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner, that
without provocation, molests, attacks, or otherwise interferes with the freedom
of movement of persons in a public right-of-way;
      (8)   Any animal that chases vehicles, bicycles, skateboarders, etc. on a
public street, alleys, parks or public ways;
      (9)   Any animal that rummages through or scatters garbage or rubbish;
      (10)   Any animal that attacks domestic animals;
      (11)   Any animal that causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or
surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored; or
      (12)   Any animal that is offensive or dangerous to the public health,
safety, or welfare by virtue of the number of animals maintained at a single
residence or the inadequacy of the facilities.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, or corporation having temporary or
permanent custody of, sheltering or having charge of, harboring, exercising
control over, or having property rights to, any animal covered by this chapter.
   POLICE OFFICER. All peace officers as that term is defined in state law as
well as all duly appointed police officers, or other officials designated by
the chief of police.
   QUARANTINE. Confined inside a secure locked building, cage, kennel, or pen
to prevent possible spread of communicable disease. Isolation shall be required
so that contact between the confined animal and any person or other animal is
not possible, and so that it can be observed daily under the supervision of the
owner or a licensed veterinarian.
   RABIES VACCINATION. The inoculation of an animal with anti-rabies vaccine
that has been approved for that species, having an effective immunity of at
least one year, and administered by a licensed veterinarian in accordance with
the current edition of the "Compendium of Animal Rabies Control", published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc.
   SERVICE ANIMAL. Any guide dog, police dog, signal dog, or other animal
individually trained to provide assistance to an individual with a disability.
   UNDER RESTRAINT. Means that an animal is secured by a leash or securely
enclosed within the real property limits of the owner's premises.
   These definitions do not apply to animals used in law enforcement work while
they are actually performing in that capacity.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-2 DOG LICENSES -- REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY; FEE; EXPIRATION.
   Every person, other than owners or keepers of commercial kennels, owning,
keeping, or harboring any dog over six months of age within the corporate
limits of Ronan shall cause such dog to be registered, numbered, and licensed
annually with the city clerk and shall pay for such license an amount as set by
resolution of the city council. Any owner claiming that the owner's dog has
been spayed or neutered must show to the satisfaction of the licensing
authority that such operation has been performed. No license shall be issued
without proof of vaccination against rabies disease. First-time licenses issued
after July 1 shall be prorated on a semiannual basis. All licenses shall expire
on December 31 of the year of issuance. A late licensing fee will be assessed
upon all renewal licenses issued after February 15 of the current license year
pursuant to the fee schedule.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-3 DOG LICENSES -- EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER APPLICABILITY.
   The licensing requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any dog
belonging to a nonresident of the city and kept within the city for not longer
than 15 days, provided all such dogs of nonresidents shall at the time of entry
into the city be properly vaccinated against rabies and, while kept within the
city, meet all other requirements of this chspter. Any owner claiming any of
these exemptions has the burden of proving to the satisfaction of the licensing
authority that the dog in question is entitled to such exemption.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-4 LICENSES; ISSUANCE AND REGISTRATION CONDITIONS; TAG REQUIREMENTS.
   On payment to the city of the amount of the license fee, the licensing
authority shall issue a license to the person applying for the same, provided
that all other requirements have been met, and shall provide and furnish with
each license a durable tag upon which shall be stamped or engraved the
registration number of the dog and the year registered. The city shall keep
suitable records in which shall be recorded the date and number of such license
and the name and address of the person to whom issued. Whenever the dog is
allowed in a public place, every owner of a dog within the city shall place and
keep around the neck of each dog owned a collar or harness to which shall be
securely fastened the license tag issued by the city and to which shall also be
attached a tag showing that the dog has been vaccinated for rabies. In the
event that a license is lost or destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued for the
current year, upon the payment of a fee for such duplicate pursuant to the fee
schedule. No person shall use, for any dog, a license receipt or license tag
issued for another dog. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the
neck of any dog the license tag issued pursuant to this section without the dog
owner's permission or alter such tag in any manner.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-5 KENNEL LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; LIMIT ON NUMBER OF CATS AND DOGS KEPT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, group of persons in the same dwelling,
or family, to keep, harbor, maintain or knowingly permit within the city more
than four cats and/or three dogs, over six months of age, without first having
obtained a kennel license from the city as herein provided. This section shall
not apply to licensed veterinarian hospitals or animal shelters, but it is
intended to apply to keeping or maintaining kennels where cats and dogs are
kept for breeding, sale, sporting purposes, boarding, or for the enjoyment of
the household. Any person keeping or maintaining a kennel shall make
application to the city for said kennel license, shall be authorized or denied
at the discretion of the chief of police.
   (B)   Kennel licensing procedure.
      (1)   All applications for a kennel license, including applications for
renewal or reinstatement, shall be reviewed by the chief of police or designee,
who shall inspect the premises of the proposed kennel and make findings, as set
forth herein, regarding said application.
      (2)   All kennel licenses shall be for a designated purpose, and a
specific number and type of cats and dogs. Licenses shall not be transferable
from one person to another person or place.
      (3)   New kennel licenses shall only be issued after the chief of police
or designee, upon appropriate inspection of the applicant's proposed kennel and
other appropriate investigation, approves the application. The application must
be accompanied by written approval (i.e., petition format) of the application
of the property owners within 200 feet in any direction from the property line
of the residence of the applicant. Names and addresses of the property owners
and/or occupants shall be supplied by the applicant. The form will be provided
by the city and shall specify the name and address of the applicant, the name
and address of the owner of record of the property, a brief statement of the
nature of the kennel license application, including the number and type of cats
or dogs proposed in the application and reference to the procedures described
herein. Applicant's failure to properly complete and deliver all notice forms
constitute cause to deny the application or revoke the kennel license.
      (4)   The chief of police or designee, in approving a kennel license,
shall determine:
         (a)   That all animals listed on the kennel license application
possess current city pet licenses;
         (b)   That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size and
topography to accommodate such use, and all yards, spaces, fences and
enclosures are adequate to properly relate such use with the land and uses in
the vicinity;
         (c)   That the proposed use will have minimal adverse effect on
abutting properties or residents within the affected area; and
         (d)   That any conditions stated in the approval are deemed necessary
and shall apply and be followed by the applicant and the property owner as a
condition of approval.
      (5)   Upon granting a kennel license, the chief of police or designee may
thereafter inspect the premises to ensure compliance with this chapter and
ensure the health and welfare of the animals.
      (6)   A kennel license holder shall notify the chief of police or
designee of any change in the operations which may affect the license and shall
keep the chief of police apprised of any change in name, use, or location of
said kennel, including, but not limited to, changes in animals and numbers of
either cats or dogs listed on the original kennel license application.
   (C)   The kennel license fee shall be in an amount as set by resolution of
the city council, and the license shall expire on December 31 of each year,
unless sooner revoked. License fees shall be reduced by 50% if application is
made, and subsequently approved, between July 1 and December 31. The kennel
license application fee is nonrefundable.
   (D)   Upon a complaint being made to the chief of police or designee that a
licensed kennel is being operated in an improper manner. After finding the
kennel was operated improperly, as a nuisance, or a condition existed that
would preclude the issuance of a license, the chief of police or designee may
revoke the license of such kennel, after providing the licensee a minimum of 72
hours. The licensee may, at the discretion of the chief of police or designee
be provided up to 15 days to mitigate an offending condition and thus have the
license reinstated. Reinstatement findings by the chief of police or designee
shall be made only after conduction of a subsequent site inspection and report
stating that each offending condition of the kennel in question was
satisfactorily corrected and the kennel complies with conditions set forth in
this chapter.
   (E)   Upon annual re-application for a kennel license renewal, an inspection
of the premises, in accordance with division B of this section, may be waived
by the chief of police or designee, unless conditions listed in division D of
this section are found to exist.
   (F)   Decisions by the chief of police or designee to approve or deny a
kennel license application, revoke an existing kennel license or reinstate a
revoked kennel license may be appealed to the city council. A written request
for an appeal hearing before the city council shall be submitted to the mayor.
Any appeal of a kennel license application approval or denial, or appeal of an
existing kennel license revocation or reinstatement decision by the chief of
police shall be in writing wherein the appellant shall set forth the specific
provisions of the decision being appealed. Written notice of an appeal of a
kennel license application approval or denial or existing kennel license
revocation or reinstatement, including specific provisions of the decision
being appealed and the date, time and location of the subsequent city council
appeal hearing as set by the city council, shall thereafter be provided by the
applicant to all owners of real property within 200 feet of the site in
question, including the property owner if the site in question is not owned by
the applicant, at least 15 days prior to the scheduled hearing. Applicant's
failure to properly complete and deliver all appeal notice forms may constitute
cause to deny the appeal. Upon review of an appeal, the city council shall have
the authority to affirm, modify, or reverse the findings of the chief of police
or designee. Council affirmation, modification or reversal of a decision made
by the chief of police or designee shall be final and binding.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-6 RESTRAINT AND CONFINEMENT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to fail to keep such animal
under restraint or to permit such animal to run at large upon the streets and
public ways of the city.
   (B)   Any dog, while on a street, sidewalk, public way, park or other public
space, or upon any private property without the consent of the property owner,
shall be secured by a leash or chain of sufficient tensile strength to restrain
the particular dog, such leash or chain shall not exceed eight feet in length.
While actually participating in instructional obedience training, dogs may be
temporarily restrained by a leash of greater length.
   (C)   No owner or custodian of any animal shall leave such animal unattended
while on a street, sidewalk, public way, or in a park or other public space, or
fail to exercise proper care and control of such animal to prevent the same
from becoming a nuisance.
   (D)   Every female dog or cat, while in heat, shall be kept in a secure
enclosed shelter or area within the real property limits of the owner's
premises in such a manner so as not to come in contact with another animal
except for planned breeding.
   (E)   Every dangerous or vicious animal shall be confined by its owner, or
authorized agent of its owner, within a building or secure enclosure, and,
whenever off the premises of its owner, shall be securely muzzled and
restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not
more than three feet in length or caged. Every person harboring a dangerous or
vicious animal is charged with an affirmative duty to confine the animal in
such a way that no other person has access to such animal.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-7 RABIES PREVENTION REQUIREMENTS; TAG.
   All dogs over six months of age within the corporate limits of the city
shall be vaccinated against the disease known as "rabies." Upon vaccination of
such dog, the veterinarian shall issue to the owner or owners of said animal a
certificate showing the inoculation thereof and shall keep a duplicate of such
certificate and shall issue a metallic tag showing such vaccination and the
date thereof. The owner shall cause the tag to be attached to a collar or
harness on such animal. Any police officer of the city shall have the right to
impound any dog at large in the city, not wearing a collar or harness on which
is displayed the license tag and also the vaccination tag.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-8 QUARANTINE FOR DOGS BITING PERSONS.
   Every animal which bites a person shall be promptly reported to a police
officer. Any dog or other animal which has bitten any person may be kept under
quarantine under the direction and authority of a police officer. Such
quarantine shall be for a period of ten days. If the owner of the animal has
not appeared to claim the animal within 96 hours of the beginning of such
quarantine, the animal may be destroyed and examined for rabies. If, during the
quarantine period, the animal is adjudged as having rabies, the animal shall be
destroyed and appropriate health authorities notified. If, after completion of
the quarantine period, the animal is adjudged free of rabies, the animal shall
be released to its owner upon written permission of the police officer unless
otherwise ordered held pursuant to section
5-1-13. Quarantine and associated costs, including any costs of destruction,
shall be at the owner's expense. No person shall fail or refuse to surrender
any animal for quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is made
by any police officer.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-9 RABIES PREVENTION REQUIREMENTS; PHYSICIAN AND VETERINARIAN
RESPONSIBILITIES.
   It shall be the duty of every physician, or other practitioner, to report to
the Ronan Police the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted
by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies
control. It shall be the duty of every veterinarian to report to the Ronan
Police the diagnosis of any animal observed by such veterinarian as a rabies
suspect.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-10 NUISANCE ANIMALS PROHIBITED; COMPLAINTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep, or maintain any such
nuisance animal, and it shall be the duty of all police officers to file
complaints for all such violations occurring in their presence. Any person
aggrieved by a nuisance animal may file a complaint with a police officer.
Where the offense is not committed in the presence of the officer, the officer
shall investigate and issue an appropriate criminal citation or request
prosecution for the violation through the city attorney.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-11 IMPOUNDMENT -- AUTHORIZED WHEN; RECORDS REQUIRED.
   Unlicensed dogs, or other animals found at large, shall be taken by a police
officer to the animal shelter. Any dangerous or vicious dog or animal may be
taken up and impounded by the police officer, by appropriate means, including a
tranquilizer gun if necessary. The police department shall keep a complete
register of every dog or other animal impounded, showing the time and place of
taking, the breed, color, sex, and distinguishing marks of such dog or other
animal; and, if licensed, the number of the license and the name and address of
the owner.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-12 IMPOUNDMENT -- NOTICE TO OWNER; REDEMPTION CONDITIONS.
   (A)   It is the duty of every owner of any dog or other animal to know its
whereabouts at all times. In the event that any dog or other animal is
impounded, the owner shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and
provide proof of ownership within 96 hours, or it shall be subject to disposal
as provided in §
5-1-13.
   (B)   The owner of any impounded dog or other animal not suspected or known
to have dangerous or vicious propensities, or impounded on the belief said
animal is repeatedly at large, or is a nuisance, or which has been the subject
of abuse may redeem the same within 96 hours of impoundment by accepting a
citation for violation of any ordinance of the city for which the owner may be
properly charged, and posting any boarding fees to the animal shelter in
accordance with its established fee rates.
   (C)   Any unlicensed dog that is impounded may only be redeemed by the owner
procuring a license, as required by §
5-1-2, in addition to paying the fees herein prescribed.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the owner of any impounded dog or other animal
suspected or known to have dangerous or vicious propensities, or impounded on
the belief said animal is repeatedly at large, or is a nuisance, or has been
the subject of abuse, to petition the Ronan City Court for release of the dog
or other animal within 96 hours of the dog or other animal being impounded. If
the owner does not file such a petition within 96 hours of the animal being
impounded, the animal shall become the property of the city and subject to
disposal as provided in §
5-1-13.
   (E)   If an impounded dog has not been spayed or neutered ("unaltered") and
is impounded a second time within three years, the dog shall be altered prior
to redemption at the owner's expense.
   (F)   If an impounded animal is suspected or known to have dangerous or
vicious propensities, or impounded on the belief said animal has been
repeatedly at large or is a nuisance, or has been subjected to abuse it shall
not be released to the owner unless and until a hearing is held before the
Ronan City Court to determine under what conditions, if any, such animal shall
be released. During the hearing, the court will hear evidence to determine
whether the animal should be declared a dangerous or vicious animal, has been
repeatedly at large or is a nuisance or the animal has been subjected to abuse.
The Court shall also hear evidence that the actions by the animal were the
result of the animal being provoked by the person injured, making the complaint
or otherwise negatively affected by the actions of the animal. The Court shall
hear any recommendations by the police officer. If a determination is made that
the animal is dangerous, vicious, has been repeatedly at large or is a nuisance
or the animal has been subject to abuse, the owner shall be ordered to comply
with provisions or conditions made by the court, including, but not limited to,
ordering confinement of the animal in a secure enclosure and imposition of
impoundment and associated costs, including any cost of destruction.
   (G)   In addition to the procedure herein, a complaint may be filed in Ronan
City Court against the person redeeming or seeking the release of any dog or
other animal impounded for violation of any provision of this chapter.
   (H)   It is an affirmative defense in any proceeding by or against the owner
of the animal that the actions by the animal were the result of the animal
being provoked by the person injured, making the complaint or otherwise
negatively affected by the actions of the animal.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-13 IMPOUNDMENT -- DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS.
   If any impounded dog or other animal is not redeemed within 96 hours from
the time it is taken and impounded, the owner thereof shall forfeit all right,
title, and interest therein, and the animal shelter director may offer the same
for sale or adoption. Sale or adoption, and such certificate of sale, shall
confer title and ownership of the dog or other animal, free of all claims and
interest of the previous owner. In the event that any impounded dog or other
animal is not redeemed by the owner or purchased, it may be disposed of by the
animal shelter or contracting agency in a humane manner. Any dog or other
animal suffering from an infectious disease shall not be released but shall be
disposed of, unless the public health officer shall otherwise order. Any animal
deemed dangerous or vicious by the court may not be sold or adopted without
proper disclosure to the individual purchasing or adopting said animal, to
include the nature and extent of the behavior prompting the declaration of the
court.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-14 CLEANING UP AFTER ANIMALS.
   Any person owning, keeping, possessing, or harboring any dog, cat, or other
animal shall promptly remove and properly dispose of all feces left by the dog,
cat, or animal on any public property and on any private property not owned by
such person or lawfully occupied by such person, with the exception of service
animals authorized under the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-15 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep or maintain
domestic or exotic fowl including but not limited to chickens, turkeys, ducks
or geese within the corporate limits of the city, except as provided by
Ordinance. It is hereby provided that livestock, consisting of horses, cattle,
mules, sheep, burros, goats and swine, or any such animals, shall not be
allowed to run at large in the city nor shall these animals be kept within the
corporate limits of the city. Horses, mules and burros may be ridden upon the
streets and alleys of the city and in authorized parades.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022; Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023)
§ 5-1-16 ANIMAL CRUELTY AND NEGLECT.
   (A)   A person commits animal cruelty if a person does any of the following:
      (1)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly subjects any animal under
the person's custody or control to neglect or abandonment.
      (2)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly fails to provide medical
attention necessary to prevent protracted suffering to any animal under the
person's custody or control.
      (3)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly inflicts unnecessary
physical injury to any animal.
      (4)   Recklessly subjects any animal to cruel mistreatment.
      (5)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly kills or attempts to kill
any animal under the custody or control of another person without either legal
privilege or consent of the owner.
      (6)   Recklessly interferes with, strikes, kills or harms a working or
service animal without either legal privilege or consent of the owner.
      (7)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly leaves an animal unattended
and confined in a motor vehicle under circumstances from which physical injury
to or death of the animal is likely to result.
      (8)   Recklessly allows any dog that is under the person's custody or
control to interfere with, kill or cause physical injury to a service animal.
      (9)   Strikes any domestic animal with a vehicle resulting in injury to
the animal and leaves the scene without rendering aid and assistance in the
care of such animal, if such action can be taken with reasonable safety. For
purposes of this section, "domestic animal" shall mean an animal usually
domiciled with or cared for by humans, such as cat or dog.
      (10)   Intentionally or knowingly poisons or attempts to poison any
domestic animal. For purposes of this section, "poison" or "attempt to poison"
includes the act of placing food, water, or lure of another sort which contains
poison or contains health threatening foreign objects, such as glass or metal,
in a location where any animal may be attracted to it.
      (11)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly uses a baited trap or
mechanical device to capture an animal, causing it injury or death.
   (B)   It is not a defense to division A of this section if:
      (1)   The animal was trespassing on property owned or controlled by the
person alleged to have violated this section.
      (2)   The animal was not restrained in compliance with any leash law.
      (3)   The person alleged to have violated this section did not know that
the animal was under the custody or control of another person.
   (C)   Neglect. The purpose of this section is to guarantee that animals
under human custody or control are housed in healthy environments and are
provided with proper food, water, shelter, medical care, exercise space and
ventilation. Any person owning or having care, control or custody of any animal
shall provide:
      (1)   That the animal receives daily, food that is free from
contamination and is of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain the
animal in good health.
      (2)   That potable water is accessible to the animal at all times, either
free-flowing or in a clean receptacle.
      (3)   That, except for livestock, all animals have convenient access to
natural or artificial shelter throughout the year. Any such artificial shelter
shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animal
from injury and from the elements, and of sufficient size to permit the animal
to enter, stand, turn around and lie down in a natural manner. Any shelter
which does not protect the animal from temperature extremes or precipitation,
or which does not provide adequate ventilation or drainage, shall not comply
with this section. Any shelter, all bedding and any spaces accessible to the
animal shall be maintained in a manner which minimizes the risk of the animal
contracting disease, being injured, or becoming infested with parasites.
      (4)   That the animal receives care and medical treatment for
debilitating injuries, parasites and diseases, sufficient to maintain the
animal in good health and minimize suffering.
      (5)   That the animal is given adequate exercise space within an
enclosure that shall be constructed of material, and in a manner, to minimize
the risk of injury to the animal, and shall encompass sufficient usable space
to keep the animal in good condition.
      (6)   That the animal has access to adequate ventilation and is protected
from temperature extremes at all times. In this connection, it is unlawful for
any person to keep any animal in a vehicle or other enclosed space in which the
temperature is either so high or so low, or the ventilation is so inadequate,
as to endanger the animal's life or health. Any police officer is authorized to
use whatever force is reasonable and necessary to remove any animal from a
vehicle or other enclosed space whenever it appears that the animal's life or
health is endangered by extreme temperatures or lack of ventilation within the
vehicle or other enclosed space.
         (a)   No police officer shall be liable for damages to property caused
by the use of reasonable force to remove an animal from such a vehicle or other
enclosed space under such circumstances.
   (D)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section may be waived by any
police officer if dictated by treatment under the direction of a licensed
veterinarian.
   (E)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.
   (F)   Penalty. Each person convicted of a violation of these sections shall
be fined according with the schedule of fees and fines.
   (G)   No judge may grant probation in lieu of, or otherwise suspend, the
imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein. The judge may order that the
owner shall not be permitted to own or control any animal for a period of up to
three years, and the judge may order that the animal(s) which are the subject
of this action be forfeited to the Humane Society or other suitable agency to
be placed by adoption in a suitable home or humanely destroyed. The court also
shall order the convicted person to make restitution to the city or to any
person, agency, or volunteer who has contracted with the city to care for an
animal that is seized and impounded pursuant to this or other provisions of
this section for the cost of care for the animal incurred from the time of
seizure or impoundment to the time of conviction. This shall not be construed
to affect, in any way, the imposition of any mandatory minimum penalties
provided herein.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-17 INTERFERENCE WITH A POLICE DOG PROHIBITED.
   No person shall purposely or knowingly provoke, grab, strike, harass, injure
or otherwise interfere with a police dog trained for use by a law enforcement
officer, including but not limited to a police K-9 handler, at any time during
the performance, attempted performance or while waiting to perform the animal's
or the officer's official duties.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-18 ENFORCEMENT; POLICE OFFICER AUTHORITY.
   (A)   For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and
enforcing its provisions, the police officer, in addition to any and all other
authority or power, whether the offense is committed in their presence or not
and existing circumstances require immediate action, is authorized:
      (1)   After investigation and upon finding of sufficient probable cause
may issue a notice to appear pursuant to the provisions of MCA 46-6-310, to any
violator of this chapter;
      (2)   After investigation and upon finding of probable cause may request
criminal prosecution for the violation through the city attorney;
      (3)   To inspect premises subject to a kennel license application, a
business license for animal boarding or any premises where the owner or
occupant of the premises has agreed to accept an animal to board or shelter
when the animal is the subject of an investigation, impound, upon issuance of a
warrant or in accordance with judicially recognized exceptions to the warrant
requirement;
      (4)   To demand from the occupants of any premises upon, or in which, an
animal is kept or harbored, the exhibition of such animal and the license for
such animal;
      (5)   To impound an animal which has attacked a person or other animal,
is otherwise reasonably believed to be dangerous, or pursuant to a cruelty
investigation against the animal in which protection of the animal from further
abuse is warranted or in cases where an animal is loose, injured or in need of
care and may order that animal held until such time as a hearing can be held
before the court to determine whether, and under what conditions, the animal
should be released to the owner; and
      (6)   Upon order of the Ronan City Court, to destroy an animal deemed a
dangerous or vicious animal.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-19 ENFORCEMENT FOR VIOLATIONS; LIABILITY OF OWNER; PERMIT TRANSFERS.
   In all enforcement actions for violations of this chapter, the person who
applied for and obtained the license for the dog or animal in question shall be
deemed the person responsible for the violation, unless there has been a
transfer of ownership prior to the violation. Any transfer of ownership must be
evidenced to the city clerk. A transfer permit, if desired, may be obtained by
furnishing the name and address of the transferee to the city clerk. Nothing
herein shall preclude the filing of separate or additional charges against any
person other than the owner charged with custody of the animal.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022)
§ 5-1-20 UNLAWFUL ACTS; PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner or person to:
      (1)   Own, keep or harbor any dog over six months of age without annually
registering and licensing the dog with the city clerk;
      (2)   Own, keep or harbor any dog over six months of age without a
current rabies vaccination;
      (3)   Remove the rabies tag from the dog for which the tag was issued;
      (4)   Operate a kennel without a license;
      (5)   Own, keep or harbor a dog or other animal that attacks, bites, or
injures a human being, domestic animal or livestock in a public place or in a
private place, including the property of the owner of the dog;
      (6)   Fail to keep an animal under restraint with a leash or similar
physical restraint;
      (7)   Permit an animal to run at large upon the streets, public ways of
the city, or on private property in which the owner of the dog does not have
some property interest;
      (8)   Leave an animal unattended on a street, sidewalk, public way, or in
a park or other public space;
      (9)   Permit any female dog or cat in heat to run at large;
      (10)   Own, keep, harbor or maintain any nuisance animal;
      (11)   Permit any dog, cat or any other animal to damage, soil, defile or
defecate in a public place or on private property in which the owner of the
animal does not hold some property interest and fail to properly dispose of the
feces;
      (12)   Permit any animal to howl, bark, whine, crow or otherwise to make
noise to such an extent as to interfere materially with or affect the health,
comfort or quiet of other persons;
      (13)   Permit any animal to molest, attack or interfere with the freedom
of movement of any person on a public street, alley, park, or public or private
ways;
      (14)   Permits any animal to chase any vehicle, bicycle, skateboard or
other means of transportation on a public street, alley, park or public or
private ways;
      (15)   Permit any animal to attack, injure or molest other dogs or pets;
      (16)   Own, keep, harbor or maintain domestic or exotic fowl including
chickens, turkeys, duck or geese within the corporate limits of the city,
except as provided by Ordinance;
      (17)   Own, keep, harbor or maintain livestock including horses, cattle,
mules, sheep, burros, goats or swine within the corporate limits of the City;
or
      (18)   Permit livestock to run at large within the corporate limits of
the City.
   (B)   Penalty for violations. Each person convicted of a violation of these
sections shall be fined according to the schedule of fees and fines.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022; Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023)
§ 5-1-21 SCHEDULE OF FEES AND FINES.
   (A)   License and permit fees.
      (1)   Spayed or neutered:         $10.00
      (2)   Unaltered:               $20.00
      (3)   Duplicate tag fee:            $5.00
      (4)   Annual Kennel Registration Fee:      $50.00
      (5)   Chicken Permit - 1 through 6
         hens only:               $25.00
   (B)   Euthanasia Fee:               $75.00
   (C)   Fines.
      (1)   First offense:               $50.00
      (2)   Second offense:            $100.00
      (3)   Third and subsequent offense:      $250.00*
         *Personal appearance before Ronan City Judge
   (D)   Interference with a police dog.
      (1)   First offense:               $100.00
      (2)   Second offense:            $200.00
      (3)   Third and subsequent offense:      $500.00*
         *Personal appearance before Ronan City Judge
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 10-26-2022; Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023)
§ 5-1-22 CHICKENS.
   (A)   Specific standards for chickens.
      (1)   Inspection of the proposed coop and run shall be conducted prior to
issuance of the chicken permit.
      (2)   No male chickens (roosters) over the age of three months are
permitted.
      (3)   There will be a strict limit of six adult (aged over six months)
chickens at all times.
      (4)   No chickens may run at large within the corporate limits of the
city. All chickens must be contained within the permittee's property boundary.
      (5)   The permittee shall provide the chickens with a covered, predator-
proof detached utility building that is thoroughly ventilated, of sufficient
size to admit free movement of the chickens. The detached utility building must
be adjacent to and provide free access to the chicken enclosure. No heat
sources or electrical facilities are to be installed in the detached utility
building. Any lighting must be solar or battery-operated devices. Absolutely no
"extension cord wiring" will be permitted.
      (6)   The permittee shall provide the chickens with a predator-proof
enclosure of sufficient size to admit free movement of the chickens. Chicken
enclosures may be moveable.
      (7)   Chickens shall be secured within the enclosure from sunset to
sunrise.
      (8)   Chicken enclosures and detached utility building must always be
kept in a neat and sanitary condition and must be cleaned on a regular basis to
prevent offensive odors.
      (9)   Chickens shall have continuous access to adequate food and water.
      (10)   Stored feed must be kept in a rodent-proof and predator-proof
container.
      (11)   Chickens shall be maintained in a healthy condition. Ill chickens
shall either receive appropriate medical care or be culled.
      (12)   No detached utility building shall be located closer than 20 feet
to any structure inhabited by someone other than the chicken owner, custodian,
or keeper, and not closer than 10-feet to any property line, nor located within
any setbacks of the property. Detached utility building may be moveable but
must comply with all standards of this section.
      (13)   No chicken shall be kept in a manner to create noxious odors or
noise of a loud, persistent, and habitual nature.
      (14)   No chickens shall be slaughtered within the public view.
      (15)   If specific provisions of §
5-1-22 Chickens, conflict with general provisions of the Animal Control
Ordinance, the specific provisions of §
5-1-22 Chickens govern.
   (B)   Permits required/inspections.
      (1)   Prior to keeping of any chickens, a party seeking to keep chickens
shall obtain a permit, from the City. A permit fee may be established by
resolution of the City Council and may be revised from time to time. Only one
permit shall be issued per address. Issuance of a permit is a discretionary
act.
      (2)   All chicken permits are valid for one calendar year unless sooner
revoked. Permits shall expire December 31. Permits must be renewed within 30
days of the expiration date or the application will be treated as a new
application. It is the applicant's responsibility to renew chicken permit prior
to the expiration of said permit. Failure to obtain a chicken permit prior to
opening and/or operating any facility covered in this section shall result in a
fine of $100.00. Each day a violation exists may be charged as a separate
offense.
      (3)   The owner of the chickens shall keep a copy of all signed city
approval documents for inspection upon request by code enforcement officer,
animal control officer, or police officer.
      (4)   A permit for chickens under this section does not relieve any party
from any requirement to obtain any other permit or other necessary approvals
for any structure, fence, lighting, etc. as required by this Code.
      (5)   A party wishing to keep chickens shall submit an application to the
City to keep chickens. The application shall contain the following:
         (a)   A sketch identifying the property boundaries, the location of
all structures on the property and distances between said structures and
between the property boundaries. The sketch must also indicate the location of
the proposed chicken enclosure and detached utility building.
         (b)   The name, address, and signed statement of the property owner.
         (c)   The number of chickens kept.
         (d)   A description of the proposed chicken enclosure and detached
utility building, including materials used and cubic footage.
         (e)   A sworn statement that all statements contained in the
application are true and that the permit holder shall keep the chickens in
compliance with the terms of the permit, application and this section.
         (f)   Where the party seeking to keep chickens is not the fee owner of
the property upon which chickens will be kept, the applicant shall obtain the
property owner's consent in writing to keep chickens on the property. The
owner's consent shall be submitted with the permit application or renewal.
      (6)   The party shall have the location inspected prior to the keeping of
chickens. The inspector shall review the enclosure, detached utility building,
and all matters related to the keeping of chickens. Applicant's failure to
properly complete all forms may constitute cause to deny the application or
revoke the permit.
      (7)   If, during any inspection, the inspector determines changes are to
be made to the enclosure, detached utility building, or to the number of
chickens to be kept, or require mitigation for the impact to adjacent
properties, such as fencing or other screening, the applicant/permit holder
shall comply with the order of the inspector. A person aggrieved by a decision
of the inspector may appeal to the city counsel who shall review all applicable
information and issue a decision on the appeal. At the time of final approval
by the inspector or, on appeal, by the city council, the Clerk shall indicate
final approval on the permit and keep a record of final approval.
      (8)   A permit to keep chickens is specific to the permit holder and the
location of the permit. A person wishing to move chickens to a different
property shall obtain a new permit. A new resident of a property who intends to
keep chickens shall obtain a new permit regardless of whether chickens were
kept on the property or continue to be kept on the property.
      (9)   Approval of a permit to keep chickens authorizes the permit holder
to keep six adult chickens in the manner described on the application and
permit.
      (10)   Nothing in this section shall prevent an inspector from requiring
an inspection of a property prior to or after issuance of a permit.
      (11)   A permit holder is required to comply with any new standard,
regulation, or condition, under this section, that is adopted according to
proper legal process.
   (C)   Enforcement. Upon receiving a complaint of a possible violation or
animal cruelty, a police officer will investigate and determine if a violation
of this section exists. If the officer determines a violation exists, the
officer may serve upon the permit holder or the owner or lessee of the property
a written notice of violation and an order to take corrective action, may issue
a warning, or may immediately issue a violation notice. The notice of violation
may be served by leaving the notice in a conspicuous location at the place of
the keeping of the chickens, or by regular US postal mail. The officer will
revisit the address where the violation occurred, no sooner than five days
after the notice of violation is issued to verify corrective action has been
taken. Failure to correct violations as determined by the officer may result in
a citation for each violation as a misdemeanor and punishable as recited under
Ronan City Ordinance §
5-1-21  Schedule of Fees and Fines. Each day a violation exists may be charged
as a separate offence.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023)
CHAPTER 2: COMMUNITY UPKEEP AND BEAUTIFICATION
Section
   
5-2-1   Purpose
   
5-2-2   Definitions
   
5-2-3   Police Department; powers and duties
   
5-2-4   Prohibitions
   
5-2-5   Exemptions
   
5-2-6   Entry upon private property
   
5-2-7   Initial action
   
5-2-8   Notice of nuisance condition
   
5-2-9   Hearings
   
5-2-10   Council orders; notice
   
5-2-11   Abatement by city
   
5-2-12   Assessment for costs
   
5-2-13   Summary abatement
   
5-2-14   Errors in procedure
   
5-2-15   Enforcement and penalty
§ 5-2-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to control conditions in the city that
constitute public nuisances, are injurious to public health, safety and
welfare, obstruct the free use of property or interfere with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property and to provide for the abatement of such
nuisances, to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to promote the
economic development of the city. It is also the purpose of this chapter to
prevent and prohibit those conditions which reduce the value of private
property, interfere with the enjoyment of public and private property, create
and constitute public nuisances and contribute to the degradation of the
character of neighborhoods and the depreciation of property values.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 5-2-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED, WRECKED, JUNKED OR DISMANTLED VEHICLE, EQUIPMENT OR MACHINERY.
Every vehicle, machine or piece of equipment which is not being used for its
manufactured or intended purpose and has been discarded, abandoned, wrecked,
stored, junked, dismantled or partially dismantled, including parts thereof.
   ACCUMULATE. To store, gather, collect, heap or pile up.
   ATTRACTIVE HAZARD. The open storage on property of any container that may
attract children and having a compartment of more than one and one-half cubic
feet capacity and a door or lid that locks or fastens automatically when closed
and cannot be easily opened from the inside.
   DANGEROUS STRUCTURE/CIRCUMSTANCE. Any dangerous, decaying, unkempt, falling
or damaged residential dwelling or other structure suitable for human
occupancy, including unsecured dwellings, garages, carports, sheds, foundations
and open trenches and ditches, excluding any structure related to an
agricultural or farming operation.
   COMMUNITY DECAY. A public nuisance created by allowing rubble, debris, junk
or refuse to accumulate resulting in conditions that are injurious to health,
indecent, offensive to the senses or obstruct the free use of property so as to
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. COMMUNITY DECAY
does not include:
      (1)   Normal farming, ranching or other agricultural operations or to a
farm, ranch or other agricultural facility and any appurtenances thereof,
during the course of its normal operations;
      (2)   Normal activities at a shooting range;
      (3)   Persons servicing, manufacturing or processing materials, goods or
products on lots in public view, so long as the materials used in the normal
operation of the business are neatly stacked or piled; or
      (4)   Normal residential maintenance or landscaping.
   COMMUNITY UPKEEP STANDARDS. Those standards which may be adopted by the City
Community Upkeep and Beautification Committee in order to provide guidance to
the Department as to the application of this chapter.
   DEPARTMENT. The city office that will respond to community decay complaints,
including the fire, police and public works or any other office designated by
the City Council.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A city police officer or any other employee of the city
that the Mayor designates to carry out the responsibilities identified herein
within the city’s zoning jurisdiction.
   FIRE HAZARD. Where owing to the existence of solid waste or waste, dried
grass, weeds or shrubbery, or dilapidated or deteriorated unsecured structures,
the condition of the property is likely to cause a fire.
   GRAFFITI. Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other
defacement on any surface of public or private property that was not authorized
in advance by the owner. AUTHORIZED GRAFFITI may also be deemed a nuisance by
the City Council.
   HOBBYIST PERMIT. A permit is for the restoration or repair of one non-
operating, wrecked, junked or partially dismantled vehicles on any premises
used for residential purposes may be granted to the resident of such premises
as follows.
      (1)   Application for the HOBBYIST PERMIT shall be filed in writing with
the City Clerk on a form provided by the city and shall contain the name and
address of the applicant and the make, model, year and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle to be restored or repaired.
      (2)   The vehicle to be restored or repaired shall be owned by the
applicant.
      (3)   The permit shall cover the vehicle only and does not authorize the
storage of miscellaneous vehicle parts or junk contained in, on or near the
vehicle.
      (4)   The fee for such HOBBYIST PERMIT shall be $50.
      (5)   The permit shall expire on the one hundred-eightieth day following
the date of issuance thereof.
      (6)   The HOBBYIST PERMIT for the vehicle shall be renewable one time
only upon payment of the $50.
   INOPERABLE. With respect to any vehicle, the inability of all significant
mechanical and electrical systems on such vehicle to operate properly and
dependably, or the absence of any significant parts. With respect to wheeled
and/or motorized vehicles, and where applicable, INOPERABLE means the inability
of any of the following systems to operate properly and dependably, or the
absence of such parts: tires, wheels, brakes, engine, ignition, transmission,
suspension, steering, windows, windshield, horn, muffler, rearview mirror,
windshield wiper, service brakes, parking brakes, headlights, brake lights,
turn signals.
   JUNK. The open storage of old appliances, equipment or parts thereof, old
iron or other scrap metal, automobile or truck tires, cardboard, old lumber or
scrap wood, rags, rope, paper, debris, rubble, batteries, rubber debris,
mattresses or any worn out, cast off or discarded article or material which is
ready for destruction or has been collected or stored as salvage, for
conversion to some other use or for reduction into components and is not part
of a commercial or public salvaging or recycling operation.
   JUNK VEHICLE. Any discarded, ruined, wrecked or dismantled motor vehicle
including components parts, that is not lawfully and validly licensed and
remains inoperative incapable of being driven.
(MCA 75-10-501(4))
   OBJECT. Any material, substance or composition not yet classified as waste,
solid waste or a fire hazard but which may subsequently be determined to be
waste, solid waste or a fire hazard. OBJECT, though used in the singular term,
can also mean the plural when circumstances require.
   OBSTRUCTION TO THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The placement of any debris, refuse,
rubble, dirt, gravel, soil, fence, junk, junk vehicle or other personal
property so as to obstruct traffic, drainage, pedestrians or otherwise safe and
open access to such right-of-way.
   OWNER. Owner of the title to real property or the contract purchaser of real
property as shown in the last available complete assessment roll in the office
of the County Assessor.
   NUISANCE WEEDS. All uncontrolled growth of vegetation of every kind and
nature over 12 inches in height, not grown for purposes of landscaping or food
production. “Noxious weeds”, as defined by state law, are not included in this
definition.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, company, association or
corporation, city, town, county or any other entity whether organized for
profit or not.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. A nuisance which affects, at the same time, an entire
community or neighborhood or any other considerable number of persons, although
the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted on individuals may be unequal.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. A private property that has been dedicated to the
community for the purpose of public usage for things such as, but not limited
to, motorized access, non-motorized and pedestrian access, trails, common
areas, utility placement and other forms of community benefit.
   PUBLIC VIEW. Any point, six feet above the surface of the center of any
public street, road alley, property, right-of-way, walking path, private road
in platted subdivisions and mobile home parks from which the community decay
can be seen.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTIES. Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others:
has legal or equitable interest in real or personal property including, but not
limited to, tenants or lessees acts as the agent of a person having a legal or
equitable interest in real or personal property.
   SHIELDING. Fencing or other fabricated barriers to conceal a facility from
public view. It also refers to natural barriers.
   SOLID WASTE. All putrescible and non-putrescible waste including, but not
limited to, garbage, rubbish, refuse, demolition wastes (including wood,
bricks, concrete, used road black top and other similar materials), ashes,
wastepaper and cardboard, sewage, sludge, septic tank and cesspool pumpage or
other sludge, commercial, industrial, construction waste, discarded home and
industrial appliances, manure, bird droppings, vegetable or animal solid and
semi-solid wastes, dead animals and other waste.
   UNLICENSED. With respect to any vehicle which is required to be registered
under state law with the Department of Justice, Motor Vehicle Division, the
absence of the appropriate license tags and/or stickers attached to such
vehicle showing a current registration.
   VEHICLE. Any automobile, car, truck, all-terrain vehicle, motorcycle,
tractor, trailer, pole trailer, bus, camper, motor home, travel trailer,
recreational vehicle, snowmobile, boat or other watercraft.
   WASTE. Useless or discarded materials.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 5-2-3 POLICE DEPARTMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The City Council designates the Police Department as the primary department
which shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   The duty to inspect when there has been a complaint by that community
decay is present in an area;
   (B)   The power to recommend to the City Council further applicable
standards by which to enforce this chapter;
   (C)   The power to determine whether or not this chapter applies after an
inspection of the property or area;
   (D)   The duty to send a written notice of violation to the owner of the
property in violation of this chapter;
   (E)   The power to enter upon the property in violation after written
notice, for the specific purpose of abating the violation; and
   (F)   The power to assess the property owner for the actual costs of an
abatement made by the Department.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 5-2-4 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to create or maintain on any premises or
adjacent to a public right-of-way within the city any condition that
contributes to the creation of a public nuisance and is injurious to health or
safety, is offensive to the senses, or obstructs the free use of property, so
as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or
obstructs a public right-of-way.
   (B)   Such condition shall be deemed a nuisance if it affects an entire
community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons. Public
nuisances include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Maintaining an attractive hazard on any premises for more than 24
hours without removing the door, lid or locking or fastening device from such
container;
      (2)   Maintaining a junk vehicle or vehicles, whether on public or
private property, for more than five consecutive days on public property; 30
consecutive days on private property, without removing such vehicle(s) to a
legal disposal site or placing said junk vehicle(s) inside a storage building
or garage;
      (3)   Maintaining a collection of junk (see definition) on any premises
for more than five consecutive days without removing such material to a legal
disposal site or placing such collection inside a storage building or garage;
      (4)   Creating or maintaining an obstruction to a public right-of-way;
      (5)   Creating or maintaining on any premises an amount of decaying
matter, animal or vegetable, that is not part of an agricultural or farming
operation, so as to contaminate the atmosphere and be offensive to the senses
and obstruct the free enjoyment of life and property;
      (6)   Maintaining a dangerous structure (see definition) for more than 30
days without securing such property against entry or abating the dangerous
condition of such structure;
      (7)   Creating or maintaining grass, weeds and lawns which are not
regularly cut and mowed;
      (8)   Creating or maintaining fallen leaves, and branches that are
allowed to accumulate upon any property to the point of creating a fire hazard;
      (9)   Accumulation of snow and ice on any public sidewalk adjoining
private property, the removal of snow and ice may not be disposed on any public
right-of-way;
      (10)   Nothing that is done or maintained pursuant to a permit issued by
the city or the state shall be deemed a public nuisance; and
      (11)   Violations of this section shall be cited into City Court as civil
citations, subject to penalties as provided § 5-2-15 of this chapter.
Violations of this section may also be grounds for a civil abatement action as
provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 5-2-5 EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to vehicles enclosed in a building, covered by
a cover specifically designed for covering vehicles, the issuance of a hobbyist
permit, vehicles which are shielded according to the definition set forth in
this chapter, or to any vehicle held in connection with a lawfully operated
business enterprise.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 5-2-6 ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   A city police officer is authorized between sunrise and sunset to
enter upon private property and examine any object for the purpose of
determining if it is a public nuisance, as defined herein. However, before
entering upon private property, the police officer shall obtain consent of the
occupant thereof or have a warrant from the City Court authorizing his or her
entry for the purpose of inspection.
   (B)   No inspection warrant shall be issued under the terms of this section
until an affidavit has been filed with the City Court showing probable cause
for such inspection by stating the purpose and the extent of the proposed
inspection or other specific or general information concerning the object in
question and identifying the property on which it is situated.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to interfere with or attempt to prevent
the police officer from entering upon private premises and inspecting such
object when the police officer exhibits a warrant authorizing the entry of or
has obtained consent of the occupant of the property.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 5-2-7 INITIAL ACTION.
   (A)   Upon the city’s own information or upon written or an oral complaint
by a member of the public that a public nuisance has been created resulting in
conditions that are injurious to health, indecent, offensive to the senses or
obstruct the free use of property, a police officer shall inspect the property
alleged to be in violation of this chapter. Upon inspection, the Department
shall determine whether there is a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   When the police officer determines that a nuisance condition described
in this chapter exists in the city’s zoning jurisdiction, the police officer
shall make an initial contact with the property owner for the purpose of making
said owner aware of the violation. The initial contact shall be in writing, or
by telephone followed up in writing. The initial contact shall describe the
violation, cite the applicable provision(s) of this code, and seek voluntary
corrective action with a compliance date of not more than 30 calendar days from
the notice and provide contact information for the city police officer.
   (C)   In the event that a nuisance condition persists after the date given
for abatement and or compliance as set forth in division (B) above, the police
officer shall issue a notice of violation and order to abate within 14 calendar
days. Should the nuisance condition persist beyond that lime period, the police
officer shall proceed as set forth in § 5-2-8 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 5-2-8 NOTICE OF NUISANCE CONDITION.
   (A)   Mailed notice.
      (1)   The police officer shall notify the owner and any occupants of the
premises by personal service or by first class mail. The notice shall state:
         (a)   A hearing will be held before the City Council concerning the
nuisance character of the property;
         (b)   A description of the properly and alleged nuisances; and
         (c)   The time and place of the hearing.
      (2)   A copy of this notice shall be posted on the property.
   (B)   Posted notices. At least ten days prior to the hearing date, the city
shall post notices in at least three public places in the city.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 5-2-9 HEARINGS.
   (A)   Right to be heard. At the hearing, the owner or other interested
parties shall have the right to be heard.
   (B)   Inspection of property. The Council may inspect the property and
consider the facts observed in determining whether the property is a nuisance.
   (C)   Resolution of Council.
      (1)   If the Council determines that the property is a nuisance, the
Council may, by resolution, order the property to be made safe and prescribe
what must be done to make it safe.
      (2)   In the resolution, the Council may set a time, not less than ten
days, within which the order must be obeyed.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 5-2-10 COUNCIL ORDERS; NOTICE.
   Notice of the Council’s determination and orders by the Council shall be by
personal service or by first class mail to the owner of the property. If the
orders are not obeyed and the property is not made safe within the time
specified by the order, the Council may order the property made safe at the
expense of the owner of the property on which it is located.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 5-2-11 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   If the Police Department’s orders are not complied with, the Department may
specify the work to be done and direct that it be undertaken by city personnel
and equipment or that the city contract for such work.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 5-2-12 ASSESSMENT FOR COSTS.
   (A)   The city shall forward to the owner, by personal service or by first
class mail, a notice stating:
      (1)   The total cost of abatement, including the administrative costs;
      (2)   The costs as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien
against the properly unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice;
and
      (3)   If the owner objects to the costs of the abatement as indicated, a
written notice of objection may be filed with the City Council not more than
ten days from the date of the notice.
   (B)   No sooner than 30 days after the date of the notice of costs, the
Council, in the regular course of business, shall hear and make a decision on
the objections to the costs assessed.
   (C)   If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the
date of the notice of costs and, if no objection was filed within ten days from
the Council determination, an assessment of the costs, as stated or as decided
by the Council, shall be made by resolution, and thereafter recorded with the
County Clerk and Recorder and/or assessed with other property assessments at
which time it shall constitute a lien on the property from which the nuisance
was removed or abated.
   (D)   The lien shall bear interest at a rate set by the Council at the time
of assessment.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 5-2-13 SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
   The procedure of this chapter need not be followed if the condition of the
property is unmistakably dangerous and imminently endangers life or property.
In this instance, the police officer may summarily abate the nuisance.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 5-2-14 ERRORS IN PROCEDURE.
   Failure to conform to the requirements of this chapter that does not
substantially and adversely affect the legal right of a person does not
invalidate a proceeding under this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 5-2-15 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.
   (A)   Prohibition. It shall be a violation of this chapter to own or
maintain any public nuisance that results in community decay that is in view of
the public within the city limits.
   (B)   Municipal infraction. A violation of this chapter shall constitute a
civil violation of this code as prescribed by MCA 7-1-4150. This civil offense
is punishable by a civil penalty:
      (1)   First offense: $100;
      (2)   Second offense: $200;
      (3)   Third offense: $300;
      (4)   Fourth offense: $400; and
      (5)   Fifth offense and subsequent offense: $500.
   (C)   Injunction. Action under this chapter does not bar enforcement of this
chapter or orders issued under it by injunction or other appropriate remedy.
   (D)   Enforcement. Proceedings for the enforcement of a municipal infraction
citation issued under this chapter shall be brought pursuant to the provisions
of MCA 7-1-4151.
   (E)   Intent. The intent of this section, fines received ultimately be
distributed to the city for costs of the enforcement of this chapter. Any
recovery of costs of abatement shall be distributed to the fund paying the cost
of the abatement.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 7-17-2017)
CHAPTER 3: ABANDONED, WRECKED OR JUNKED VEHICLES
Section
   
5-3-1   Definitions
   
5-3-2   Nuisance declared
   
5-3-3   Abatement
   
5-3-4   Enforcement and penalty
§ 5-3-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED, WRECKED, JUNKED OR DISMANTLED VEHICLE. Every vehicle, which is
not being used for its manufactured or intended purpose and has been discarded,
abandoned, wrecked, stored, junked, dismantled or partially dismantled,
including parts thereof.
   ENCLOSED AREA. An area shall be deemed an ENCLOSED AREA when surrounded by a
fence or other structure, and is constructed of an opaque material, and
surrounds the area on all sides, such that abandoned, wrecked, junked or
dismantled vehicles behind the fence or other structure are not visible from
the public right-of-way or other private or public property.
   ENCLOSED STRUCTURE. A garage or building structure erected pursuant to the
lawful issuance of a building permit, constructed in accordance with all
applicable zoning and building code regulations and which provides a complete
enclosure such that abandoned, wrecked, junked or dismantled vehicles are not
visible from the public right-of-way or other private or public property.
   HOBBYIST PERMIT. A permit is for the restoration or repair of one non-
operating, wrecked, junked or partially dismantled vehicles on any premises
used for residential purposes may be granted to the resident of such premises
as follows.
      (1)   Application for the HOBBYIST PERMIT shall be filed in writing with
the City Clerk on a form provided by the city and shall contain the name and
address of the applicant and the make, model, year and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle to be restored or repaired.
      (2)   The vehicle to be restored or repaired shall be owned by the
applicant.
      (3)   The permit shall cover the vehicle only and does not authorize the
storage of miscellaneous vehicle parts or junk contained in, on or near the
vehicle.
      (4)   The fee for such HOBBYIST PERMIT shall be $50.
      (5)   The permit shall expire on the one hundred-eightieth day following
the date of issuance thereof.
      (6)   The HOBBYIST PERMIT for the vehicle shall be renewable one time
only upon payment of the $50.
   INOPERABLE. With respect to any vehicle, the inability of all significant
mechanical and electrical systems on such vehicle to operate properly and
dependably, or the absence of any significant parts. With respect to wheeled
and/or motorized vehicles and, where applicable, INOPERABLE means the inability
of any of the following systems to operate properly and dependably, or the
absence of such parts: tires, wheels, brakes, engine, ignition, transmission,
suspension, steering, windows, windshield, horn, muffler, rearview mirror,
windshield wiper, service brakes, parking brakes, headlights, brake lights,
turn signals.
   JUNK VEHICLE. Any discarded, ruined, wrecked or dismantled motor vehicle
including components parts, which is not lawfully and validly licensed and
remains inoperative incapable of being driven.
(MCA 75-10-501(4))
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. A nuisance which affects, at the same time, an entire
community or neighborhood or any other considerable number of persons, although
the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted on individuals may be unequal.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. A public right-of-way is a private property that has
been dedicated to the community for the purpose of public usage for things such
as, but not limited to, motorized access, non-motorized and pedestrian access,
trails, common areas, utility placement and other forms of community benefit.
   PUBLIC VIEW. Any area visible from the surface of the center of a public
roadway or right-of- way.
   SHIELDING. Any natural barriers, fencing or other manmade barriers used to
conceal any violation on the premises from public view. All shielding barriers
must conform to all local zoning, planning, building and protective covenant
requirements. All shielding barriers shall be of sufficient height and density
to conceal any violation on the premises from public view. This definition is
not intended to require that permanent buildings, utility poles or other
similar structures be shielded.
   UNLICENSED. With respect to any vehicle which is required to be registered
under state law with the Department of Justice, Motor Vehicle Division, the
absence of the appropriate license tags and/of stickers attached to such
vehicle showing a current registration.
   VEHICLE. Any automobile, car, truck, all-terrain vehicle, motorcycle,
tractor, trailer, pole trailer, bus, camper, motor home, travel trailer,
recreational vehicle, snowmobile, boat or other watercraft.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-318) (Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 5-3-2 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   All abandoned and junk motor vehicles, whether on public property or on
private property in view of the general public, are declared to be a nuisance.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-318) (Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 5-3-3 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Public property. If the abandoned or junk motor vehicle is on public
property and is not disposed of within five days of receipt of notice as
provided hereinafter from the city, the Chief of Police or his or her designee
is authorized to remove and dispose of said vehicle. The owner of said vehicle
shall be responsible for all costs including expenses for towing and storage.
   (B)   Private property. If the abandoned or junk motor vehicle is on private
property and is not enclosed in a building; covered by a cover specifically
designed for covering vehicles; shielded or disposed of within 30 days of
receipt of notice as provided for herein, the Police Department shall commence
an action to abate said nuisance. The owner of said vehicle shall be
responsible for all costs, including expenses for towing and storage.
      (1)   Front and side yards. Disabled, wrecked or abandoned or junk
vehicles shall not be permitted in a front yard or side yard. However, a
reasonable time (not to exceed 14 days from the time of disability) shall be
permitted for the removal or servicing of a temporarily disabled motor vehicle
in any emergency caused by an accident or sudden breakdown of the vehicle.
      (2)   Permitted in enclosed structure or a rear yard. Storage, service,
restoration and repair with a hobbyist permit, which is conducted within the
confines of an enclosed structure or in a rear yard shall be permitted;
provided that, such vehicle is the property of the owner or occupier of the lot
and; provided that, the storage, service, restoration or repair is within a
garage, or an enclosed area, or enclosed structure, or shielded as not to be
visible from the public right-of-way or other private or public property.
   (C)   Notice. The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall make
reasonable attempt to locale the owner of vehicle and/or lienholder. The
address currently maintained by the Montana Department of Motor Vehicle
Registration, or the equivalent agency in any other state or country, shall be
deemed the address upon which notice shall be made. Any notice is deemed
complete by deposit into the United States Postal Service of a return receipt
requested mailing to said address.
   (D)   Consent. If the owner of the junk vehicle consents to said abatement,
such person shall sign a written consent to abate the vehicle and provide to
the Police Department a copy of the motor vehicle registration for said
vehicle, if available, or a bill of sale. The signing of such consent shall in
no way relieve the owner of paying the costs associated with the towing,
disposal of said vehicle.
   (E)   Right to be heard. With respect to abandoned, wrecked, junked or
dismantled vehicle on private property, the owner or occupant shall have the
right to be heard before the City Council as specified in Title 5, Ch. 2, of
this code of ordinances.
   (F)   Involuntary abatement. If the owner does not consent to said removal,
then the Police Department shall pursue legal remedies through the City Court
to abate the nuisances as specified in Title 5, Ch. 2, of this code of
ordinances.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-318) (Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 5-3-4 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.
   (A)   Municipal infraction. A violation of this chapter shall constitute a
civil violation of this code as prescribed by MCA 7-1-4150. This civil offense
is punishable by a civil penalty of not more than $300 for each violation or if
the infraction is a repeat offense, a civil penalty not to exceed $500 for each
repeat violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense and
be punishable as such:
      (1)   First offense: $100;
      (2)   Second offense: $200;
      (3)   Third offense: $300;
      (4)   Fourth offense: $400; and
      (5)   Fifth offense and subsequent offense: $500.
   (B)   Enforcement. Proceedings for the enforcement of a municipal infraction
citation issued under this chapter shall be brought pursuant to the provisions
of MCA 7-1-4151.
   (C)   Intent. It is the intent of this section that fines received
ultimately be distributed to the city for costs of the enforcement of this
chapter. Any recovery of costs of abatement shall be distributed to the fund
paying the cost of the abatement.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-318) (Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-5-2017)
TITLE 6: POLICE AND FIRE REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
1.    PUBLIC SAFETY; LAW ENFORCEMENT
      
2.    CRIMINAL CODE
      
3.    OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
      
4.    CURFEW
      
5.    OFFENSES CONCERNING ALCOHOL
      
6.    FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
7.    MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
CHAPTER 1: PUBLIC SAFETY; LAW ENFORCEMENT
Cross-reference:
   Court Department, see §§
2-1-15  through
2-1-22
   Fire Department, see §§
2-2-20  through
2-2-24
   Police Department, see §§
2-2-1  through
2-2-8
CHAPTER 2: CRIMINAL CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
6-2-1 Adoption of criminal code by reference
Specific Acts
   
6-2-15   General requirements of criminal act and mental state
   
6-2-16   Casual relationship between conduct and result
   
6-2-17   Accountability for conduct of another
   
6-2-18   When accountability exists
   
6-2-19   Separate conviction of person accountable
   
6-2-20   Criminal responsibility of corporations
   
6-2-21   Accountability for conduct of corporation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 6-2-1 ADOPTION OF CRIMINAL CODE BY REFERENCE.
   The city hereby adopts by reference all applicable acts of criminal conduct
as found in MCA Title 45 and grants to its police officers and city court
lawful jurisdiction of such offenses not otherwise prohibited by state law.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-201)
SPECIFIC ACTS
§ 6-2-15 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CRIMINAL ACT AND MENTAL STATE.
   (A)   A person is not guilty of an offense, other than an offense which
involves absolute liability, unless, with respect to each element described by
the statute defining the offense, he or she acts while having one of the mental
states described in divisions (D)(1), (D)(2) and (D)(3) below. The existence of
a mental state may be inferred from the acts of the accused and the facts and
circumstances connected with the offense.
   (B)   If the statute defining an offense prescribes a particular mental
state with respect to the offense as a whole without distinguishing among the
elements thereof, the prescribed mental state applies to each element.
   (C)   Knowledge that certain conduct constitutes an offense or knowledge of
the existence, meaning or application of the statute defining an offense is not
an element of the offense unless the statute clearly defines it as such.
   (D)   (1)   A person’s reasonable belief that his or her conduct does not
constitute an offense is a defense if:
         (a)   The offense is defined by an administrative regulation or order
which is not known to him or her and has not been published or otherwise made
reasonably available to him or her and he or she could not have acquired such
knowledge by the exercise of due diligence pursuant to facts known to him or
her;
         (b)   He or she acts in reliance upon a status which later is
determined to be invalid;
         (c)   He or she acts in reliance upon an order or opinion of the
Montana Supreme Court or a United States appellate court later overruled or
reversed; and/or
         (d)   He or she acts in reliance upon an official interpretation of
the statute, regulation or order defining the offense made by a public officer
or agency legally authorized to interpret such statute.
      (2)   If a person’s reasonable belief is a defense under division (D)(1)
above, nevertheless he or she may be convicted of an included offense of which
he or she would be guilty if the law were as he or she believed it to be.
      (3)   Any defense based upon this section is an affirmative defense.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-101)
§ 6-2-16 CASUAL RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CONDUCT AND RESULT.
   (A)   Conduct is the cause of a result if:
      (1)   Without the conduct the result would not have occurred; and
      (2)   Any additional casual requirements imposed by the specific statute
defining the offense are satisfied.
   (B)   If purposely or knowingly causing a result is an element of an offense
and the result is not within the contemplation of purpose of the offender,
either element can nevertheless be established if:
      (1)   The result differs from that contemplated only in the respect that
a different person or different property is affected or that the injury or harm
caused is less than contemplated; or
      (2)   The result involves the same kind of harm or injury as contemplated
but the precise harm or injury was different or occurred in a different way,
unless the actual result is too remote or accidental to have a bearing on the
offender’s liability or on the gravity of the offense.
   (C)   If negligently causing a particular result is an element of an offense
and the result is not within the risk of which the offender is aware or should
be aware, either element can nevertheless be established if:
      (1)   The actual result differs from the probable result only in the
respect that a different person or different property is affected or that the
actual injury or harm is less; or
      (2)   The actual result involves the same kind of injury or harm as the
probable result, unless the actual result is too remote or accidental to have a
bearing on the offender’s liability or on the gravity of the offense.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-102)
§ 6-2-17 ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CONDUCT OF ANOTHER.
   A person is responsible for conduct which is an element of an offense if the
conduct is either that of the person himself or herself or that of another and
he or she is legally accountable for such conduct.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-103)
§ 6-2-18 WHEN ACCOUNTABILITY EXISTS.
   A person is legally accountable for the conduct of another when:
   (A)   Having a mental state described by the statute defining the offense,
he or she causes another to perform the conduct, regardless of the legal
capacity or mental state of the other person;
   (B)   The statute defining the offense makes him or her so accountable; or
   (C)   Either before or during the commission of an offense with the purpose
to promote or facilities such commission, he or she solicits, aids, abets,
agrees or attempts to aid such other person in the planning or commission of
the offense. However, a person is not so accountable if:
      (1)   He or she is a victim of the offense committed, unless the statute
defining the offense provides otherwise; or
      (2)   Before the commission of the offense, he or she terminates his or
her effort to promote or facilities such commission and does one of the
following:
         (a)   Wholly deprives his or her prior efforts to effectiveness in
such commission;
         (b)   Gives timely warning to the proper law enforcement authorities;
or
         (c)   Otherwise makes proper effort to prevent the commission of the
offense.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-104)
§ 6-2-19 SEPARATE CONVICTION OF PERSON ACCOUNTABLE.
   A person who is legally accountable for the conduct of another which is an
element of an offense may be convicted upon proof that the offense was
committed and that he or she was so accountable although the other person
claimed to have committed the offense has not been prosecuted or convicted has
been convicted of different offense, is not amenable to justice, or has been
acquitted.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-105)
§ 6-2-20 CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY OF CORPORATIONS.
   (A)   A corporation may be persecuted for the commission of an offense if,
but only if:
      (1)   The offense is a misdemeanor and which clearly indicates a
legislative purpose to impose liability on a corporation and an agent of the
corporation performs the conduct which is an element of the offense while
acting within the scope of his or her office or employment in behalf of the
corporation; except that, any limitation in the defining statute concerning the
corporation’s accountability for certain agents or under certain circumstances
is applicable; or
      (2)   The commission of the offense is authorized, requested, commanded
or performed by the board of directors or by a high managerial agent who is
acting within the scope of his or her employment in behalf of the corporation.
   (B)   A corporation’s proof that the high managerial agent having
supervisory responsibility over the conduct which is the subject matter of the
offense exercised due diligence to prevent the commission of the offense is a
defense to a prosecution for any offense to which division (A)(1) above refers,
other than an offense for which absolute liability is imposed. This division
(B) is inapplicable if the legislative purpose of the statute defining the
offense is inconsistent with the provisions of this division (B).
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AGENT. Any director, officer, servant, employee or other person who is
authorized to act in behalf of the corporation.
      HIGH MANAGERIAL AGENT. An officer of the corporation or any other agent
who has a position of comparable authority for the formulation of corporate
policy or the supervision of subordinate employees in a managerial capacity.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-106)
§ 6-2-21 ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CONDUCT OF CORPORATION.
   (A)   A person is legally accountable for conduct which is an element of an
offense and which, in the name or in behalf of a corporation, he or she
performs or causes to be performed to the same extent as if the conduct were
performed in his or her own name or behalf.
   (B)   An individual who has been convicted of an offense by reason of his or
her legal accountability for the conduct of a corporation is subject to the
punishment authorized by law for an individual upon conviction of such offense
although only a lesser or different punishment is authorized for the
corporation.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-107)
CHAPTER 3: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
Section
   
6-3-1   Definitions
   
6-3-2   Public display or dissemination of material harmful to minors
   
6-3-3   Penalties
   
6-3-4   Exemption of parent or guardian
   
6-3-5   Defense
   
6-3-6   Severability
§ 6-3-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISTRIBUTE. To transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.
   EXHIBIT or EXHIBITION. To show.
   HARMFUL TO MINORS. Material or a live performance that:
      (1)   The average person applying contemporary community standards would
find, taken as a whole and with respect to minors, appeals to a prurient
interest in nudity, sex or excretion;
      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary community standards would
find depicts, describes or represents, in a patently offensive way with respect
to what is suitable for minors, ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted,
actual or simulated, sado-masochistic sexual acts or abuse or lewd or
lascivious exhibition of the genitals, pubic area, buttocks or post pubertal
female breast; and
      (3)   A reasonable person would find, taken as a whole, lacks serious
literary, artistic, political or scientific value for minors.
   LIVE PERFORMANCE. Any play, show, skit, dance or other exhibition played or
performed before an audience of one or more, with or without consideration.
   KNOWINGLY. Being aware of the age of a minor or being aware of the character
of the material.
   MATERIAL. Any communication, picture, image, graphic image file, article,
message, recording, writing, CD ROM, laser disk, computer floppy disk, computer
software or other matter of any kind.
   MINOR. An unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   NEGLIGENTLY. Consciously disregarding a risk or existence of circumstances
of which a person should be aware to the degree that the risk deviates from the
conduct of a reasonable person concerning:
      (1)   The character of the material or live performance that is
reasonably susceptible to examination; and
      (2)   The age of the minor. However, an honest mistake will constitute an
excuse from liability if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to
ascertain the true age of the minor.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or other legal
entity of any kind.
   PRURIENT INTEREST IN NUDITY, SEX OR EXCRETION. A shameful, morbid,
lascivious or unhealthy lustful interest in nudity, sex or excretion.
   REASONABLE BONA FIDE ATTEMPT. An attempt to ascertain the true age of the
minor by requiring production of a driver’s license, marriage license, birth
certificate or a governmental or educational identification card or paper
rather than relying solely on the oral allegations or apparent age of the
minor.
(1992 Code, § 8-2-101)
§ 6-3-2 PUBLIC DISPLAY OR DISSEMINATION OF MATERIAL HARMFUL TO MINORS.
   A person may not knowingly or negligently:
   (A)   Display material that is harmful to minors in such a way that minors,
as a part of the invited public, will be able to view the material; provided,
however, that, a person is considered not to have displayed material harmful to
minors if the material is kept behind devices commonly known as blinder racks
so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view and the
material is not accessible to minors;
   (B)   Sell, furnish, present, distribute, rent, send or cause to be sent,
exhibit or otherwise disseminate or allow a minor to view, or offer to
distribute or exhibit by any means with or without consideration, any material
that is harmful to minors to a minor; or
   (C)   Present or exhibit or participate in presenting to a minor, with or
without consideration, any live performance that is harmful to minors.
(1992 Code, § 8-2-102)
§ 6-3-3 PENALTIES.
   (A)   A person who is convicted of violating §
6-3-2 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined an amount not
to exceed $500 or be imprisoned for a term not to exceed six months, or both.
   (B)   Each day that a violation of §
6-3-2 of this chapter occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense and is
punishable as a separate violation.
   (C)   Every act, thing or transaction prohibited by §
6-3-2 of this chapter constitutes a separate offense to each item, issue or
title involved and is punishable as a separate offense.
   (D)   For purposes of §
6-3-2 of this chapter, multiple copies of the same title, monthly issue, volume
and number issue or other identical material constitutes a single offense.
(1992 Code, § 8-2-103)
§ 6-3-4 EXEMPTION OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN.
   (A)   (1)   Nothing in §
6-3-2 of this chapter shall prohibit any parent or guardian from distributing
any material harmful to minors to his or her child or ward, or permitting his
or her child or ward to attend an exhibition of any material harmful to minors,
if the child or ward is accompanied by the parent or guardian.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to encourage or condone
such consent by a parent or guardian, or to prohibit the prosecution of a
parent or guardian who displays or distributes any material harmful to his or
her child or ward for the purpose of enticing, encouraging, instructing or
otherwise inducing his or her minor child to engage in any sexual act, as
defined in §
6-3-1 of this chapter, or any sexual act otherwise prohibited by law, by
himself or herself, with the parent or guardian, with another person or an
animal.
   (B)   Nothing in §
6-3-2 of this chapter shall prohibit any person from exhibiting any harmful
matter to any of the following:
      (1)   A minor who is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian; and/or
      (2)   A minor who is accompanied by an adult who represents himself or
herself to be the parent or guardian of the minor and who the person, by the
exercise of reasonable care, does not have reason to know is not the parent or
guardian of the minor.
(1992 Code, § 8-2-104)
§ 6-3-5 DEFENSE.
   (A)   It shall be a defense in any prosecution for a violation of §
6-3-2 of this chapter that the act charged was displayed, presented or
disseminated to a minor at a recognized and established school, church, museum,
medical clinic, hospital, public library, governmental agency and was committed
in aid of legitimate scientific or education purposes.
   (B)   It shall be a defense in any prosecution for a violation of §
6-3-2 of this chapter that a person who knowingly or negligently distributed
any material harmful to minors by the use of telephones or telephone facilities
to any minor, that the defendant has taken either of the following measures to
restrict access to material harmful to minors by persons under 18 years of age:
      (1)   Required the person receiving the harmful matter to use an
authorized access or identification code, as provided by the information
provider, before transmission of the material harmful to minors begins, where
the defendant previously has issued the code by mailing it to the applicant
after taking reasonable measures to ascertain that the applicant was 18 years
of age or older and has established a procedure to immediately cancel the code
of any person after receiving notice, in writing or by telephone, that the code
has been lost, stolen or used by persons under the age of 18 years or that the
code is no longer desired; and/or
      (2)   Required payment by credit card before transmission of the matter.
(1992 Code, § 8-2-105)
§ 6-3-6 SEVERABILITY.
   If any phrase, clause, sentence, section or provision of this chapter or
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect any other phrase, clause, sentence, section,
provision or application of this chapter, which can be given effect without the
invalid phrase, clause, sentence, section, provision or application and, to
this end, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.
(1992 Code, § 8-2-106)
CHAPTER 4: CURFEW
Section
   
6-4-1   Curfew
   
6-4-2   Exception
   
6-4-3   Parent responsibility
   
6-4-4   Juvenile violators
§ 6-4-1 CURFEW.
   It shall be unlawful for minors under the age of 18 years of age to be in,
or upon, or to loiter upon or frequent the streets, alleys or sidewalks within
the city limits between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except on the
days of Friday and Saturday, when the time shall be extended to the hours of
12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-201) (Ord. 2004-03, passed - -)
§ 6-4-2 EXCEPTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any minor going to or
returning from his or her place of employment nor to any minor accompanied by
his or her parents, guardian or other adult person having the care or custody
of such minor or where such minor is engaged upon an errand or business
directed by his or her parent, guardian or adult person having his or her care
or custody; provided, however, that, any such minor embraced within the
provisions of this section shall not unnecessarily linger or loiter at any time
while engaged or occupied as in this section provided.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-202) (Ord. 2004-03, passed - -)
§ 6-4-3 PARENT RESPONSIBILITY.
   The parent or parents or legal guardian of any minor who shall allow a
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not to
exceed the sum of $100 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-203) (Ord. 2004-03, passed - -)
§ 6-4-4 JUVENILE VIOLATORS.
   Any minor violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and may be taken into custody for referral to juvenile
authorities or to their legal custodian, guardian or parent. Such offense shall
be punishable by a fine not to exceed $50.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-204) (Ord. 2004-03, passed - -)
CHAPTER 5: OFFENSES CONCERNING ALCOHOL
Section
   
6-5-1   Definitions
   
6-5-2   Public drinking or display of open alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
6-5-3   Public consumption in vehicles prohibited
   
6-5-4   Permit for gathering; permits allowed
   
6-5-5   Penalties
   
6-5-6   Fees
§ 6-5-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, also called ethanol, or the hydrated oxide of ethyl.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. A compound produced and sold for human consumption as a
drink that contains more than 0.5% of alcohol by volume.
   BEER. A malt beverage containing not more than 8.75% of alcohol by volume.
   LIQUOR or LIQUORS. Any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt or
other liquor which contains more than 1% of alcohol by weight, but which shall
not mean or include beer, as that term is defined in the Montana Beer Act.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled by which any person or
property is, or may be, transported or drawn upon a public highway.
   POSSESSION. The knowing control of anything for a sufficient time to be able
to terminate control.
   PUBLIC DISPLAY OR EXHIBITION OF BEER OR LIQUOR. The carrying and exhibiting
of open cans or bottles of beer, or the carrying and exhibiting of glasses or
other types of container, or containing beer or liquor, from retail liquor or
beer establishments to any “public place”, as defined in this section, or to,
in, on or within any motor vehicles while parked or operated on any “public
place”, as defined in this section; but does not include carrying or
transporting such beer or liquor from retail liquor or beer establishments in
sacks, cases, boxes, cartons or other similar containers with unbroken seals
when no display or exhibition is made, nor transporting from private
residences.
   PUBLIC DRINKING. Includes the consumption or possession, for the purpose of
consumption, of open alcoholic beverages in or on any public place in the city.
   PUBLIC PLACE. All streets, alleys, athletic fields, public parks, public
parking lots and motor vehicles when parked or operated within the city limits.
For purposes of this chapter, a “public parking lot” shall be deemed to be any
parking lot, whether owned by the city or by private individuals, to which the
general public has access to park and which is designed to accommodate five or
more vehicles. PUBLIC PLACE does not include a private residence or business
and its contiguous real properly (front or rear yard) or a private hotel or
motel room, but does include the commonly shared areas such as common hallways
of a building or apartment complex and areas of city right-of-way, including
sidewalks and streets.
(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 6-5-2 PUBLIC DRINKING OR DISPLAY OF OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   Public drinking and public display and exhibition of beer or liquor, as
defined in this chapter, is hereby prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any
person to engage in public drinking, as defined in this chapter, within the
limits of the city; and it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any
public display or exhibition of beer or liquor, as defined in this chapter,
within the city limits.
(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 6-5-3 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION IN VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall drink or consume an intoxicating substance or
alcoholic beverage in or on any motor vehicle when such vehicle is upon a
public highway or in a public place. No person shall have in his or her
possession while in or on a motor vehicle while in a public place, a container
of an alcoholic beverage which has been opened or the seal broken, or the
contents of which have been partially removed.
   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner of any motor vehicle or the driver, if
the owner is not present in or on the motor vehicle, to keep or allow to be
kept in the vehicle when such vehicle is in a public place, any bottle, can or
other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or the
seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, except when
such bottle or receptacle shall be kept in the trunk of the motor vehicle, or
kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or
passenger, if the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. A utility
compartment or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied
by the driver and passengers.
(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 6-5-4 PERMIT FOR GATHERING; PERMITS ALLOWED.
   (A)   No permit is required for events located on private property, even if
the event is open to the public.
   (B)   A permit may be granted by the Mayor/City Council to permit
individual, groups of individuals, businesses, corporation or organizations to
possess or consume alcoholic beverages in a public place, for purposes such as
barbecues, parties, picnics, reunions, street dances or other public assemblies
in public places, upon application and approval.
   (C)   A permit may be granted, within the sole discretion of the Mayor/City
Council. The application must include the following.
      (1)   The application shall designate either the applicant, or one or
more members of the group submitting the application as the contact person for
the event. The contact person shall be present at all times during the event,
or shall arrange for an alternate contact person. The contact person shall be
in charge of the event and be responsible for those attending the event and the
cleanup after the event.
      (2)   The application shall be filed a minimum of 14 days before the
event.
      (3)   The application shall include proof of insurance in an amount
acceptable to the city and which includes the city as an additional insured in
cases where the event is expected to include 75 persons or more.
   (D)   The city may include conditions as part of the permit approval and has
the discretion to withdraw or revoke the permit at any time if it appears that
the event will adversely impact the city or any of its inhabitants, including,
but not limited to, the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian or vehicle
traffic and any significant negative impact on individuals living in the
vicinity of the activity or event, or when a public emergency exists.
   (E)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall have the power and
authority to revoke the permit immediately and prohibit further public drinking
or the display or exhibition of beer or liquor if a violation of excessive
noise, disturbance of the peace or disorderly conduct during the event occurs.
   (F)   The application shall be accompanied by a fee to the city. The fee
shall be set by the City Council by resolution and is a non-refundable fee to
cover administrative costs of processing the application. Payment of the fee
does not entitle the applicant to approval for the permit. In addition, a
deposit is also required. The deposit may be refunded if peace and order have
been maintained and the cleanup has been completed satisfactorily.
   (G)   If the event is to be held on a regular or recurring basis at the same
location, an application for a permit for the calendar year or any portion
thereof may be filed at least 60 days and not more than 180 days before the
date and time of the first event proposed. The city, as appropriate, may waive
the minimum filing period after due consideration of all necessary facts.
   (H)   A denial of the application may be reconsidered by the City Council
upon request by the applicant.
(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 6-5-5 PENALTIES.
   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $50, nor more than $300, for each offense.
(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 6-5-6 FEES.
 
Deposit                                                             $90
Single event - 1 day up to 3 consecutive days                       $35
Special event - specified multiple days, but no longer than 90 days $100
 
(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)
CHAPTER 6: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
   
6-6-1   Starting fires within city limits
   
6-6-2   Gasoline, amount allowed to be kept
   
6-6-3   Chimneys and stove pipes
   
6-6-4   Protection of stoves and pipes
   
6-6-5   Hay, straw and the like; how kept
   
6-6-6   Warehouses
   
6-6-7   Flexible cords
   
6-6-8   Bulk storage of explosives and inflammable materials
   
6-6-9   Open burning of vegetative materials
§ 6-6-1 STARTING FIRES WITHIN CITY LIMITS.
   Any person who shall start or maintain any fire upon any street, alley or
private premises, outside of any enclosed building, except as provided in § 6-
6-9 of this chapter, within the city for the purpose of burning any paper,
rubbish, garbage, vegetative material or for any purpose whatever shall be
deemed guilty of committing a nuisance, and shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined in any sum not exceeding $100.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-201) (Ord. 04-1, passed - -)
§ 6-6-2 GASOLINE, AMOUNT ALLOWED TO BE KEPT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company or corporation to
keep or permit to be kept within the city any gasoline, benzene, petroleum or
petroleum products or other highly inflammable oils, chemicals or compounds in
any quantity exceeding the following:
      (1)   Gasoline: ten gallons;
      (2)   Benzene: ten gallons;
      (3)   Kerosene or coal oil: 100 gallons; and
      (4)   Other petroleum products or highly inflammable oils, chemicals or
compounds: 50 gallons.
   (B)   In stores or other places of business where such oils, chemicals or
compounds shall be kept in hermetically sealed cans in original unopened
packages, or in iron or steel tanks, to be approved by the Building Inspector;
provided that, druggists and chemists may keep in open cans or decanters any of
the oils, chemicals and compounds above mentioned in quantities not exceeding
five gallons of each, for the purpose of compounding prescriptions, mixtures
and ordinary retail trade. This section shall not include persons or entities
commonly considered retail or bulk dealers of petroleum products, gasoline
stations or gasoline sales outlets or the storage of home heating oils when
used in connection with heating premises.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-202)
§ 6-6-3 CHIMNEYS AND STOVE PIPES.
   Every building erected within the limits of said city wherein fire shall be
intended to be used, shall be furnished with at least one substantial brick
chimney, or one of stone or other material equally as safe and fire-proof,
securely plastered throughout and on the inside, and also on the outside where
passing through places near woodwork and no person shall be allowed, in any
building hereafter erected within the limits of the said city, to run a
stovepipe through the roof or side of the same, nor in any place wherein such
arrangement now exists within said limits, shall the same be allowed to
continue after notice to remove the same.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-203)
§ 6-6-4 PROTECTION OF STOVES AND PIPES.
   Hereafter, in all buildings erected, repaired or altered within the limits
of said city, when it shall be desired that stovepipes shall pass through any
partition wall of wood, or partly of wood, the same shall be secured by an iron
or tin thimble with at least a two-inch air chamber, and where a pipe shall
enter a chimney the same shall be provided with an iron thimble securely
fitted. Every stove before use shall be provided with zinc, iron, tin or
something equivalent, to protect the woodwork underneath and around said stove
from taking fire therefrom.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-204)
§ 6-6-5 HAY, STRAW AND THE LIKE; HOW KEPT.
   No person within the fire limits of the city shall have or keep hay, straw
or other combustible fodder in open stock or otherwise than securely covered
from fire; not shall any owner or occupant of any premises within said limits
allow piles of open and broken packing boxes, paper or straw to be or
accumulate on any part of said premises.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-205)
§ 6-6-6 WAREHOUSES.
   Buildings constructed strictly for storage or warehouse purposes may be
built of lumber; providing, the roof and all four sides are entirely covered
with tin or corrugated iron, but the same shall not be built or located within
five feet of any lot line, nor less than 20 feet from any other building on the
lot upon which it is located.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-206)
§ 6-6-7 FLEXIBLE CORDS.
   Flexible cords shall not be run across ceilings, nor on side walls in lieu
of an approved wiring method, and within the fire limits, only reinforced cord
known as “Type P”, or an equivalent or better grade, shall be permitted for
use.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-207)
§ 6-6-8 BULK STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND INFLAMMABLE MATERIALS.
   The storage of bulk gunpowder, giant powder nitroglycerine or other
explosives is hereby prohibited, the bulk storage of tar, pitch, gasoline,
kerosene, butane, propane, natural gas and other gases, and other inflammable
or combustible oils or gases, in any manner other than in approved tanks within
the city limits is hereby prohibited.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-208)
§ 6-6-9 OPEN BURNING OF VEGETATIVE MATERIALS.
   (A)   Open burning of vegetative materials shall be allowed, without permit,
beginning at 8:00 a.m. on March 1 and extending through the Sunday following
May 15 at 5:00 p.m. within the corporate limits of the city. Open burning may
be maintained only during daylight hours. Reasonable and appropriate control
and maintenance of all open burning shall be the responsibility of the property
owner. Public property may not be for such burning unless conducted by the
appropriate public officials. In the event that such burning may cause, upon
investigation, a public nuisance, health hazard or potential therefor, the
Chief of Police, or his or her designee, may order all open burning to cease
and desist.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      OPEN BURNING. Igniting a fire outside of a receptacle for the containment
of such materials.  All OPEN BURNING shall be subject to air quality
requirements of local, state and federal authority.
      VEGETATIVE MATERIALS. Naturally occurring vegetable matter such as
leaves, clippings and tree limbs, and does not include garbage, refuse and
animal matter.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-209) (Ord. 04-1, passed - -)
CHAPTER 7: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Section
   
6-7-1   Barbed wire and electric fences
   
6-7-2   Giving assistance to police officers
   
6-7-3   Lug wheels prohibited
   
6-7-4   Mufflers; unnecessary noise
   
6-7-5   Resisting an officer
   
6-7-6   Riot
   
6-7-7   Deposits of injurious material on thoroughfares
   
6-7-8   Supervised public display of fireworks
   
6-7-9   Where chapter does not apply
   
6-7-10   Conflict with state law
   
6-7-11   Discharge of air rifles/air guns prohibited
   
6-7-12   Detonation, combustion or display of fireworks restricted
§ 6-7-1 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric fence
or any fence constructed in while or in part of barbed wire, unless such barbed
wire is located at a height greater than six feet from ground level.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-101)
§ 6-7-2 GIVING ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any male citizen over the age of 18 years to refuse
or neglect to render assistance to any police officer when called upon for such
assistance or aid in the suppression of riot or other unlawful assemblage or in
the arrest of any person who has committed an offense.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-102)
§ 6-7-3 LUG WHEELS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for tractors with wheels injurious to pavement to be
permitted upon the public thoroughfares unless the operator of such vehicle
shall first plank such streets.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-103)
§ 6-7-4 MUFFLERS; UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle which shall
not at all times be equipped with a muffler upon the exhaust thereof in good
working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise
and it shall be unlawful for any person operating any motor vehicle to use a
cut-out, by-pass or similar muffler elimination appliance.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-104)
§ 6-7-5 RESISTING AN OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere willfully with, resist,
delay, obstruct, molest or threaten to molest any officer of the city in the
exercise of his or her official duties.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-105)
§ 6-7-6 RIOT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse immediately to
disperse upon an order to do so by a policy officer, when two or more persons
are assembled for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of
committing any unlawful act.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-106)
§ 6-7-7 DEPOSITS OF INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON THOROUGHFARES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or allow to remain in
or upon any public thoroughfare any material or substance injurious to person
or property.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-107)
§ 6-7-8 SUPERVISED PUBLIC DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   The City Council shall have the power to grant permits for supervised
public display of fireworks to be held by licensed and qualified individuals.
Each such display shall be handled by a competent operator to be approved by
the State Fire Marshal or by the City Council and shall be of such character
and so located as, in the opinion of the Chief of the Fire Department or such
other officer as may be designated by the Council, after proper inspection,
shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons.
   (B)   Applications for permits shall be made in writing at least 16 days in
advance of the display. After such permission shall have been granted by the
City Council, sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such
display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permits granted hereunder
shall be transferable.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-108)
§ 6-7-9 WHERE CHAPTER DOES NOT APPLY.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the sale of any kind
of fireworks to a person holding a permit from the city at the display covered
by such permits; or the use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation
agencies for signal purposes or illumination, or when used in quarrying or
blasting or other industrial use; or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a
show or theater, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports,
or for use by military organizations or organizations composed of veterans of
the United States Army, Navy or Marine Corps.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-109)
§ 6-7-10 CONFLICT WITH STATE LAW.
   Nothing in this chapter pertaining to fireworks display is intended to
conflict with Montana state law and is intended only to supplement the same.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-110)
§ 6-7-11 DISCHARGE OF AIR RIFLES/AIR GUNS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge within the city limits an
air rifle, air gun or any device that uses compressed air for the discharge of
a pellet, BB or projectile.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-111) (Ord. 00-01, effective 7-5-2000)
§ 6-7-12 DETONATION, COMBUSTION OR DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   Dates and hours. The dates and times that it is permissible to
detonate, combust or display legally authorized fireworks is follows:
      (1)   June 24 through July 2: 8:00 a.m. until curfew (10:00 p.m. Sunday
through Thursday; 12:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday);
      (2)   July 3 and 4: 8:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m.;
      (3)   July 5: 8:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m.;
      (4)   December 29 and 30: 8:00 a.m. until curfew (10:00 p.m. Sunday
through Thursday; 12:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday); and
      (5)   December 31: 8:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m.
   (B)   Detonation, combustion or display not permitted. Except for the
periods of time described above in division (A) above, no person shall combust,
detonate or display any kind of fireworks within the city limits.
   (C)   Location. Fireworks may not be discharged on commercial, residential
or publicly owned property unless the individual or organization is either the
owner of the property, or has the express permission of the owner.
   (D)   Safety. Anyone who discharges fireworks in a manner that creates a
substantial risk of bodily injury or damages to the property of others will be
in violation of this section.
   (E)   Violation. Any person who detonates, combusts or displays fireworks in
violation of this section shall:
      (1)   First offense: be given a written warning;
      (2)   Second offense: $85 citation will be issued; and
      (3)   Third offense: may be fined up to a maximum of $500.
(1992 Code, § 10-1-112) (Ord. 2014-02, passed 7-16-2014)
TITLE 7: PUBLIC UTILITIES
   Chapter
      
1.    PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS
      
2.    GARBAGE
      
3.    WATER
      
4.    SEWERS
      
5.    STORM WATER UTILITY
CHAPTER 1: PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS
Section
   
7-1-1   State standards adopted by reference
§ 7-1-1 STATE STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city hereby adopts by reference for the construction, reconstruction and
maintenance of its public works, the Ten State Standards for Public
Improvements and, where applicable, the Uniform Plumbing Code, as those
standards are promulgated and as amended.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1000)
CHAPTER 2: GARBAGE
Section
   
7-2-1   Definition
   
7-2-2   Removal
   
7-2-3   Supervision
   
7-2-4   Authority of city
   
7-2-5   Contracts
   
7-2-6   Containers
   
7-2-7   Disposal of garbage
   
7-2-8   Burning garbage prohibited
   
7-2-9   Depositing garbage upon the streets
   
7-2-10   Transportation garbage upon the streets
   
7-2-11   Building construction wastes
§ 7-2-1 DEFINITION.
   The word GARBAGE, as used in this chapter, is intended to mean all refuse,
animal and vegetable matter, ashes, store sweepings, paper and rubbish and
other indestructible waste matter, but it shall not be construed to mean or
include manure, basement or lawn excavations, trees or house wreckage or other
like debris.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-301)
§ 7-2-2 REMOVAL.
   All garbage must be removed and disposed of in a safe and sanitary manner.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-302)
§ 7-2-3 SUPERVISION.
   The collection, removal and disposal of garbage shall be done and performed
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and with the additional rules
and regulations that may be made from time to time by the Council or by state
law.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-303)
§ 7-2-4 AUTHORITY OF CITY.
   The city shall provide for the disposal of all garbage within the city and,
to that end, shall have the power to contract with some responsible person,
firm, corporation or other business organization, and/or the Council is hereby
empowered and authorized to purchase equipment and hire personnel for the
removal of the garbage and other refuse accumulated within the city.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-304)
§ 7-2-5 CONTRACTS.
   Before the letting of any contract for the collection and removal of garbage
and other refuse within the city limits, the Council shall advertise for bids
pursuant to the Codes of Montana and amendments thereto. Upon the letting of
such a contract, the person receiving the same shall give a bond to the city in
such sum as shall be designated by the Council, which bond shall provide for
the faithful performance of such contract and shall be licensed in conformance
with Montana state law.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-305)
§ 7-2-6 CONTAINERS.
   It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant, tenant, lessee, or any of
them individually, of any and every occupied building used for human habitation
or business purposes within the city to provide or cause to be provided,
portable, washable metallic containers of not more than 55 gallons’ capacity
and sufficient in number to hold the garbage accumulating between periods of
removal.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-306)
§ 7-2-7 DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE.
   All refuse, animal or vegetable matter, upon, any premises in the city,
which is not otherwise disposed of, shall be securely wrapped and deposited in
the cans or containers above mentioned. All ashes, tin cans and other
mentioned, and all waste paper to be removed by the city as garbage shall be
placed either in said cans and containers or in sacks securely tied or baled.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-307)
§ 7-2-8 BURNING GARBAGE PROHIBITED.
   The burning of garbage, except as defined and limited in §
6-6-9 of this code, within the corporate limits of the city in or out of
incinerators, is hereby forbidden and prohibited and any such burning or
disposing shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-308) (Ord. 04-01, passed - -)
§ 7-2-9 DEPOSITING GARBAGE UPON THE STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, scatter or otherwise place or
have, or cause to be thrown, scattered or otherwise left, upon or along any
street or other public place or upon any vacant or unoccupied lot or lots
within the city any waste, paper, rubbish, refuse, debris or garbage of any
kind.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-309)
§ 7-2-10 TRANSPORTING GARBAGE UPON THE STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to convey or cause to be conveyed mortar
shavings, rubbish, garbage or loose material of any description, except in
tight receptacles, boxes or truck bodies equipped with secure covers which
prevent the escape of any material contained therein.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-310)
§ 7-2-11 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION WASTES.
   Building rubbish resulting from new construction or extensive alterations to
buildings or yards or the removal of large trees, or any trade waste condemned
in large quantities, is considered garbage under this chapter and must be
disposed of at the expense of the person responsible for its production.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-311)
CHAPTER 3: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
7-3-1   Connection to the water service
   
7-3-2   Meters property of municipality
   
7-3-3   Meters to have cut offs: by pass
   
7-3-4   Effect of ordinances
   
7-3-5   Application for service; costs
   
7-3-6   Maintaining service lines
   
7-3-7   Maintaining mains and meters
   
7-3-8   One connection for two or more buildings prohibited; exceptions
   
7-3-9   When water discontinued
   
7-3-10   Owner responsible for service pipes; costs
   
7-3-11   Application from contractors
   
7-3-12   May shut off water for repairs
   
7-3-13   Access to buildings
   
7-3-14   Separate stop required
   
7-3-15   Report of all work
   
7-3-16   Interfering with property prohibited
   
7-3-17   Meter testing and regulations
   
7-3-18   Unlawful acts
   
7-3-19   Lawn and garden watering
   
7-3-20   Size of hose and use of hose
   
7-3-21   Using water during fire prohibited
   
7-3-22   Water may be turned off
   
7-3-23   Emergency restrictions
   
7-3-24   Rental property requirement
   
7-3-25   Seasonal rules
   
7-3-26   Waiver of fees for fire suppression sprinklers
   
7-3-27   Water outside of city limits
   
7-3-28   Reserve fund
   
7-3-29   Extending water mainlines
   
7-3-30   Mains designation and separation
Rates, Charges and Billing
   
7-3-45   Rates to be charged when water turned off and availability fee
   
7-3-46   Reading meters and estimating usage
   
7-3-47   Payment of bills
   
7-3-48   Rates; when due; delinquent
   
7-3-49   Water to be turned on or off by authorized persons only
   
7-3-50   Must contract for water
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-3-1 CONNECTION TO THE WATER SERVICE.
   All individual residences and all business premises, within the limits of
the city, shall be required to hook up to the city water system and have
metered water services. Meters shall be installed and placed in service by the
city under the direction of the Public Works Department (hereafter referred to
as “PWD”) that shall prescribe the size of the meter to be placed on each
service pipe, according to a schedule adopted therefor. Only employees of the
PWD shall open, shut off or repair any water meter in service.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1101) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-2 METERS PROPERTY OF MUNICIPALITY.
   Meters are owned by the city and are furnished to consumers. Meter cost
shall be originally paid by the consumer and the repair or replacement shall be
made at the expense of the city. Proper receptacles are to be provided for them
and the service pipes are to be suitably arranged in accordance with applicable
plumbing codes and the direction of the PWD. Meters damaged by negligence of
the user shall be replaced by the user.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1102) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-3 METERS TO HAVE CUT OFFS; BY-PASS.
   All meters installed within or outside the city shall be provided with
cutoffs or valves on each side of the meter, so that any meter may be removed
for the purpose of testing and a by-pass placed in the service pipe for the
purpose of supplying the consumer with water during the testing of the meter.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1103) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-4 EFFECT OF ORDINANCES.
   The rules and regulations set forth herein shall constitute a part of a
contract entered into by every consumer of city water and the failure to know
the said rules will not excuse anyone from the penalty for violation of such
rules.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1104) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-5 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; COSTS.
   Application for city water to be used for any purpose shall be made to the
PWD, upon the printed form supplied by the Department. This form shall be
signed by the owner or duly authorized agent of the owner of the property. The
owner or owners of property requiring a connection to the water mains of the
city shall pay a water main connection fee as set forth in the table of fees in
§
1-7-1 of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1105) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-6 MAINTAINING SERVICE LINES.
   All property owners are responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of the
pipes and plumbing from the meter to and on their property. Where such meter is
located within the building of the owner, the owner shall be responsible for
the service line from the curb stop to the meter. The owner shall keep all
service lines in good repair to prevent waste or leakage of water, and shall be
liable for and indemnify the city for all costs and damages which may accrue to
the city by reason of their failure to do so. It is the responsibility of the
property owner to identify leaks in his or her systems, and have them promptly
repaired. It is the equal responsibility of the city to maintain the meter and
its service tap and to keep its mainline in repair.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1106) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-7 MAINTAINING MAINS AND METERS.
   All installation, repair or placement of pipes and/or plumbing involving the
mains shall be performed by the PWD and all expenses shall be the
responsibility of the city.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1107) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-8 ONE CONNECTION FOR TWO OR MORE BUILDINGS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or tenant to supply, or permit to
be supplied, any water to two or more buildings through one and the same
connection, except on special contract with the city.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1114) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-9 WHEN WATER DISCONTINUED.
   lf undue waste is permitted, or water is by-passed to other consumers, or in
cases of deception, misrepresentation or abuse of the privilege of connection
with the water system, the supply of water will be turned off without notice
and shall be punishable as provided in this code.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1115) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-10 OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR SERVICE PIPES; COSTS.
   The service pipe for property in and without the city limits, to the tap in
the city water main together with curb stop and box, will be laid according to
city specifications and by authorized persons only, at the expense of the
property owner. Once laid and paid for by the owner, the city assumes
responsibility from the main to curb shut off.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1116) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-11 APPLICATION FROM CONTRACTORS.
   Contractors, builders or others desiring water for building purposes must
make application to the PWD prior to using the same and the amount to be paid
shall be based upon rates fixed therefor or as otherwise agreed.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1117) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-12 MAY SHUT OFF WATER FOR REPAIRS.
   In a case of emergency, or to make needed repairs or extensions, or for any
necessary purpose, the city shall have the right to shut off or interrupt water
service without notice and to keep it shut off as long as may be necessary. If
the shut off can be scheduled in advance, the Public Works Department will make
every effort to notify users of the time of shut off and approximate duration.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1118) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-13 ACCESS TO BUILDINGS.
   The PWD shall have access at all reasonable times and hours to all parts of
any building or premises in which water is being delivered from the water mains
for the purpose of inspecting the condition of the pipes and fixtures and the
manner in which the water is used and shall also have the right to remove
meters from the premises for examination and test when necessary.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1119) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-14 SEPARATE STOP REQUIRED.
   Service pipes must be so arranged that the supply for each separate house of
premises may be controlled by a separate stopcock placed at a point designated
by the PWD and the owner for the property will be held responsible for all
bills for water through said service for use, or for use of others to whom it
may be accessible.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1120) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-15 REPORT OF ALL WORK.
   No one but licensed plumbers shall be allowed to do any work in connection
with the service pipes when water may be drawn from the city mains and all
plumbers must make return to the proper officers of the PWD a true and correct
account of the work done within 24 hours after completion; provided, however,
that, the said PWD, by its duly authorized employees, may do any of the work.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1121) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-16 INTERFERING WITH PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to open, close, turn or interfere with,
or attach to or connect with any fire hydrant, main, curb cock or valves,
without permission from the PWD or to disturb or damage any pipe, machinery,
tools or other property of the PWD, or to throw any substance into any
reservoir or water main or to bathe in any reservoir, or to deface or injure
any buildings belonging to or connected with the said water system.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1122) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-17 METER TESTING AND REGULATIONS.
   Consumers supplied by meter shall take every reasonable precaution to
protect the water service from injury or damage by frost or otherwise, and
shall be liable for all injury to meters. If from any cause the meter fails to
register correctly, the charge to the consumer shall be at the rate used for
the corresponding period of the month previous, or if for any reason the rate
for the corresponding period of the previous month cannot be justly applied,
the rate shall be equitably adjusted by the PWD. For the testing of each meter
at the request of the property owner, or lessee, if the meter is found
defective, no charge will be made, but if found in good order a charge of $25
will be made.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1123) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-18 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Break or deface the seal on any meter;
   (B)   Obstruct, alter, injure or prevent the action of any meter or other
instrument used to measure or register the quantity of water supplied to a
consumer thereof;
   (C)   Make any connection by means of a pipe, or otherwise, with any main or
pipe used for delivery of water to a consumer thereof, in such manner as to
take water from said main or pipe without its passage through the meter or
other instrument provided for registering the amount or quantity consumed or
use any water so obtained;
   (D)   Make any connection or reconnection with such main or pipe, or turn
off or on, or in any manner interfere with any valve, stopcock or other
appliance connected therewith;
   (E)   Prevent, by the erection of any device or construction, or by any
other means, free access to any meter or other instrument for registering or
measuring the amount of water consumed, or to interfere with, obstruct or
prevent, by any means the reading or inspection of such meter or instrument by
any of the employees of the PWD of the city; or
   (F)   Turn on the waterline after the same shall have been shut off by or
under the direction of the city for non-payment of water charges or who shall
unlawfully take water from such water system.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1124) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-19 LAWN AND GARDEN WATERING.
   (A)   The lawn and garden watering season shall extend over a period of four
months, beginning on June 1 and ending September 30.
   (B)   Watering will be billed with the regular water billing and in the
amount provided for in the scheduled rates.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1125) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-20 SIZE OF HOSE AND USE OF HOSE.
   (A)   No hose larger than one inch in diameter shall be used from any
service pipe without special permission from the PWD.
   (B)   No sprinkling shall be done by consumers of water without a nozzle
attached to the hose having an opening not larger than one-quarter of an inch
in diameter.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1126) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-21 USING WATER DURING FIRE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to draw any water from the city main
during a fire, except for the extinguishment of a fire or for normal domestic
use.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1127) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-22 WATER MAY BE TURNED OFF.
   For any violation of the rules of this chapter, pertaining to the use of
water, the same may be turned off without notice and will not be turned on
until the rules and regulations are complied with and all bills are paid
together with the appropriate turn on fee as established by the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1128) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-23 EMERGENCY RESTRICTIONS.
   The Mayor, in cases of emergency whenever the public safety, health or the
equitable distribution so demands, may prohibit or limit the use or water
service.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1129) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-24 RENTAL PROPERTY REQUIREMENT.
   Landlords, as owners, shall be responsible for the water charges assessed
against property owned by them. When no tenant is in possession, landlords may
request that the PWD terminate water service to that property.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1130) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-25 SEASONAL RULES.
   The City Council shall make such rules as it deems necessary for controlling
the seasonal use of water. All water users shall be notified of these rules.
Users violating these rules shall be given notice by the PWD and prosecuted
where appropriate for violation of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1131) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-26 WAIVER OF FEE FOR FIRE SUPPRESSION SPRINKLERS.
   The city shall waive the cost of installation for non-commercial consumers
where sprinkler systems for fire suppression purposes are installed.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1132) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-27 WATER OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   No water shall be supplied outside the limits of the city, except those
currently receiving service. Water may be purchased and hauled out of city at
the rate established by resolution after signing a purchase contract with the
city. Water may be only drawn from designated sites.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1133) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-28 RESERVE FUND.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes a reserve fund specifically for
replacement and upgrading of the water system.
   (B)   The Clerk has the responsibility to invest such funds with the advice
and consent of Mayor and Council.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1134) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-29 EXTENDING WATER MAINLINES.
   (A)   The full cost of mainline extensions, including engineering, materials
and labor shall be borne by the developer as the applicant for service.
   (B)   The PWD has the authority to make arrangements with equipment
operators, contractors and plumbers to accomplish the work, unless the total
cost is such that formal bidding procedures are required.
   (C)   No water shall be turned on until the fees for extension and hook-up
are paid in full.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1135) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-30 MAIN DESIGNATION AND SEPARATION.
   (A)   It shall be within the discretion of the PWD to designate a service
line as a main.
   (B)   All mains must have a separation distance from other water or sewer
service lines of at least ten feet in all directions.
   (C)   In the event of replacement of existing lines, where separation may
cause a hardship, approval of separation distance less than prescribed herein
will be made by the City Council with appropriate safety precautions.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1136) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
RATES, CHARGES AND BILLING
§ 7-3-45 RATES BE CHARGED WHEN WATER TURNED ON AND AVAILABILITY FEE.
   Water rates, at the established amount, will be charged against the property
from the date on which the water is turned on until the date on which the
property owner or agent orders the water turned off, but no charge will be
made, nor water furnished for less than one-half the monthly rate. In the
discretion of the City Council, a fee for water service availability may be
levied against each property serviceable by the city. Water rates, both the
base rates and the rates charged for usage above the basic allowance, will be
fixed by resolution of the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1108) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-46 READING METERS AND ESTIMATING USAGE.
   Normally, billings for water usage are completed by the twenty-fifth of each
month. If meters cannot be read due to inclement weather, usage may be
estimated based upon prior consumption. Adjustments will be made as soon as
possible. Complaints for adjustment will be referred to the Public Works
Director. The Public Works Director shall recommend to the City Council any
adjustments.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1109) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-47 PAYMENT OF BILLS.
   The recorded owners of the property shall be responsible for payment of all
water charges incurred herein.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1110) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-48 RATES; WHEN DUE; DELINQUENT.
   (A)   On a monthly basis, the Clerk shall prepare a statement of charges
assessed against each property for the previous month according to the users
water use and the table of fees in §
1-7-1 of this code of ordinances. The Clerk shall mail a statement of charges
assessed to the user at the address provided to the Clerk by the property
owner. The recorded owners of the property shall be responsible for payment of
all water charges incurred herein. All bills for water are due and payable on
the tenth day of each month, and shall be delinquent at the close of business
on the fifteenth day of each month in which they are due. If the fifteenth
falls on a holiday or weekend day (Saturday or Sunday), they shall become
delinquent at the close of business of the next business day.
   (B)   Charges shall be delinquent if not paid on or before the due date, and
a delinquency which continues 15 days or more shall result in termination of
water service unless arrangements acceptable to the city have been made. When
any water bill for any premises is delinquent, a penalty set by resolution of
the City Council will be assessed on the first business day following
delinquency. If the delinquency is not paid by the due date of the bill for the
following month, then two months’ charges are delinquent, and penalties will be
assessed for the second delinquency. In addition, the Clerk shall prepare and
forward to the owner of such premises by mail or post upon the property a
notice of delinquency. The notice shall state with particularity the amount and
period of such delinquency and shall require the owner either to pay the
delinquency, in full, on or before a date certain, or to appear before the
Water/Wastewater Committee to show reasons why water service to the premises
should not be discontinued. In the event the delinquent bill has not been paid
within the time specified in the notice, and the property owner fails to appear
as required or, having appeared, has failed to show cause why water service to
said premises should not be discontinued, the PWD shall discontinue such water
supply at noon on the first Monday thereafter.
   (C)   Once terminated, the water service shall not be restored until the
user’s account is paid in full, including both current and delinquent charges
including the expenses of notice and mailing, or until arrangements acceptable
to the city have been made. The city shall have the sole discretion to decide
what arrangements, if any, are acceptable.
   (D)   The city shall have an action at law for the collection of delinquent
charges or place the same upon the real property tax as an assessment and may
also recover reasonable collection costs and attorneys’ fee.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1111) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-49 WATER TO BE TURNED ON OR OFF BY AUTHORIZED PERSONS ONLY; FEE.
   Water may be turned on or off at the curb stop only by an authorized
employee of the city. Any time that a water service is turned off or on, upon
delinquency or at the request of the property owner or his or her agent, except
for repairs, there will be a charge for such service. Such charge is set by
resolution by the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1112) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 7-3-50 MUST CONTRACT FOR WATER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to take, use or allow to be used, water
service without having previously contracted for the same. No water shall be
supplied or terminated upon any premises for any purpose, except delinquency or
upon the request of the owner or his or her duly authorized agent or as
otherwise provided in these ordinances.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1113) (Ord. 06-01, passed 11-6-2006)
CHAPTER 4: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
7-4-1   Definitions
   
7-4-2   Discharging wastes
   
7-4-3   Connections to the public sewer
   
7-4-4   Application for sewer hookup
   
7-4-5   Inspections
   
7-4-6   Inspection procedures
   
7-4-7   Broken or damaged sewer mains
   
7-4-8   Warranty of work
   
7-4-9   Sewer disturbances
   
7-4-10   Use of old building sewer lines
   
7-4-11   Sewer design
   
7-4-12   Sewer elevation
   
7-4-13   Illegal sewer connections
   
7-4-14   Emergency sewer shut-offs
   
7-4-15   Separate sewer
   
7-4-16   Cost of sewer installations
   
7-4-17   Specifications for laying of sewer pipe
   
7-4-18   Sewer cap offs
   
7-4-19   Users not on city water
   
7-4-20   Illegal use of sewer system
   
7-4-21   Discharge of water or wastes
   
7-4-22   Grease traps
   
7-4-23   Pretreatment
   
7-4-24   Additional structures required
   
7-4-25   Requirements
   
7-4-26   Measurement and tests
   
7-4-27   Agreements
   
7-4-28   Power and authority of inspectors
   
7-4-29   Violations; penalties
Charges, Rates and Billings
   
7-4-45   Sewer outside city limits
   
7-4-46   Availability fee
   
7-4-47   Extending sewer mainlines
   
7-4-48   Sewer rates
   
7-4-49   Sewer estimates
   
7-4-50   Payment of bills
   
7-4-51   Failure to pay bills
   
7-4-52   Wastewater Facilities Replacement Fund
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system, which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning two
feet (0.6 meters) outside the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer
system.
   CITY OF RONAN STANDARD PROCEDURES. The Uniform Plumbing Code.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
   OPERATOR, CITY OPERATOR, WASTEWATER OPERATOR AND THE LIKE. Hereafter, shall
mean the PWD or his or her appointed representative.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
   POLLUTED WATERS. Any of the following: storm water; surface water; ground
water; roof runoff; subsurface drainage; or cooling water.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PWD. The Public Works Director.
   SLUDGE. Any discharge of water or wastewater, which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
or collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Total suspended matter (TSS) that either floats on the
surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids, and
that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for
Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as non- filterable residue.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1201) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-2 DISCHARGING WASTES.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or
in any area under jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1202) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-3 CONNECTIONS TO THE PUBLIC SEWER.
   The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, except irrigation, situated within
the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is
now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the
city, is hereby required at the owner’s expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provision of this chapter, within 180 days
(weather permitting) after date of official notice to do so and prior to
occupancy.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1203) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-4 APPLICATION FOR SEWER HOOKUP.
   Application for city sewer to be used for any purpose shall be made to the
Public Works Department (PWD), upon the printed form supplied by the
Department. This form shall be signed by the owner or duly authorized agent of
the owner of the property. The owner or owners of property requiring a
connection to the sewer mains of the city shall pay a main connection fee as
set forth in the table of fees in §
1-7-1 of this chapter. Upon approval by the Public Works Director, the
applicant will pay the appropriate sewer hookup fee.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1204) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-5 INSPECTIONS.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City Clerk when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer
system. The inspection and connection shall be made under the supervision of
the Public Works Director or his or her appointed representative.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1205) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-6 INSPECTION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The PWD will assist in the location of sewer lines in the vicinity of
the proposed excavation.
   (B)   After the excavation has been made, if applicable, the PWD will
inspect any disturbed or exposed water or sewer line to ensure that no damage
has been done to the lines. If the excavation is for a new sewer service (to a
line without an existing stub-out), during this inspection, the city operator
will aid the contractor in tapping the sewer main with the use of city supplied
tapping drill and contractor supplied pipe and fittings. In addition, a field
diagram shall be made of the sewer service layout and filed with the City
Clerk.
   (C)   Prior to backfill, the installation and excavation shall be inspected.
   (D)   During the backfilling procedure, to ensure that city standard
procedures and materials are used, the project shall be inspected reviewed and
corrected, if necessary.
   (E)   A final inspection will be made after resurfacing is completed.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1206) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-7 BROKEN OR DAMAGED SEWER MAINS.
   During excavation, the contractor may accidentally break or damage a sewer
main. To prevent any health hazard or pollution potential, the line must be
repaired as quickly as possible with the proper materials. The contractor shall
take immediate steps to mitigate any damages and shall immediately notify the
PWD.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1207) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-8 WARRANTY OF WORK.
   (A)   The PWD may inspect the progress of the excavation work at any point
in time and monitor the progress of the work as it takes place.
   (B)   City inspections are not a guarantee or warranty that the contractor
has or will properly perform the work.
   (C)   The city assumes no liability for any damages that may arise or be
occasioned or caused by the permittee’s workmanship.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1208) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-9 SEWER DISTURBANCES.
   No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, without
first obtaining a written permit from the PWD.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1209) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-10 USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWER LINES.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination by the PWD, to meet all requirements of this
chapter.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1210) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-11 SEWER DESIGN.
   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of all sanitary
sewers, including building sewers, and the methods to be used in excavation,
placing of the pipe, jointing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to
the requirements, applicable rules and regulations set forth by the State of
Montana and the city. See the PWD for these regulations.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1211) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-12 SEWER ELEVATION.
   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer system, the sewage
shall be lifted by a means approved by the PWD and discharged into the building
sewer.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1212) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-13 ILLEGAL SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains, sump pumps or other sources of surface runoff or ground water
to a building sewer or building drain, which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sewer system.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1213) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-14 EMERGENCY SEWER SHUT-OFFS.
   In case of fire or other emergency, or in making needed repairs or
extensions, or for any purpose deemed necessary by the PWD, the city shall have
the right to shut off or interrupt sewer services without notice, and to keep
it shut off as long as may be necessary.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1214) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-15 SEPARATE SEWER.
   A separate and independent building sewer is required for every building;
except where a building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer. The city does not and will not
assume any obligations or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from
any such single connection aforementioned.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1215) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-16 COST OF SEWER INSTALLATIONS.
   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer from the building to the sewer mainline shall be borne by the
property owner. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and
connection of the building sewer from the property line to the main sewer shall
be borne by the property owner.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1216) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-17 SPECIFICATIONS FOR LAYING OF SEWER PIPE.
   (A)   The contractor must install pipe according to state and local codes.
   (B)   Angle of grade of pipe must be 2% or more.
   (C)   There shall be no angles in pipe greater than 45 degrees.
   (D)   The pipe must be at least four inches in diameter in size.
   (E)   Property owners: minimum quality pipe to be used in system: schedule
40 PVC.
   (F)   For going through cesspools, which have been drained and refilled, the
minimum quality pipe to be used shall be schedule 40 PVC.
   (G)   (1)   Each horizontal drainage pipe shall be provided with a cleanout
at its upper terminal and at the end of each run of piping, which is more than
100 feet (30.4 m) or fraction there of in length.
      (2)   Each cleanout shall be installed so that it opens in a direction
opposite to the flow of the soil or waste.
      (3)   Each cleanout extension shall be considered as drainage piping and
each 90-degree cleanout extension shall be extended from a “Y” type fitting or
other approved fitting of equivalent sweep.
      (4)   Each cleanout for an interceptor shall be outside of such
interceptor.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1217) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-18 SEWER CAP OFFS.
   The city, by order of the Mayor, may allow the discontinuance of sewer
services upon request. Sewer line will be capped off five feet from the
property line at the owner’s expense under the supervision of the PWD. The
owner must first fill out a sewer cap off form and both the owner and the PWD
shall sign it. The cap for the sewer line will be glued on or in the line. If
the sewer line is to be used again, there will be a full sewer hook-up fee
charged.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1218) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-19 USERS NOT ON CITY WATER.
   All users that do not use the city water system, or whose water consumption
is not metered shall pay the minimum set rate, plus a set rate for each 1,000
gallons of water based on an average of similar customers on the metered
system.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1219) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-20 ILLEGAL USE OF SEWER SYSTEM.
   Any residential or business customer of the city water/wastewater system who
shall willfully turn on the waterline or sewer line after the same shall have
been shut off by or under the direction of the city for non-payment of sewer
charges or who shall unlawfully make use of such sewer system shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1227) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-21 DISCHARGE OF WATER OR WASTES.
   Except as provided in the limitations and regulations established by the
Water Quality Bureau of the Montana Department of Health and Environmental
Sciences, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   (B)   Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
contaminate the sludge of any municipal system, to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute hazard to humans or animals, create a
public nuisance or create any hazard in or have an adverse effect on the waters
receiving any discharge from the treatment works;
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the wastewater works;
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders; and/or
   (E)   Polluted waters.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1229) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-22 GREASE TRAPS.
   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the PWD, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
elements of excessive amounts as specified in §
7-4-23 of this chapter; except that, such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or single dwelling units. All interceptors shall be
of a type and capacity approved by the PWD and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining
of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal
and disposal by appropriate means of the captivated material and shall maintain
records of the dates and means of disposal, which are subject to review by the
PWD. Currently licensed waste disposal firms must perform any removal and
hauling of the collected material not performed by the owner.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1230) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-23 PRETREATMENT.
   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1231) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-24 ADDITIONAL STRUCTURES REQUIRED.
   When required by the PWD, the owner of any property carrying industrial
wastes into the city’s sewer system shall install a suitable structure together
with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observations, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such
structures, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the PWD. The structure shall
be installed by the owner at owner’s expense and shall be maintained so as to
be safe and accessible at all times.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1232) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-25 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The PWD may require a user of sewer service to provide information
needed to determine compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   These requirements may include:
      (1)   Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period;
      (2)   Chemical analyses of wastewaters;
      (3)   Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality;
      (4)   Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent
or other materials important to sewer use and control;
      (5)   A plot of sewer on the user’s property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location;
      (6)   Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; and
      (7)   Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1233) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-26 MEASUREMENT AND TESTS.
   All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which references are made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association.
Sampling methods, locations, times, durations and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the PWD.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1234) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-27 AGREEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1235) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-28 POWER AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   The PWD and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing
pertinent to discharge to the community system in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   The PWD or other duly authorized employees are authorized to
obtain information concerning industrial processes, which have a direct bearing
of the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system.
      (2)   The industry may withhold information considered confidential.
      (3)   The industry must establish that the revelation to the public of
the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors.
   (C)   (1)   The PWD and other duly authorized employees, or his or her
authorized replacement, shall be permitted to enter all private properties
through which the city holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited
to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of
any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement.
      (2)   All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be
done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the
private property involved.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1236) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-29 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city
by reason of such violation.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of $500 for each day of occurrence and/
or imprisonment of up to six months in jail for each violation.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1237) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
CHARGES, RATES AND BILLINGS
§ 7-4-45 SEWER OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   No sewer shall be supplied outside of the limits of the city.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1220) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-46 AVAILABILITY FEE.
   Users that have had their water shut off will be assessed the minimum set
sewer rate and the minimum set sewer rate shall be applied to all premises,
whether vacant or inhabited, if a sewer hook up is installed to the owner’s
lots and not capped off.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1221) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-47 EXTENDING SEWER MAINLINES.
   The full cost of mainline extensions shall be borne by the applicant or
applicants for service requiring any extension of a sewer mainline. The PWD has
the authority to make arrangements with equipment operators, contractors and
plumbers to accomplish the work, unless the total cost is such that formal
bidding procedures are required. No water shall be turned on until the costs of
such extension and hook-up are paid in full.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1222) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-48 SEWER RATES.
   All users of the sewer (residential, business, trailer courts, apartments
and multiple residences) are assessed a minimum monthly fixed rate, plus the
current rates established, for actual water used, as determined by resolution
of the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1223) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-49 SEWER ESTIMATES.
   The Clerk shall estimate sewer usage for households when the meters cannot
be read or sewer rates have not been set previously. Any adjustments shall be
made by the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1224) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-50 PAYMENT OF BILLS.
   The record owner of property shall be responsible for payment of all sewer
charges and repairs incurred herein. All bills for sewer are due and payable on
the tenth day of each month, and shall be delinquent at the close of business
on the fifteenth day of each month in which they are due, unless such day falls
on a legal holiday or weekend day (Saturday or Sunday), in which event they
shall be delinquent on the close of office hours on the next business day.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1225) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-51 FAILURE TO PAY BILLS.
   When any sewer bill for any premises is delinquent, late payment fees will
be charged on the first business day following said delinquency. If said
delinquency is not paid by the due date of the bill for the following month,
then two months’ charges are delinquent, and penalties will be assessed for the
second delinquency. In addition, the Clerk shall prepare and forward to the
owner of such premises, by certified mail (return receipt requested), a notice
of such delinquency. Said notice shall state with particularity the amount and
period of such delinquency and shall require the owner either to pay said
delinquency, in full, on, or to appear before the City Council to show reasons
why sewer for said premises should not be discontinued. In the event such
delinquent bill has not been paid within the time specified in the notice, and
said owner fails to appear as required or, having appeared, has failed to show
cause why sewer service to said premises should not be discontinued, the PWD
shall discontinue such water supply by 12:00 p.m. on the first Monday after the
City Council meeting. Upon application for reconnection, the owner shall pay
the cost of all certified letters, plus costs and expenses upon continuance of
such service.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1226) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 7-4-52 WASTEWATER FACILITIES REPLACEMENT FUND.
   A reserve fund called the “Wastewater Facilities Replacement Fund” is hereby
established within the wastewater utility fund for the purpose of providing
funds to be expended for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories and
appurtenances during the useful life (20 years) of wastewater treatment
facilities necessary to maintain the capacity and performance for which such
facilities are designed and constructed.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-1228) (Ord. 07-01, passed 1-22-2007)
CHAPTER 5: STORM WATER UTILITY
Section
   
7-5-1   Purpose
   
7-5-2   Definitions
   
7-5-3   Service area
   
7-5-4   Operation cost determination
   
7-5-5   Monthly storm water service charge
   
7-5-6   Monthly billing
   
7-5-7   Establishment of fund
   
7-5-8   Flood insurance
   
7-5-9   Cooperation with county
   
7-5-10   Coordination with Montana Department of Transportation
   
7-5-11   Submission of plans by developers
   
7-5-12   Responsibility for accepted storm water facilities
   
7-5-13   Applicability to government entities
   
7-5-14   Violations
§ 7-5-1 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that the establishment of a storm water utility
system is necessary in order to decrease drainage related damage to public and
private property; to promote the safety of public roads and rights-of-way, to
further storm water management within the city; to address drainage issues
related to new developments within the city; to minimize water quality
degradation and soil erosion and sedimentation; to minimize adverse impacts on
property owners adjacent to developing and developed land to minimize damage to
existing street pavement; to reduce street maintenance and repair costs; to
encourage the construction of permanent-type pavements; to preserve the quality
of natural waters in the flathead basin; and to dispose of storm water which
might otherwise collect and provide a breeding ground for mosquitoes and other
disease-carrying insects.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009)
§ 7-5-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE. The City of Ronan Municipal Code.
   DEVELOPED PROPERTY. Property which has been altered from its natural state
by the addition of any improvements such as buildings, structures or other
impervious area.
   FEE or STORM WATER UTILITY SYSTEM FEE. The charge established under this
chapter, as the same may be amended from time to time, and levied on owners of
parcels or pieces of property to fund the costs of operating, maintaining and
improving the storm sewer system in the city.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The property owner of record as listed in the state
assessment roll. A PROPERTY OWNER includes any individual, corporation, firm,
partnership or group of individuals acting as a unit, and any trustee, receiver
or personal representative.
   STORM WATER SYSTEM UTILITY FUND or FUND. The fund created by this chapter to
operate, maintain and improve the city’s storm water system.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT. The planning, design, construction, regulation,
improvement, repair, maintenance and operation of facilities and programs
relating to the storm water system.
   STORM WATER SYSTEM. The system or network of storm and surface water
management facilities including, but not limited to, curbs, gutters, inlets,
conduits, manholes, channels, ditches, drainage easements, retention and
detention basin, infiltration facilities and other components as well as all
natural waterways.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009)
§ 7-5-3 SERVICE AREAS.
   The storm water utility system service area shall be:
   (A)   Inclusive of all property receiving city water or sewer service and
located within the corporate boundaries of the city as the same presently exist
or may be adjusted from time to time; and
   (B)   The city reserves the right to plan for drainage improvements outside
the service area. The city may also construct storm water improvements out of
the service area, when needed as an integral part of the storm drain facilities
located within the service area.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009)
§ 7-5-4 OPERATION COST DETERMINATION.
   The City Council shall determine the total annual cost of operation and
maintenance of the storm water system, including all maintenance, and shall
develop an operating plan for the system. The total annual cost of operation
and maintenance shall include, but need not be limited to, labor, repairs,
equipment replacement, maintenance, necessary modifications, power, sampling,
laboratory tests and a reasonable contingency fund.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009)
§ 7-5-5 MONTHLY STORM WATER SERVICE CHARGE.
   For the purpose of paying the cost of operation, maintenance, administration
and routine functions of the existing city’s storm water facilities and the
operation, maintenance and administration of such future storm water facilities
as may be established within, or without, the service area and to pay for the
review of sewer plans, and the design, right-of-way acquisition and
construction or reconstruction of storm sewer facilities, a monthly storm sewer
service charge is imposed and made applicable to all developed property within
the city limits. The cost shall be assessed to each parcel in the service area
at the rate of $5 per month per water and/or sewer service utility tap.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009)
§ 7-5-6 MONTHLY BILLING.
   The monthly charge for city storm sewer service shall be included on the
monthly bill for city water and/or sewer, as the case may be, delivered in the
usual manner provided therefor and shall be delivered to the real property
owner. The real property owner shall be responsible for the payment in full of
the monthly bill for city storm sewer service imposed upon the real property so
billed for said service. Failure of the real property owner to pay the bill as
and when due will subject the property to the termination of water service as
authorized pursuant to Montana law.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009)
§ 7-5-7 ESTABLISHMENT OF FUND.
   All storm sewer charges shall be collected as provided in this chapter and
credited to a fund to be known as the “Storm Water System Fund”, which Fund
shall be at all times segregated and maintained by the City Clerk on the books
of the city as a separate and special fund. All revenues collected from the
storm sewer utility fee, grants, permit fees and other charges collected shall
be deposited to the Fund. The Council may make additional appropriations to the
fund. All disbursements from the fund shall be for the following purposes: The
acquisition by gift, purchase or condemnation of real and personal property,
and interests therein, necessary to construct, operate and maintain storm sewer
facilities; all costs of administration and implementation of the storm water
management program, including the establishment of reasonable operating and
capital reserves to meet unanticipated or emergency storm water management
requirements; engineering and design, debt service and related financing
expenses, construction costs for new facilities and enlargement or improvement
of existing facilities; operation and maintenance of the storm sewer system;
monitoring, surveillance and inspection of storm water system facilities; water
quality monitoring and water quality programs; retrofitting developed areas for
pollution control; inspection and enforcement activities; billing and
administrative costs; and all other activities which are reasonably required to
plan, design, build, operate, maintain and administer the storm water system.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009)
§ 7-5-8 FLOOD INSURANCE.
   Floods from storm drainage may occasionally occur which exceed the capacity
of storm drainage sewer facilities constructed and maintained using funds made
available under this code. This code does not imply that property liable for
the rates and charges established in this code will always be free from storm
drainage flooding or flood damage. This code does not purport to reduce the
need or the necessity for the owner obtaining flood insurance and protecting
the owner’s property from storm drainage.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009)
§ 7-5-9 COOPERATION WITH COUNTY.
   The city shall, in all ways and within the limits of its powers, solicit
Lake County, itself or by and through its several subordinate governing bodies,
to cooperate in providing drainage facilities in storm drainage basins, or
parts thereof, extending outside the city and in general to carry out the
drainage plan developed therein. Maps showing all storm drainage basins and
proposed facilities shall be furnished to the Lake County Commission for use in
this matter.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009)
§ 7-5-10 COORDINATION WITH MONTANA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION.
   The city shall solicit the Department of Transportation’s financial
participation in all storm drainage improvements constructed on or impacted by
federal aid routes within the city limits. This solicitation shall be in
accordance with any then-existing city-state storm drain agreement.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009)
§ 7-5-11 SUBMISSION OF PLANS BY DEVELOPERS.
   (A)   All developers applying for any of the following permits and/or
approvals shall submit, for approval, a drainage plan prepared by a
professional engineer with their application and/or request:
      (1)   Major subdivision plat approval; and
      (2)   Minor subdivision plat approval.
   (B)   Commencement of construction work under any of the above permits or
applications shall not begin until such time as final approval of the drainage
plan is obtained in accordance with the ordinance codified in this chapter.
   (C)   The same plan submitted during one permit/approval process may be
subsequently submitted with further required applications. The plan shall be
supplemented with such additional information as may be requested by the city
planning staff or its Facilities Department.
   (D)   The plan requirement established in this section will apply, except
when the developer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city staff and/or
Planning Board that the proposed activity or development:
      (1)   Will neither seriously, nor adversely, impact the water quality
conditions of any affected receiving bodies of water;
      (2)   Will not alter the surface discharge location, alter the drainage
pattern on adjoining properties, alter drainage patterns, increase the
discharge, nor cause any other adverse effects in the drainage; and
      (3)   Will not alter the subsurface drainage patterns, flow rates and
discharge points, nor result in any significant adverse affects to property or
residents.
   (E)   Drainage plans shall be prepared in accordance with the rules,
regulations and standards as the same then exists, and shall be consistent with
the criteria set forth in this chapter.
   (F)   At the time of approval of the drainage plan for the subject property,
a schedule for inspection of construction and facilities will be established by
the city planning staff.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009)
§ 7-5-12 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACCEPTED STORM WATER FACILITIES.
   All storm water facilities constructed, installed or provided hereunder
within public right-of-way shall, upon acceptance by the city, become the
property of the city, and the city thereafter shall be responsible for the
operation and maintenance of the facilities. The city shall maintain all
accepted public storm sewer facilities located within city-owned land, city
rights-of-way and city easements. The city has the option to maintain other
accepted public storm water facilities located within or adjacent to the city.
Such public facilities include, but are not limited to, open drainage ways and
piped drainage ways constructed, expressly for use by the general public and as
a part of the city storm water facilities, bridges, roadside drainage ditches
and glitters, flood control facilities, including detention and retention
basins, dikes, overflow channels, and pump stations, that have been designed
and constructed expressly for use by the public. Such public storm sewer
facilities exclude facilities not accepted by the city for maintenance.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009)
§ 7-5-13 APPLICABILITY TO GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES.
   (A)   All governmental entities shall be required to submit a drainage plan
and comply with the terms of the ordinance codified in this chapter when
developing and/or improving land including, but not limited to, road
construction and reconstruction, and other improvements that can affect storm
water within the city.
   (B)   It is recognized that county, state and federal permit conditions may
apply to the proposed action and that compliance with the provisions of the
ordinance codified in this chapter does not constitute compliance with such
requirements.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009)
§ 7-5-14 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of the ordinance codified in this chapter are misdemeanors and
shall be punishable in accordance with the general penalties in the municipal
code. In addition to the foregoing penalty, and as set forth above, the Mayor
may direct the supply of water or provision of sanitary sewer service to the
premises to be discontinued from the premises where such violation is found in
accordance with MCA 7-13-4306. As an alternative method of enforcement, the
city may initiate an action to enjoin any development undertaken in violation
of the ordinance codified in this chapter by making application for an
injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction. Violation of this chapter
shall constitute a municipal infraction punishable in accordance with the
provisions of MCA 7-1-4150 through 7-1-4152.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009)
TITLE 8: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
   Chapter
      
1.    STREETS, ALLEYS AND SIDEWALKS
      
2.    WATERCOURSES
      
3.    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE COURTS
      
4.    OFF-STREET PARKING
      
5.    PARKS, TRAILS AND OPEN SPACES
CHAPTER 1: STREETS, ALLEYS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
8-1-1   Opening of streets and alleys
   
8-1-2   Maintenance and repair
   
8-1-3   Hazardous conditions; public safety measures
   
8-1-4   Snow removal responsibility
   
8-1-5   Unsafe sidewalks
   
8-1-6   Removal of obstruction of sidewalk
   
8-1-7   Obstructions prohibited
   
8-1-8   Openings in sidewalks must be covered
   
8-1-9   Official grades
   
8-1-10   Alteration of grades
   
8-1-11   Cross-section of streets
   
8-1-12   Location of curb and tree line
   
8-1-13   Use of trucks on Main Street
   
8-1-14   Vehicles GVW in excess five tons on 3rd Avenue NW
Construction
   
8-1-25   Approval required
   
8-1-26   Conformance to established grade required
   
8-1-27   Petition by property owners
   
8-1-28   Authority to order
   
8-1-29   Notice
   
8-1-30   Cost recovery
   
8-1-31   By city generally; assessment of costs; Sidewalk and Curb Fund
Excavations
   
8-1-45   Filling of cesspools and excavations
   
8-1-46   Sewer pipe excavations
   
8-1-47   Prevention of obstructions; public safety measures
   
8-1-48   Post-excavation settling; repair; responsibility
   
8-1-49   Proximity of gas or water conduits to sewer pipes
Signs and Encroachments
   
8-1-60   Definitions
   
8-1-61   Restrictions
   
8-1-62   Projection and clearance
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 8-1-1 OPENING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to open or cause to
be opened any city street or alley for the purpose of connecting or laying any
sewer or water connection or to open the same in any way for any purpose. If a
necessity arises for the opening of a street or an alley, a request must be
made to the City Council or its designated representative.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-401)
§ 8-1-2 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
   It shall be the duty of the owners and tenants of any premises within the
limits of the city to keep the sidewalk in front of and adjoining their
premises in good, safe and substantial condition. The owners shall see that all
breaks or unsoundness be repaired with all possible dispatch.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-411)
§ 8-1-3 HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS; PUBLIC SAFETY MEASURES.
   When by any reason or the construction or repair of sidewalks from any cause
whatsoever any sidewalk is rendered dangerous or impassable to the public, such
sidewalk or portion of sidewalk shall be securely fenced and from dark until
sunrise red lights shall be maintained thereon.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-412)
§ 8-1-4 SNOW REMOVAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be the duty of the owners and tenants of any premises within the
limits of the city to keep the sidewalk in front of and adjoining the premises
clean and safe for pedestrians, and to remove with reasonable dispatch snow,
ice, slush, mud and any other impediment to safe and convenient foot travel.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-413)
§ 8-1-5 UNSAFE SIDEWALKS.
   Whenever any sidewalk is in an unsafe condition for pedestrians, it shall be
the duty of the City Foreperson to place a suitable obstruction on either side
of that part of the sidewalk which is in a suitable obstruction on either side
of that part of the sidewalk which is an unsafe condition and notify the owner
or occupant of the abutting property that such sidewalk must be repaired. If
the abutting property be unoccupied or the owner cannot be found within the
city, then the City Foreperson shall post a notice on such property requiring
the walk to be repaired. If the walk is not properly repaired within 24 hours
from the giving of the notice as herein provided, then the City Foreperson
shall report that fact to the Mayor and the Mayor may cause the sidewalk to be
repaired or removed by the city.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-414)
§ 8-1-6 REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALK.
   Any person who takes down or removes or in any way interferes with an
obstruction placed on any sidewalk, as provided in §
8-1-5 of this chapter, shall commit the offense of criminal mischief and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by this code.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-415)
§ 8-1-7 OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED.
   None of the duties or privileges imposed or conferred by this subchapter
shall in any way be deemed to authorize or allow the obstruction of any street,
either during or after any work upon any sidewalk, except under permit
therefor. No material removed from any sidewalk shall be placed upon any
portion of any adjacent street, alley, place or square. All refuse, lumber or
debris remaining after the completion of any sidewalk repair or renewal shall
be removed from the street forthwith, and any owner, lessee or tenant of
abutting property who shall fail to remove any such obstruction from any
street, alley place or square, within 48 hours after being notified by the City
Foreperson to do so, shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a public nuisance
and shall be subject to the penalties prescribed therefor. In case of failure
to remove obstructions after such notice, the City Foreperson shall cause the
same to be removed and shall charge the full cost of such removal to such
owner, lessee or tenant, and the charge shall become a lien upon such abutting
property and shall be collected, as hereinbefore provided for the collection of
cost of construction or repair of sidewalks.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-416)
§ 8-1-8 OPENINGS IN SIDEWALKS MUST BE COVERED.
   No openings shall be permitted in or on any sidewalks in the city for
transmission of light to basements or floors below, with floor light not over
four inches square, not less than three-quarters of an inch thick, set in metal
frames. No railings shall be permitted about any lights in the sidewalks to
basements or floors below, nor shall any openings be allowed or permitted for
the purpose or transmitting light to basements or floors below.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-417)
§ 8-1-9 OFFICIAL GRADES.
   The grades as now established within the city shall be and are hereby
declared to be the established grades upon the streets and part of streets
therein specified and shall more fully set forth by resolution.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-418)
§ 8-1-10 ALTERATION OF GRADES.
   It shall be the duty of the engineer in charge to make such alterations upon
the official profiles of all the several divisions and upon the duplicates of
said that may from time to time become necessary, to indicate any changes that
may have been ordered by the Council, or may hereafter be ordered in the
established grade of any street. The Clerk shall notify the engineer in charge
of all official profiles approved or changed by the Council.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-419)
§ 8-1-11 CROSS-SECTION OF STREETS.
   The cross-section of a street shall be established by the engineer in charge
upon any or all streets in the city, whenever so directed by the Council, and
the engineer in charge shall report his or her action in establishing the
cross-section of any street to the Council for approval.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-420)
§ 8-1-12 LOCATION OF CURB AND TREE LINE.
   The curb line and tree line as now established within the city shall be and
hereby is declared to be the established curb and tree line for the city.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-421)
§ 8-1-13 USE OF TRUCKS ON MAIN STREET.
   (A)   The use of Main Street in the city by all semi-tractor and trailer
vehicles for the entire length thereof is hereby prohibited, and the use of
Main Street by all other trucks in excess of two tons from 5th Avenue SW to the
west end of Main Street is hereby prohibited; provided, however, that, Main
Street may be crossed at a 90-degree angle by all trucks at street
intersections.
   (B)   Freight trucks, otherwise prohibited from using all or a portion of
Main Street under division (A) above, and having no other exchange point than a
Main Street entrance, may use only that portion of Main Street fronting the
block in which such entrance in located.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-422)
§ 8-1-14 VEHICLES WITH GVW IN EXCESS OF FIVE TONS ON 3RD AVENUE NW.
   (A)   Vehicles in excess of five tons’ gross vehicle weight shall be
prohibited from operation upon Third Avenue Northwest along that portion of its
length lying and being between Round Butte Road and Highway 93.
   (B)   The City Public Works Department is instructed to erect necessary
signage.
   (C)   Violation of this section shall constitute a civil misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-423) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-28-2011)
CONSTRUCTION
§ 8-1-25 APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   No curbing or sidewalk shall be constructed, except by the written approval
of the City Council or its designated representative. The construction and
location of any sidewalk so approved shall be in accordance with such
specifications as the Council shall prescribe, but all construction shall as
far as possible be uniform.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-402)
§ 8-1-26 CONFORMANCE TO ESTABLISHED GRADE REQUIRED.
   Sidewalk and curb construction on improved or graded streets must conform
with the established grade and sidewalk lines. On all other streets the
construction must be to the satisfaction of the municipal official appointed by
the Council to supervise such work.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-403)
§ 8-1-27 PETITION BY PROPERTY OWNERS.
   Whenever the owners of a majority of lots in any one block in the city,
fronting upon the same street or avenue shall petition the City Council for the
construction or reconstruction of a sidewalk, curb or gutter along that side of
the block, the City Council shall order the construction or reconstruction of
such sidewalk, curb or gutter in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-404)
§ 8-1-28 AUTHORITY TO ORDER.
   The City Council, upon its own motion, or at the request of the owners of
less than a majority of the lots in any one block fronting the same street or
avenue in the city may order the construction or reconstruction of any
sidewalk, curb or gutter.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-405)
§ 8-1-29 NOTICE.
   (A)   (1)   Before any sidewalk, curb or gutter is ordered constructed, a
notice stating the time and place the City Council shall consider the
advisability of constructing or reconstructing the same, shall be sent by
registered mail by the City Clerk to all owners of any lots which will be
compelled to bear any part of the cost of construction or reconstruction of the
sidewalk, curb or gutter.
      (2)   Service of notice made upon the duly authorized agent for any
property affected shall be sufficient.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall keep a record of the registry of such notices,
and shall also make and keep on file an affidavit as to the names of persons
upon whom service has been made by serving upon an agent, showing the name of
the agent.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-406)
§ 8-1-30 COST RECOVERY.
   Whenever any street or avenue in the city shall be ordered improved by the
construction, repair or reconstruction of any sidewalk, curb or gutter the duty
and expense of constructing, repairing, reconstructing or maintaining the same
shall devolve upon the owner of the property directly abutting on that side of
the street on which the sidewalk, curb or gutter is constructed, repaired or
reconstructed.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-407)
§ 8-1-31 BY CITY GENERALLY; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS; SIDEWALK AND CURB FUND.
   (A)   Generally. Whenever any sidewalk, curb or gutter is ordered
constructed, repaired or reconstructed by the City Council, if the work is not
commenced by the owner within 30 days from the service of notice on the owner
or his or her authorized agent, or if after the commencement of such work it is
not pursued with diligence, then such improvement shall be made by the city and
the cost of construction, including the engineering cost, shall be assessed
against the property in front of which the improvement has been made.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-408)
   (B)   Assessment of costs.
      (1)   When any sidewalk, curb or gutter is constructed by the city as
provided in division (A) above, payment shall be by special warrants drawn
against the fund known as the “Special Sidewalk and Curb Fund”.
      (2)   The City Council may provide for the payment of interest annually.
      (3)   Each year, the City Council shall, prior to the first Monday in
October, pass a resolution levying an assessment and tax against each lot where
sidewalks, curbs or gutters have been ordered constructed, repaired or
reconstructed.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-409)
   (C)   Sidewalk and Curb Fund. All moneys collected from assessments made for
the construction of sidewalks, curbs or gutters ordered by the City Council
shall be placed to the credit of the Special Sidewalk and Curb Fund.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-410)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 8-1-45 FILLING OF CESSPOOLS AND EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   The City Council may order the owner or owners of any real property
within the city to fill in any abandoned cesspool, well, cistern, latrine or
other excavation.
   (B)   If the owner or owners fail to cause such filing within 30 days after
receiving notice, they shall be subject to the general penalty as specified in
this code.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-501)
§ 8-1-46 SEWER PIPE EXCAVATIONS.
   Excavations made in the streets or other public ways for the purpose of
connecting drainpipes with the sewer, shall not remain open more than 48 hours
unless a special permit for a longer time is obtained from the Sewer
Commissioner, within which time the street must be restored to its original
condition of good repair.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-502)
§ 8-1-47 PREVENTION OF OBSTRUCTIONS; PUBLIC SAFETY MEASURES.
   (A)   Every precaution shall be taken when excavating in the streets or
public ways to prevent the obstruction or disturbance of any gutter or other
pipe or conduit or the destruction of property of any kind.
   (B)   Proper and sufficient barricades and warning devices shall be placed
around the excavation.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-503)
§ 8-1-48 POST-EXCAVATION SETTLING; REPAIR; RESPONSIBILITY.
   Any settlement that occurs in the surface of the ground through the laying
of any drain or water pipe, and within one year from the completion of the
work, shall be repaired by the property owner to whom the permit was issued for
doing the work. If the repairs are not completed by the owner in the manner and
within the time required by order of the Sewer Commissioner, City Foreperson or
Building Inspector, they shall be completed by the city and the expense
thereof, plus 10% for administrative costs, shall become a special tax against
the property.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-504)
§ 8-1-49 PROXIMITY OF GAS OR WATER CONDUITS TO SEWER PIPES.
   No gas or water pipe or other conduit shall be laid nearer than ten feet on
either side of any public sewer, unless a special permit is obtained from the
City Foreperson.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-505)
SIGNS AND ENCROACHMENTS
§ 8-1-60 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CURB LINE. The line at the face of the curb nearest to the street or
roadway. In the absence of a curb, the CURB LINE shall be established by the
city officials.
   ENCROACHMENTS. All private devices placed upon the public right-of-way,
including devices which overhang or underlie the right-of-way.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-601)
§ 8-1-61 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No private signs, eaves, marquees or similar devices shall encroach on
the public rights-of-way in the city, except as provided in this subchapter,
and then only by permit revocable on ten days’ notice issued by the city.
   (B)   No gainful private or commercial use of the public right-of-way will
be allowed.
   (C)   Prohibited activities shall include non-emergency servicing of
vehicles, parking or placing of portable advertising devices on the public
right-of-way.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-602)
§ 8-1-62 PROJECTION AND CLEARANCE.
   The outermost portion of an overhanging device shall be at least two feet
behind the face of the curb or, where there is no curb, from the shoulder of
the roadway, and the lowest portion of an overhanging device shall be at least
seven and one-half feet above the top of the curb, sidewalk or roadway shoulder
elevation.
(1992 Code, § 7-1-603)
CHAPTER 2: WATERCOURSES
Section
   
8-2-1   Alteration permit required; penalty for violation
§ 8-2-1 ALTERATION PERMIT REQUIRED; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation may alter, straighten or widen any of
the watercourses or streams within the city without a permit. The Council
reserves the right to alter, straighten or widen any of the watercourses or
streams and to issue permits therefor subject to state law thereon.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
section shall be subject to the general penalty.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-201)
CHAPTER 3: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE COURTS
Section
   
8-3-1   Definitions
   
8-3-2   General regulations
   
8-3-3   Site requirements generally
   
8-3-4   Trailer coach spaces
   
8-3-5   Parking
   
8-3-6   Service buildings
   
8-3-7   Toilet facilities
   
8-3-8   Lavatories
   
8-3-9   Laundry facilities
   
8-3-10   Refuse disposal
   
8-3-11   Electricity
   
8-3-12   Fuel
   
8-3-13   Alterations or additions to coaches
   
8-3-14   Registration of occupants
   
8-3-15   Reporting of communicable diseases
   
8-3-16   Enforcement authority
§ 8-3-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPENDENT TRAILER COACH. A trailer coach which does not have a toilet and a
bath or shower.
   INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH. A trailer coach which has a toilet and a bath or
shower.
   SERVICE BUILDING. A building housing separate toilet and bathing facilities
for men and women and also having laundry facilities and a slop sink.
   TRAILER COACH. Any vehicle use or so constructed as to permit its being used
as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and duly licensable as such
and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling
or sleeping place for one or more persons.
   TRAILER COACH SPACE. A plot of ground within a trailer court designated for
the accommodation of one trailer coach.
   TRAILER COURT. Any plot or ground upon which two or more trailer coaches,
occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-401)
§ 8-3-2 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   All trailer courts within the city constructed, maintained and operated in
accordance with the regulations provided in this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-402)
§ 8-3-3 SITE REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.
   Every trailer court shall be on a well-drained site, so located that its
drainage will not endanger any water supply. All trailer courts shall be in
areas free from marshes, swamps or other potential breeding places for insects
or rodents.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-403)
§ 8-3-4 TRAILER COACH SPACES.
   Each trailer coach space shall contain a minimum of 1,000 square feet, shall
be at least 25 feet wide, and shall abut on a driveway or other clear area with
unobstructed access to a public street. Such spaces shall be clearly defined,
and trailer coaches shall be parked in such spaces so that there is a minimum
of 15 feet between trailer coaches, and so that no trailer coach is less than
ten feet from the exterior boundary of the trailer court.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-404)
§ 8-3-5 PARKING.
   No trailer coach shall be parked closer than 25 feet from any street or
highway, or so than any part of such trailer coach obstructs any roadway or
walkway. No trailer coach shall be allowed in a trailer court unless there is a
trailer coach space available. Sufficient area shall be provided for the
parking of at least one motor vehicle for each trailer coach space.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-405)
§ 8-3-6 SERVICE BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Each trailer court shall be provided with one or more service
buildings adequately equipped with flush-type fixtures. No service building
shall contain less than two toilets for women, one toilet for men, two
lavatories and one shower for each sex, a urinal for men, a laundry tray and a
slop sink. These minimum fixtures will be adequate to serve up to 20 dependent
trailer coaches and any number of independent trailer coaches. Additional
fixtures shall be provided in the ratios set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Every service building shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Be located not more than 200 feet from any dependent trailer coach,
nor less than 15 feet from any trailer coach;
      (2)   Be of permanent construction and be provided with adequate light,
heat and ventilation;
      (3)   The interior to be of moisture-resistant material to permit
frequent washing and cleaning; and
      (4)   All rooms to be well ventilated with all openings screened.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-406)
§ 8-3-7 TOILET FACILITIES.
   (A)   Toilet facilities for women shall consist of at least one flush-type
water closet for every ten dependent trailer coaches and toilet facilities for
men shall consist of one flush-type water closet or urinal for every ten
dependent trailer coaches. Urinals shall be substituted for not more than one-
third of the toilet fixtures required for men. A one and one-half foot length
of trough-type urinal shall be considered as one urinal. Each water closet
shall be in a private compartment.
   (B)   Toilet facilities for men and women shall be separated if in the same
building by a sound-resistant wall.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-407)
§ 8-3-8 LAVATORIES.
   (A)   A lavatory for each sex shall be provided for every ten dependent
trailer coaches and a bath or shower for each sex shall be provided for every
20 dependent trailer coaches.
   (B)   Each bath or shower shall be in a private compartment.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-408)
§ 8-3-9 LAUNDRY FACILITIES.
   Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one unit for every 20
trailer coach spaces. Drying space in the ratio of 50 feet to each coach space
or other clothes-drying facilities shall be provided to accommodate the laundry
of the trailer court occupants. A slop sink shall be provided in the service
building.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-409)
§ 8-3-10 REFUSE DISPOSAL.
   The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the court shall be in a
manner so as not to create health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding
areas, accident hazards or air pollution. All refuse shall be stored in fly-
tight, water-tight, rodent-proof containers and such containers shall be
provided of a number and capacity to prevent any refuse from overflowing on the
ground. Satisfactory container racks or holder shall be provided and located
not more than 150 feet from any trailer coach space.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-410)
§ 8-3-11 ELECTRICITY.
   An electrical outlet supplying at least 110 volts shall be provided for each
trailer coach space and the installation shall be in compliance with all state
and local electrical codes. Such electrical outlets shall be weather-proofed
and no power line shall be permitted to lie on the ground or be suspended less
than ten feet above the ground.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-411)
§ 8-3-12 FUEL.
   (A)   Bottled gas for cooking purposes shall not be used at individual
trailer coach spaces unless the containers are properly connected by copper or
other suitable metallic tubing. Bottled gas cylinders shall be securely
fastened in place and adequately protected from the weather.
   (B)   No cylinder containing bottled gas shall be located in a trailer coach
or within five feet of a door to a trailer coach.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-412)
§ 8-3-13 ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS TO COACHES.
   (A)   No permanent additions of any kind shall be built onto or become a
part of any trailer coach.
   (B)   Skirting of coaches is permissible, but such skirting shall not
permanently attach the coach to the grounds, provide a harborage for rodents or
create a fire hazard.
   (C)   The wheels of the coach shall not be removed, except temporarily for
repairs.
   (D)   Jacks or stabilizers may be placed under the frame of the coach to
prevent movement on the springs while the coach is parked or occupied.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-413)
§ 8-3-14 REGISTRATION OF OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   Every trailer court owner or operator shall maintain a register
containing a record of all trailer coaches and occupants using the trailer
court. Such register shall be available to any unauthorized person inspecting
the court and shall be preserved for the period required by the Health Officer.
   (B)   The register shall contain:
      (1)   The names and addresses of all trailer coach occupants stopping in
the court;
      (2)   The make, model and license number of each motor vehicle and
trailer coach;
      (3)   The state, territory or county issuing registration to the vehicle
and trailer coach; and
      (4)   The dates of arrival and departure of each trailer coach.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-414)
§ 8-3-15 REPORTING OF COMMUNICABLE DISEASE.
   Every owner, operator, attendant or other person operating a trailer court
shall notify immediately the local Health Officer of any suspected communicable
or contagious disease within the trailer court. In the case of quarantinable
diseases so diagnosed by a physician, such owner, operator, attendant or other
person operating a trailer court shall not permit the departure of a trailer
coach or its occupants or the removal therefrom of clothing or other articles
which have been exposed to infection, without the approval of the Health
Officer.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-415)
§ 8-3-16 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to enforce the regulations of this
chapter, and for the purpose of securing enforcement of them, the Police Chief,
or any person duly authorized by him or her, shall have the right to enter upon
the premises of any trailer or recreational vehicle court within the city, to
inspect the court and all accommodations connected to it.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-416)
CHAPTER 4: OFF-STREET PARKING
Section
   
8-4-1   Definitions
   
8-4-2   Parking requirements
   
8-4-3   Permit required
   
8-4-4   Plan requirements
   
8-4-5   Plan review
   
8-4-6   Off-street parking design standards
   
8-4-7   Joint use of off-street parking areas
   
8-4-8   Expanded building or land use
   
8-4-9   Employee parking
   
8-4-10   Minimum number of spaces required
§ 8-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA. Gross useable floor area of the building.
   GROSS LEASABLE AREA. Gross leasable area of building.
   LODGING, ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSES. Any dwelling in which one or more
rooms is rented to a person or persons.
   MULTI-FAMILY, EFFICIENCY UNIT. A living unit without a separate bedroom.
   PARKING SPACE. An area sufficient to park one automobile. PARKING AREA shall
be used for automobile parking only, with no sales, dead storage, repair work,
dismantling or servicing of any kind being permitted thereon.
   RESERVOIR SPACE REQUIREMENTS. Space required for automobiles waiting to
enter a facility.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-501)
§ 8-4-2 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for various types of land use
or business establishments. Land use, either new or modified, or buildings,
either remodeled so as to increase parking needs or new structures, shall meet
the off-street parking requirements and standards, as herein provided. Off-
street parking requirements shall be provided within the property lines of the
property to be developed or modified and shall not be located within the public
rights-of-way of streets or alleys.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-502)
§ 8-4-3 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   New or remodeled work shall require permits for grading or paving of the
off-street parking areas. The permit may be part of the zoning compliance or a
separate permit. There shall be no charge for this type of permit. The
applicant, for the permit, shall provide plans of the proposed parking area and
receive approval for such plans prior to commencing any construction.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-503)
§ 8-4-4 PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   Two copies of the plans of the proposed parking area shall be submitted to
the City Clerk at the time of the application for building permit for which the
parking area is required. Said plans shall be drawn to a scale of not less than
one inch, equal to 50 feet, showing locations of all pertinent buildings,
driveways, streets, parking arrangements, circulation patterns, traffic signs
and markings, lighting, landscaping, pedestrian walks, curbing, drainage and
other pertinent features.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-504)
§ 8-4-5 PLAN REVIEW.
   Prior to the issuance of a building permit to proposed plans will be
reviewed by the Building Inspector to ensure conformity to the parking
requirements and standards as herein provided. The Public Works Director shall
also review and approve the proposed traffic control for the off-street parking
areas and its impact to city street traffic prior to the issuance of the
permit.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-505)
§ 8-4-6 OFF-STREET PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall be taken into consideration as minimum
requirements for off-street parking areas.
   (A)   Off-street parking shall be located as herein specified. Where a
distance is specified, such distance shall be the walking distance measured
from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the
building that such facility is required to serve:
      (1)   For one- and two-family dwellings: on the same building site with
the building they are required to serve;
      (2)   For multiple dwellings: on the same building site with the building
they are required to serve; and
      (3)   For uses other than those above: not more than 200 feet.
   (B)   An off-street parking space shall be at least nine feet in width and
at least 18-1/2 feet in length, exclusive of access drives or yard area. Such
spaces shall have a minimum vertical clearance of at least eight feet.
   (C)   All off-street parking areas and access drives shall be paved or made
of concrete. No such surfaces shall be permitted between the curb and the
property line, except for access drives.
   (D)   Adequate drainage structures shall be provided within the off-street
parking area to handle surface water. If a storm drain system does not exist,
concrete drainage sumps shall be provided. An estimated quantity of one sump
per 10,000 square feet shall be used or a minimum of one. The minimum of one
may be waived by the City Engineer if he or she determines that surroundings
drainage is adequate.
   (E)   All open areas containing four or more spaces shall be effectively
screened by a wall, fence or landscaping from grounds of an institutional or
public property or from any residential property.
   (F)   No lighting used to illuminate a parking area or its sign shall face
or have its source directly visible from any residential district and shall not
be a nuisance or hazard to passing traffic.
   (G)   Any uses having more than 3,500 square feet of required parking shall
have 6% of the gross required parking area landscaped with trees and shrubs.
This landscaping shall be properly maintained and shall be of a profile so as
not to interfere with street traffic.
   (H)   All traffic-control devices, such as parking stripes designating
vehicle stalls, directional arrows or signs, pin-down curbs, curbing and other
developments shall be installed and completed as shown on the approved plan.
   (I)   Where exclusive pedestrian walks are used in the parking lots, they
shall be protected by a physical barrier, such as, raised or pin-down curbs.
   (J)   All traffic signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic-
Control Devices.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-506)
§ 8-4-7 JOINT USE OF OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS.
   The city’s Building Inspector may authorize the joint use of parking
facilities for the following uses or activities under conditions specified.
   (A)   Up to 50% of the parking facility required by this section for
primarily “night-time” uses, such as theaters, bowling alleys, bars and related
uses may be supplied by certain other types of building or uses herein referred
to, as “day-time” uses, such as banks, offices, furniture stores, manufacturing
or wholesale and related uses.
   (B)   Up to 50% of the parking facilities required by this section for
primarily “day-time” uses may be supplied by primarily “night-time” uses.
   (C)   Up to 90% of the parking facilities required by this section for a
church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be
supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by uses primarily of a
“day-time” nature.
   (D)   The joint use parking facility shall be located within 200 feet of
either building or land or which the parking facility is required.
   (E)   The applicant for the joint use parking facility shall shown that
there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the two
buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is
proposed.
   (F)   The applicant shall present a properly drawn legal instrument executed
by the parties concerned for joint use of the off-street parking facilities and
approved as to form and manner of execution by the City Attorney and recorded
with the office of the Clerk and Recorder. Such instrument shall also be filed
with the City Clerk.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-507)
§ 8-4-8 EXPANDED BUILDING OR LAND USE.
   Whenever any building is enlarged in height and/or ground coverage, the off-
street parking shall be provided for said expansion or enlargement in
accordance with the requirements as stated in the schedule provided in this
chapter. However, no parking space need be provided, in the case of enlargement
or expansion, where the number of parking spaces required for such enlargement
or expansion is less than 10% of the parking spaces specified in the schedule
for the building. Nothing herein shall be construed to require off-street
parking spaces for the portion of such buildings existing at the time of
passage of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-508)
§ 8-4-9 EMPLOYEE PARKING.
   The parking requirements provided herein shall take into consideration
employee parking and the employer shall make the off-street available to
employees.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-509)
§ 8-4-10 MINIMUM NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED.
   The required off-street spaces shall be in conformance with the following
schedule and where alternative standards prevail, the greater applies in
conflicting computations. Where two or more uses (mixed occupancy) apply, the
total of the activities computed separately shall prevail, except as provided
for in joint use.
Use and Parking Spaces Available
Use and Parking Spaces Available
COMMERCIAL
Automobile repair                   2 spaces for each service bay
                                    1 per 300 feet of gross floor area; if a
Bank                                drive-through window is provided,
                                    parking may be reduced to 1 space for
                                    each 400 feet of gross floor area
Bar                                 1 per 3 persons in designed capacity,
                                    plus 1 per employee on a typical shift
Barber/beauty parlor                1 per chair, plus 1 per employee
Bed and breakfast                   1 per room, plus 1 for the principal
                                    residence
Casino                              1 per 30 square feet of gaming and
                                    searing area
Churches, auditoriums and similar   1 per each 4 seats or 60 lineal inches
enclosed places of assembly         of pew or 4 square feet of gross floor
                                    area used for assembly purposes
Convalescent homes                  1 per each 5 beds
Day care                            1 per employee, plus 1 per 10 pupils
Foster home                         1 per each employee or caregiver
Group home                          1 per 4 residents, plus 1 per employee
Hospitals                           1 for each 4 beds, plus 1 per each staff
                                    doctor and 1 per each 2 employees
Hotels and motels                   1 per rentable room, plus 1 for each 4
                                    employees
Lodging/rooming/boarding houses     1 per rooming unit, plus 2 per resident
                                    manager
Medical and dental offices          1 for each 200 square feet of gross
                                    floor area
Mortuaries                          1 per 75 square feet of gross floor area
                                    used for assembly
Other retail outlets                1 for each 750 square feet of retail
                                    floor area
Professional office                 1 per 250 feet of gross floor area
Restaurant (not drive-through)      1 per 4 seats
Restaurant (with drive-through)     1 per 100 feet of gross floor area, plus
                                    3 stacked in drive-through
Stadiums, sports arenas and similar 1 per each 8 seats and/or 1 per each 100
open places of assembly             square feet of assembly space without
                                    fixed seats
Theaters                            1 per each 4 seats
RESIDENTIAL
If the required parking spaces for one- or two-family dwellings is not
provided in a covered garage, then such space(s) shall be located or
constructed that it (they) may, at some later date, be covered by a garage
structure
Multi-family
   Efficiency unit               1 per dwelling unit
Single-family                       2 per dwelling unit
 
(1992 Code, § 9-1-510)
CHAPTER 5: PARKS, TRAILS AND OPEN SPACES
Section
   
8-5-1   Park rules
§ 8-5-1 PARK RULES.
   Other than set forth below, additional rules may be adopted from time to
time by resolution of the City of Ronan.
   (A)   Definition. "Parks" shall mean all parks, trails, and open spaces
owned or leased by the City of Ronan, including but not limited to ball fields,
and any private land dedicated for public use.
   (B)   Hours of use are 5:00 AM to 11:00 PM, unless otherwise allowed by
permit from the City of Ronan, or for the purpose of passing through a park to
go from one area of the City of Ronan to another area.
   (C)   Camping and overnight parking. It is unlawful to camp, sleep, or park
overnight in any park or parking lot associated with a park.
   (D)   Motorized vehicles.
      (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the boundaries of a
town park except in parking lots.
      (2)   This rule does not apply to emergency or maintenance vehicles or
vehicles necessary for use by the handicapped.
      (3)   No one shall clean, wash, or perform any motor vehicle maintenance
in any park.
      (4)   No one shall drain or dump waste from any vehicle in any park.
   (E)   Fires.
      (1)   No person shall ignite or maintain a fire within a park except in a
designated barbecue unit or by permit issued by the City of Ronan.
   (F)   Pets.
      (1)   Horses are not permitted in any park.
      (2)   Dogs will be under the handler's control.
   (G)   Littering.
      (1)   Littering in parks is prohibited.
      (2)   All food and animal waste shall be disposed of in a garbage can or
other receptacle designed for such purposes.
   (H)   Amusement for gain.
      (1)   No amusement for gain or for which a charge is made can be
conducted in a park without a permit granted by the City of Ronan.
      (2)   Such amusement must be conducted in accordance with all park rules.
   (I)   Firearms, projectiles, golf, archery, etc.
      (1)    All firearms are prohibited except duly authorized law enforcement
personnel.
      (2)   No one shall hit golf balls, engage in archery, or throw spears in
any park.
   (J)   Sound amplification.
      (1)   No one shall use, operate, or play any device producing sound at a
volume that is audible at a distance of over 30 feet except if a permit is
granted by the City of Ronan.
   (K)   Posting of signs.
      (1)   No one shall post, paste, paint, or affix any placard, bill,
notice, or sign upon any structure or thing within any part of a park.
   (L)   Fireworks.
      (1)   Fireworks are prohibited in all parks.
   (M)   Trail use.
      (1)   Pedestrians, bicycles, skateboards, roller skates or rollerblades
can use all trails.
      (2)   No motorized vehicles shall be allowed on the trails, except as set
out above.
      (3)   Pathways may be used for the purpose of passing through a park to
go from one area of the City of Ronan to another area at all hours.
   (N)   Alcoholic beverages.
      (1)   The possession of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in all parks
except as allowed by permit issued by the City of Ronan.
      (2)   Members of groups or organizations, or individuals may request an
alcoholic beverage permit issued by the City of Ronan.
   (O)   Penalties. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor,
punishable as set forth in Ronan City Ordinances.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 9-13-2023)
TITLE 9: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
   Chapter
      
1.    TRAFFIC AND PARKING
CHAPTER 1: TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Section
   
9-1-1   Definitions
   
9-1-2   Enforcement and obedience
   
9-1-3   Traffic-control devices
   
9-1-4   Turning movements
   
9-1-5   Special stops and yield right-of-way
   
9-1-6   Miscellaneous driving rules
   
9-1-7   Method of parking
   
9-1-8   Stopping, standing or parking
   
9-1-9   Stopping for loading or unloading only
   
9-1-10   Forms and notices of arrest and appearance
   
9-1-11   Penalty
   
9-1-12   Operation and use of snowmobiles
   
9-1-13   On-street parking
   
9-1-14   Adoption of Traffic Code by reference
   
9-1-15   Speed restrictions
   
9-1-16   Exhibition driving
   
9-1-17   Parking along established parade route
   
9-1-18   Parking and open storage in city limits
   
9-1-19   Gross vehicle weight
§ 9-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department, police
vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of city departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the Chief of
Police.
   CROSSWALK. The area included in extension of sidewalk lines at all
intersections.
   ESTABLISHED COMMUNITY PARADE. A parade that has occurred annually for at
least three years within the city and includes the following annual parades:
St. Patrick’s Day; Homecoming; Ronan Pioneer Days; and Parade of Lights.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails.
   STREET INTERSECTION. The space where streets intersect, bounded by an
extension of the curb lines of the intersection streets.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. VEHICLE shall include all
carriages moving on land, whether on wheels or runners, and whether drawn or
pushed or propelled by animals or man, or propelled by motive power, excepting
a baby carriage.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-301) (Ord. 2016-01, passed 8-1-2016)
§ 9-1-2 ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE.
   (A)   Authority of Police and Fire Department officials. It shall be the
duty of the officers of the Police Department of such officers as are assigned
by the Chief of Police to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all
of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. Officers of
the Police Department, or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police,
are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in
conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in the event of a fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the
Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding
the provisions of the traffic laws. Officers of the Fire Department, when at
the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic
thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
   (B)   Obedience to Police and Fire Department officials. It shall be
unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of a police officer or Fire Department official.
   (C)   Persons propelling push carts or riding animals. Every person
propelling any push cart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person
driving an animal drawn vehicle shall be subject to provisions of this chapter
applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this
chapter which, by their very nature, can have no application.
   (D)   Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted. It
shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means
of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device to go upon any roadway, except
while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person shall
be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while
set aside as a play street as authorized by law of the city.
   (E)   Public employees to obey traffic regulations. The provisions of this
chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the
service of the United States Government, the state, county or city and it shall
be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute.
   (F)   Exceptions to authorized emergency vehicles.
      (1)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking
and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as
defined in this chapter, except as follows:
         (a)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
         (b)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he or she does
not endanger life or property; and
         (c)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions so long as he or she does not endanger life or
property.
      (2)   Those exceptions hereinbefore granted in reference to movement of
an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of said
vehicle sounds a siren, bell or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary,
and the vehicle displays a lighted red lamp visible from the front as a warning
to others.
      (3)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of
any such vehicle from the consequence of his or her reckless disregard of the
safety of others.
   (G)   Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles.
      (1)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle may be giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall
immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possibly to the
right edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and
remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed,
except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
      (3)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the highway.
   (H)   Duty to stop in event of accident.
      (1)   Whenever an automobile, motor truck, motorcycle or any motor
vehicle strikes any person or collides with any vehicle containing a person,
the driver of such automobile, motor truck, motorcycle or other motor vehicle,
or any person who has or assumes authority over such a driver, shall
immediately cause such automobiles, motor truck, motorcycle or other motor
vehicle to stop, and shall render to the persons struck or to the occupants of
the vehicle collided with, all necessary assistance, including the carrying of
such person or occupant to a physician or surgeon for medical or surgical
treatment, if such treatment be required, or if such carrying is requested by
the person struck or the occupant of the vehicle struck, and such driver, and
the person having or assuming authority over such driver shall further give to
the occupant of such vehicle or person struck, the license plate number of such
automobile, motor truck, motorcycle or other motor vehicle or person struck,
the license plate number of such automobile, motor truck, motorcycle or other
motor vehicle, also the name of the owner thereof and the name of the passenger
or passengers, not exceeding five, in such automobile, motor truck, motorcycle
or other vehicle at the time of such striking or collision.
      (2)   Every person convicted under this section, upon a charge of failure
to stop after an accident resulting in injury or death of any person, shall be
punished by imprisonment in the municipal jail for not less than 30 days, nor
more than 90 days, or by a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $300, or
by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (I)   Report of accidents. The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident
within the city resulting in injury to or death of any person, or in property
damage in excess of $250, shall immediately by the quickest means of
communications give notice of such accident to the Police Department.
   (J)   Garage keeper to report damaged vehicles. The person in charge of any
garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows
evidence of having been involved in a serious accident, or struck by any
bullet, shall report to the police headquarters of the city within one hour
after such motor vehicle has been received, giving the motor number,
manufacturer’s number, name and model, license plate number and the name and
address of the owner or operator of such vehicle if such is known.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-302)
§ 9-1-3 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   Authority to install traffic- and parking-control devices. The Chief
of Police, with approval of the Council of said city, shall place and maintain
traffic- and parking-control signs, signals and devices when and as required
under the traffic laws of the city to make effective the provisions of said
laws, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as or
under state laws or to guide or warn traffic.
   (B)   Standards and specifications for traffic- and parking-control devices.
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices, insofar as possible, shall
conform to the standards set forth by the National Association of Traffic
Engineers. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose
shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the
city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the
provisions of state law of this chapter shall be official traffic-control
devices.
   (C)   Obedience to official traffic-control devices. The driver of any
vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device
applicable there to placed in accordance with the traffic laws of the city,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions
granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter.
   (D)   Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or display
upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, a signal, marking or
device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal or which attempts to direct
the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness, or any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway, any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon
private property, adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
      (2)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is
hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
   (E)   Interferes with official traffic- and parking-control devices or
railroad signs or signals. It shall be unlawful for any person without lawful
authority to attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove
any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or any
inscription, shield or insignia thereon or any part thereof; not shall any such
person deposit, or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slugs, device
or metal substance or other substitute for lawful coins.
   (F)   Chief of Police to designate and mark traffic lanes and parking
spaces. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized with the approval of the
Council of said city:
      (1)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines,
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his or
her opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and
at such other places as he or she may deem necessary;
      (2)   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he
may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the city; and
      (3)   To mark off individual parking spaces in parking zones and in such
other zones as may hereafter be established, said parking spaces to be
designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface of the
street; at each space so marked off it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in
such a way that said vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the
space so designated.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-303)
§ 9-1-4 TURNING MOVEMENTS.
   (A)   Required position and method of turning at intersection. The driver of
a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as follows:
      (1)   Both the approach for right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway;
      (2)   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right
half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and, after entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to
the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered;
      (3)   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way
street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest
the centerline where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way
street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the
centerline of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection; and
      (4)   Where both streets or roadways are one-way, both the approach for a
left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the left
curb or edge of the roadway.
   (B)   Signals on slowing down, stopping or turning.
      (1)   The driver of any vehicle upon a highway before slowing down,
stopping or turning from a direct line shall first see that such movement can
be made in safety and, if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement,
shall give clearly audible signal by sounding the horn, and whenever the
operation of any other vehicle may be affected by such movement, shall give a
signal, required in this section, plainly visible to the driver of such vehicle
of the intention to make such movement.
      (2)   The signal herein required shall be given by means of the hand and
arm in the manner herein specified, or by an approved mechanical or electrical
signal device; except that, when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to
prevent the hand and arm signal from being visible both to the front and rear,
the signal shall be a device or a type which has been approved by the Chief of
Police.
      (3)   Whenever the signal is given by means of the hand and arm, the
driver shall indicate his or her intention to slow down or stop by extending
hand and arm downward, to turn left by extending the hand and arm horizontally,
and to turn right by extending the hand and arm upward beyond the left side of
the vehicle.
   (C)   Authority to place and obedience to turning markers.
      (1)   The Chief of Police is authorized to place markers buttons, or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled
by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so
indicated may conform to be other than as prescribed by law.
      (2)   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications.
   (D)   Authority to place restricted turn signs. The Chief of Police is
hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles
shall not make a right, left or U turn, and shall place proper sign at such
intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours
of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be
plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are
permitted.
   (E)   Obedience to no-turn signs. Whenever authorized signs are erected
indicating that no right, left or U turn is permitted, no drive of a vehicle
shall disobey the directions of any such sign.
   (F)   Limitations on turning around. The driver of any vehicle shall not
turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in
a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle
unless such a movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other
traffic. No U turn shall be permitted on any street unless made at an
intersection of two streets or street end.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-304)
§ 9-1-5 SPECIAL STOPS AND YIELD RIGHT-OF WAY.
   (A)   General. The Council shall designate through or preferential streets
and the Chief of Police is authorized to erect stop signs or yield signs at
specified entrances there-to or may designate any intersection as a stop
intersection or as a yield right-of-way intersection and erect stop signs or
yield signs at one or more entrances to such intersection.
   (B)   Vehicle approaching yield sign. The driver of a vehicle approaching a
yield right-of-way sign shall slow to a speed of not more than 15 mph and yield
the right of way to all vehicles approaching from the right or left on the
intersecting roadways or streets, which are so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard. If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or
interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield sign,
such collision of interfering shall be deemed evidence of driver’s failure to
yield the right-of-way.
   (C)   Signs to bear the word “stop”. Every sign erected pursuant to this
chapter shall bear the word “STOP” in letters not less than six inches in
height and such sign shall, at nighttime, be rendered luminous by steady or
flashing internal illumination, or by a fixed floodlight projected on the face
of the sign, or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every
stop sign shall be located as near as practicable at the nearest line of
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, at the nearest
line of the roadway.
   (D)   Vehicles to stop at stop signs. When signs are erected as herein
provided at or near the entrance to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle
shall stop such vehicle at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line before
entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer
or traffic-control signal.
   (E)   Emerging from alley or private driveway. The driver of a vehicle
emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across any alleyway, yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian as
may be necessary to avoid collision and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching.
   (F)   Stop when traffic obstructed. It shall be unlawful for any driver to
enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on
the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he
or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or
pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
   (G)   Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad train. Whenever
any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of
the circumstances stated in this section, but the driver of such vehicle shall
stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet, from the nearest rail or such
railroad, and shall not proceed until he or she can do so safely. The foregoing
requirements shall apply when:
      (1)   Clearly visible electric or mechanical signal devices give warning
of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
      (2)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagger gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train;
      (3)   A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the
highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad
train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate
hazard;
      (4)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing;
      (5)   Any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing is closed
or is being opened or closed; and
      (6)   Any motor bus is carrying passengers for hire; any school bus is
carrying any school child; any motor truck is carrying substances or explosive
liquids of any specific gravity as cargo or part of cargo, of any vehicle of
the tractor or caterpillar type, other than a truck tractor, is being driven.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-305)
§ 9-1-6 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES.
   (A)   Following fire apparatus prohibited. The driver of any vehicle other
than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in
response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such
vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire
alarm.
   (B)   Crossing fire hose. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven
over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department when laid down on any street
or private driveway, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the
consent of the Fire Department official in command.
   (C)   Driving through funeral or other procession. It shall be unlawful for
any person of a vehicle to drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or
other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are
conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals
or police officers.
   (D)   Driver in procession. Each driver in a funeral or other procession
shall drive as near to the right edge of the roadway as practicable and shall
follow the vehicle ahead as close as practicable and safe.
   (E)   Funeral processions to be identified. A funeral composed of a
procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the lighting of the
headlights of all vehicles in said procession or by such other method as may be
determined and designated by the Traffic Division.
   (F)   When permits required for parades and processions. It shall be
unlawful for any funeral procession or parade containing 200 or more persons or
50 or more vehicles, excepting the forces of the United States Army or Navy,
the military forces of the state, and the forces of the Police and Fire
Departments, to occupy, march or proceed along any street, except in accordance
with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other regulations as are
set forth herein which may apply.
   (G)   Vehicles shall not be driven on a sidewalk. The driver of a vehicle
shall not drive within any sidewalk area, except at a permanent driveway, or
upon a temporary driveway when a permit therefor has been secured from the
Chief of Police.
   (H)   Limitations on backing. A vehicle shall not back up or down a public
highway, except insofar as it is necessary in getting away from the curb where
it has been standing or parked.
   (I)   Riding on motorcycles. A person operating a motorcycle shall not ride
other than upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or carry any
other person, nor shall any person ride upon such motorcycle other than upon a
firmly attached seat to the rear or side of the operator.
   (J)   Clinging to moving vehicles. Any person riding upon any bicycle,
motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or toy vehicles shall not attach the
same or himself or herself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway, nor shall
the driver of such moving vehicle permit any person so to attach himself or
herself to said vehicle.
   (K)   Restricted access. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway, except at such entrances and
exits as are established by public authority.
   (L)   Boarding or alighting from vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any
person to board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion.
   (M)   Unlawful riding. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any
vehicle or portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers.
This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary
discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended
for merchandise.
   (N)   Railroad trains not to block streets. It shall be unlawful for the
directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation
of or to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street
for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes; except
that, this provision shall not apply to trains in motion other than those
engaged in switching.
   (O)   Motor vehicles left unattended brakes to be set and engine stopped. It
shall be unlawful for any person having control charge of a motor vehicle to
allow such vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the
brakes thereon and stopping the motor of said vehicle; and when standing upon a
perceptible grade without turning the wheel of such vehicle to the curb or the
side of the street or highway.
   (P)   Obstruction to driver’s view or driving mechanism. It shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive the same when such vehicle is
so loaded or when there are in the front seat of such vehicle such number of
persons as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides or to
interfere with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any passenger in a vehicle to ride in such position as
to interfere with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the
vehicle.
   (Q)   Driving by certain persons unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any
person, unless such person has been issued and is in possession of a driving
authorization permit from the Montana Highway Patrol, to drive any motor
vehicle on the streets of the city.
   (R)   Minors driving. No person shall knowingly authorize a minor to drive a
motor vehicle without a valid driver’s license within the city.
   (S)   Hauling. No person shall drag or haul any timber or any article along
or over any public highway in such a manner that a portion of the same shall
rest upon or come in contact with that surface of such public highway; nor
shall any person on any planked, paved or macadamized public highway, lock the
wheel or any vehicle by the method commonly known as “rough lock”; nor by any
method whereby anything other than the tire of such wheel or a smooth shoe
shall come in contact with the surface of the public highway.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-306)
§ 9-1-7 METHOD OF PARKING.
   (A)   Signs or marking indicating angle parking. The Chief of Police, with
the approval of the Council, shall determine upon what street angle parking
shall be permitted. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand a
vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by
such signs or markings.
   (B)   On-street parking. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to make a left
turn to park on the opposite side of the street.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided: first offense, $50; second
offense, $75; third and subsequent offenses, $100.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-307) (Ord. 2016-02, passed 8-15-2016)
§ 9-1-8 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING.
   (A)   No signs required. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand
or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic
or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-
control device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection:
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection (and zone);
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (8)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or a railroad crossing;
      (9)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station;
      (10)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (11)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
      (12)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel; and/or
      (13)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, it shall be
unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
   (B)   Parking in alleys. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle within any alley located in a commercial zoning district, except a
commercial vehicle while such vehicle is actually being loaded or unloaded, and
such commercial vehicle shall be parked in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available at least ten feet of the width of the roadway
for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. No passenger vehicle
shall park in said alleys at any time.
   (C)   Parking for certain purposes prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
      (1)   Displaying such vehicle for sale;
      (2)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairing
necessitated by an emergency; and
      (3)   Displaying advertising.
   (D)   Parking adjacent to schools.
      (1)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating
no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when
such parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a
hazardous situation.
      (2)   When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that
side of a street adjacent to any school property, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle in any such designated place.
   (E)   No stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places.
      (1)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to determine and designate
by proper signs places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition
or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
      (2)   When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a
vehicle in any designated place.
   (F)   No parking on Main Street SW between 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. hours.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to park on Main Street SW
between 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Signs must be posted setting such restricted
hours.
      (2)   Any person who shall violate any provision of division (F)(1) above
shall be punishable as provided: 365-day escalation: first offense, written
warning; second offense, $20, third offense, $40, fourth offense, $60.
      (3)   The city will perform functions of street cleaning and snow
removal, when conditions dictate, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
on Main Street SW. In order to provide for efficient street cleaning and snow
removal on Main Street SW, the City Council authorizes the Public Works
Department to tow vehicles parked on the right-of-way between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m., without providing a written warning, and at the expense of
the registered owner.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-308) (Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-12-2016)
§ 9-1-9 STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY.
   (A)   Chief of Police to designate curb loading zones. The Chief of Police,
with the approval of the Council, is hereby authorized to determine the
location of passenger and freight curb loading zones in the commercial zoning
district of the city.
   (B)   Standing passenger curb loading zone.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a
vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious
unloading and delivery or pick-up and loading of materials in any place marked
as a freight curb loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable
to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and
unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
      (2)   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of material which
is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
   (C)   Parking in alleys. Vehicles, other than commercial, shall not park in
any alley. Commercial vehicles shall not park in alleys longer than is required
to load or unload when so parked. Such vehicles shall stand as close as
possible to one side of the alley and in any case shall so stand as to permit
other vehicles to pass. Vehicles in alleys shall comply with the directions and
orders of police officers.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-309)
§ 9-1-10 FORMS AND NOTICE OF ARREST AND APPEARANCE.
   (A)   Forms and notices of arrest and appearance. The Clerk shall provide,
in quadruplet, suitable serially numbered forms for notifying violators to
appear and answer to charges of violating traffic laws. Such forms shall be
issued to and receipted for by the Chief of Police or other person acting for
him or her. The Clerk shall each month report to the Mayor and Council of the
disposal made by the police of all quadruplet forms issued to them. For this
purpose, the Clerk or his or her representative shall have access to the
necessary records of the Police Department and the Police Court of the city.
These reports shall be public records.
   (B)   Procedure upon arrest. Except when authorized or directed under state
law to immediately take a person arrested for a violation of any of the traffic
laws before a magistrate, any police officer, upon making an arrest for
violation of the state traffic laws or traffic laws of the city shall take the
name, address and operator’s license number of the alleged violator and the
license plate number of the motor vehicle involved and shall issue to him or
her in writing on a form provided by the city a notice to answer to the charge
against him or her as a place and at a time at least 48 hours after such arrest
to be specified in the notice.
   (C)   Failure to obey notice of summons. Any person who fail to appear for
any traffic violation is guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition
of the charge of which he or she was originally arrested.
   (D)   Notice on illegally parked vehicle. Whenever any motor vehicle without
drive is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions
imposed by laws of the city or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle
shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed
on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to
such vehicle a notice in writing, on a form provided by the Clerk, for the
driver to answer to the charge against him or her within 48 hours, during the
hours and at a place specified in the notice. The officer shall send one copy
to the Police Court.
   (E)   Failure to comply with notice attached to parked vehicle. If a
violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under the traffic
laws does not appear in response to a notice affixed to such motor vehicle
within a period of 48 hours, the Clerk shall send to the owner of the motor
vehicle to which the notice was affixed a letter informing him or her of the
violation and warning him or her that in the event such letter is disregarded
for a period of five days, a complaint will be filed and a warrant of arrest
issued.
   (F)   Presumption in reference to illegal parking.
      (1)   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or
regulation together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at
the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute
in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle
was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where and for the
time during which violation occurred.
      (2)   The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the
procedure, as described in the division (G) below has been followed.
   (G)   Disposition of traffic fine and forfeitures. All fines or forfeitures
collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged
with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid to the
Clerk and deposited in the General Fund, to be expended to defray the expense
of proper regulation of traffic and parking upon the public streets of the city
to provide for the cost of supervision, regulation and control of parking
vehicles and expense of the Police Department.
   (H)   Official misconduct. Failure, refusal or neglect on the part of any
judicial or other officer or employee, receiving or having custody of any such
fine or forfeiture, either before or after a deposit in said fund, to comply
with the foregoing provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in
office and shall be grounds for removal therefrom.
   (I)   Authority to impound vehicles.
      (1)   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove a
vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of
safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the city under the
circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
         (a)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct,
causeway or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction
to traffic;
         (b)   When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are,
by reason of physical or mental injury, incapacitated to such an extent as to
be unable to provide for its custody and removal;
         (c)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so
parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic during extraordinary occasions; and
         (d)   When any vehicle determined to be “junk car” is parked upon a
street and apparently abandoned, or is abandoned in a vacant lot without
consent of the owner of such lot.
      (2)   Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized
in this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the
registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof,
such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to
such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor, and of the
place to which such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice
shall be given to the proprietor of such garage.
      (3)   Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this
section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner or
for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as hereinbefore
provided and, in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a
period of three days, then and in that event the officer shall immediately send
or cause to be sent written report of such removal by mail to the Montana
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, and shall file a copy of such notice with the
proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice
shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place
from which removed, the reasons for such removal and the name of the garage or
place where the vehicle is stored.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-310)
§ 9-1-11 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this code shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $1, nor more than $500.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-311; Ord. 2020-03, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 9-1-12 OPERATION AND USE OF SNOWMOBILES.
   The use or operation of snowmobiles at any time on the public section of
right-of-way of the city is hereby prohibited; provided, however, that, the
above designated streets and/or highway may be crossed at a 90-degree angle at
all streets and alleyway intersections.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-312)
§ 9-1-13 ON-STREET PARKING.
   No resident or person shall allow commercial or large recreational vehicles
to be stored or parked upon the public ways located within residentially zoned
areas for a period exceeding 24 hours.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-313)
§ 9-1-14 ADOPTION OF TRAFFIC CODE BY REFERENCE.
   The city hereby adopts all provisions of Montana state law as found in MCA
Title 61, regarding the regulation of traffic, drivers of vehicles, licensing
of vehicles and hereby grants authority and jurisdiction to the police and City
Court over all such laws and offenses not in conflict herewith.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-314)
§ 9-1-15 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Applications of act; speed limits. All traffic within the city will be
governed and regulated by the provisions of said Uniform Act Regulating Traffic
on Highways, as set forth in the statutes of Montana; provided that, a speed
limit within the city limits shall be 25 mph in the business district or
residential districts, except in zones clearly marked for speed limits.
   (B)   Obedience to speed limits.
      (1)   The driver of any vehicle shall operate a vehicle in a careful and
prudent manner and at a reduced rate of speed no greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions existing at the point of operation, taking into
account the amount and character of traffic, visibility, weather and roadway
conditions.
      (2)   Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for
compliance with division (A) above, the limits specified in this section are
the maximum lawful speeds allowed.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in § 9-1-11 of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-315) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 4-22-2015)
§ 9-1-16 EXHIBITION DRIVING.
   (A)   Application of act; exhibition driving. All traffic within the city
will be governed and regulated by provisions of said Uniform Act Regulating
Traffic on Highways as so set forth in the statutes of Montana; provided that,
exhibition driving within the city limits is unlawful.
   (B)   Exhibition driving unlawful. No person may engage in exhibition
driving of any vehicle on a highway, street, alley, sidewalk or any public or
private parking lot or area, nor may any person engage in any exhibition of
speed or acceleration.
   (C)   Driving exempted. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting drag racing, exhibition driving or similar events when carried out
in an organized manner on a track or other specified area as approved by the
Chief of Police.
   (D)   Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in § 9-1-11 of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-316) (Ord. 2015-02, passed - -2015)
§ 9-1-17 PARKING ALONG ESTABLISHED PARADE ROUTE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be parked along the parade route on Main Street SW as
designated and approved as the parade route 30 minutes prior to an established
community parade.
   (B)   The city’s Police Department shall be responsible for posting
temporary “No Parking - Parade Route” signs two hours prior to the start of the
parade, and post appropriate notices on vehicles parked along the parade route.
   (C)   Vehicles parked on Main Street SW, designated as the parade route, 30
minutes preceding the start of the parade, are subject to tow by the city at
the expense of the owner.
(1992 Code, § 8-1-317) (Ord. 2016-01, passed 8-1-2016)
§ 9-1-18 PARKING AND OPEN STORAGE IN CITY LIMITS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this parking and open storage ordinance is to
provide regulation for the parking and storage of recreational vehicles, camper
enclosures, trailers, snowmobiles, boats and other watercraft in the city.
These regulations are intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare
by reducing traffic hazards; maintain unobstructed access to public sidewalks,
thoroughfares and rights-of-way, maintain sanitation standards; and by
preserving the character of the neighborhood of the community.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BUS. A motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and
used for the transportation of persons, and any other motor vehicle, other than
a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
      CAMPER. A structure designed to be mounted in the cargo area of a truck
or attached to an incomplete vehicle for the purpose of providing shelter for
persons. The term includes but is not limited to a cab-over, half cab-over,
non-cab-over, telescopic, and telescopic cab-over.
      ENCLOSED STRUCTURE. A building that protects the contents from the
elements, including sight obscuring walls on all sides and a roof.
      INOPERABLE. With respect to any vehicle, the inability of all significant
mechanical and electrical systems on such vehicle to operate properly and
dependably, or the absence of any significant parts. With respect to wheeled
and/or motorized vehicles, and where applicable, inoperable means the inability
of any of the following systems to operate properly and dependably, or the
absence of such parts: tires, wheels, brakes, engine, ignition, transmission,
suspension, steering, windows, windshield, horn, muffler, rearview mirror,
windshield wiper, service brakes, parking brakes, headlights, brake lights,
turn signals.
      JUNK. Includes the open storage of old appliances, equipment, or parts
thereof, old iron or other scrap metal, automobile or truck tires, cardboard,
old lumber or scrap wood, rags, rope, paper, debris, rubble, batteries, rubber
debris, mattresses or any worn out, cast off or discarded article or material
which is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored as salvage, for
conversion to some other use or for reduction into components and is not part
of a commercial or public salvaging or recycling operation.
      JUNK VEHICLE. Any discarded, ruined, wrecked, or dismantled motor vehicle
including components parts, that is not lawfully and validly licensed and
remains inoperative incapable of being driven (MCA 75-10-501(4)).
      MOBILE HOME. Forms of housing known as "trailers", "house trailers", or
"trailer coaches" exceeding eight feet in width or 45 feet in length, designed
to be moved from one place to another by an independent power connected to the
mobile home or any trailer, house trailer, or trailer coach up to eight feet in
width or 45 feet in length used as a principal residence.
      MOTORBOAT. A vessel, including a personal watercraft or pontoon,
propelled by any machinery, motor, or engine of any description, whether or not
the machinery, motor, or engine is the principal source of propulsion. The term
includes boats temporarily equipped with detachable motors or engines.
      MOTORCYCLE. A motor vehicle that has a seat or saddle for the use of the
operator and that is designated to travel on not more than three wheels in
contact with the ground. A motorcycle may carry one or more attachments and a
seat for the conveyance of a passenger.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle propelled by its own power and designed or used
to transport persons or property on the highways of the state; typically, any
automobile, car, truck or motorcycle.
      OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for recreation or
cross-country travel on public lands, trails, easements, lakes, rivers, or
streams. The term includes but is not limited to motorcycles, quadricycles,
dune buggies, amphibious vehicles, air cushion vehicles, and any other means of
land transportation deriving motive power from any source other than muscle or
wind.
      OPEN STORAGE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. The storage for a period of 30
consecutive days or more of junk, salvage, trash, inoperable vehicles and/or
merchandise outside of an enclosed structure.
      OPERABLE MOTORIZED VEHICLE. Any car, truck, van, recreational vehicle,
motorcycle, snowmobile or other vehicle typically powered by an engine that is
registered under state law with the department of justice, motor vehicle
division, with the appropriate license tags and/or stickers attached to such
vehicle showing a current registration.
      PERSONAL WATERCRAFT. A vessel that uses an outboard motor or an inboard
engine powering a water jet pump as its primary source of propulsion and that
is designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing, or kneeling on the
vessel rather than by the conventional method of sitting or standing in the
vessel.
      SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle of an overall width of 48 inches or
less, excluding accessories that is designed primarily for travel on snow or
ice, that may be steered by skis or runners, and that is not otherwise
registered or licensed under the laws of the state.
      TRAILER. A vehicle without power designed to be drawn by another vehicle
and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole or by being
boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle and ordinarily used for
transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or
structural members capable generally of sustaining themselves as beams between
the supporting connections; including those designed for carrying property and
for being drawn by a motor vehicle and constructed so that no part of its
weight rests on the towing vehicle.
      TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle, that is 40 feet or less in length, that is of
a size or weight that does not require special permits when towed by a motor
vehicle; with gross trailer area of less than 320 square feet; and that is
designed to provide temporary facilities for recreational, travel, or camping
use and not used as a principal residence.
   (C)   Residential. The following standards for parking and open storage of
any of the recreational vehicles listed in division (B) of this section, shall
apply in all residential districts and on property that is developed for
residential use.
      (1)   Parking and open storage of validly licensed and operable
recreational vehicles on private property, except the front yard, is permitted;
      (2)   Parking and open storage of inoperable recreational vehicles for
more than five consecutive days is a prohibited;
      (3)   Parking and open storage of any recreational vehicle on a city
street or city easement or a front yard for more than five days is prohibited;
      (4)   Parking and open storage of licensed and operable recreational
vehicles is allowable in any side or rear yard;
      (5)   Parking and open storage of licensed and operable recreational
vehicles in any yard shall provide at least a five-foot separation between such
recreational vehicle and any door, window or other opening of a dwelling or
accessory building that provides ventilation or access to the structure.
      (6)   The use of a recreational vehicle for a guest visiting a resident
of Ronan is limited to no more than fourteen five (14) consecutive days. The
permanent living or sleeping in a recreational vehicle is prohibited in the
City of Ronan.
      (7)   Parking and open storage of one licensed and operable motor vehicle
used for commercial or business purposes is an allowable provided it does not
exceed 12,000 pounds in G.V.W. (gross vehicle weight).
      (8)   Right to be heard. With respect to parking and open storage on
private property in a residential district, the owner, or occupant shall have
the right to be heard before the City Council as specified in the Community
Upkeep and Beautification Ordinance 7-1-700.
   (D)   Business and commercial. The following standards for parking and open
storage shall apply in all business and commercial zoning districts.
      (1)   Open storage for more than five consecutive days of junk, salvage
and trash is prohibited.
      (2)   Open storage for more than five consecutive days of material
collected as salvage for recycling, re-use, dismantling to remove parts for re-
use or for separation prior to recycling or destruction is prohibited.
      (3)   Parking and open storage of inoperable or junk motor vehicles for
more than five consecutive days is prohibited.
      (4)   Parking and open storage of inoperable or junk motor vehicles for
more than five consecutive days is an allowable for the principal uses
classified as automotive repair shops. The parking and open storage area shall
be located in the rear or side yard, and inoperable motor vehicles or vehicle
parts shall not be visible from any right of way or adjoining property.
Shielding of at least six feet in height from grade shall be required to
enclose the parking and open storage for inoperable motor vehicles. Chain link
fence may be allowed as a sight obscuring fence if opaque slat inserts are
used.
      (5)   The use of any recreational vehicle for permanent living or
sleeping purposes is prohibited in the City of Ronan.
      (6)   Any property where open storage of equipment and supplies is an
allowable, the open storage area shall be located in the rear or side yard.
Shielding of at least six feet in height from finished grade shall be required
to enclose the storage area. Chain link fence may be allowed as a sight
obscuring fence if opaque slat inserts are used.
   (E)   Enforcement and penalties.
      (1)   Municipal infraction. A violation of this chapter shall constitute
a civil violation of this code as prescribed by MCA 7-1-4150. This civil
offense is punishable by a civil penalty of not more than $300 for each
violation or if the infraction is a repeat offense, a civil penalty not to
exceed $500 for each repeat violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense and be punishable as such.
         (a)   First offense: $100;
         (b)   Second offense: $200;
         (c)   Third offense: $300;
         (d)   Fourth offense $400; and
         (e)   Fifth offense and subsequent offense: $500.
      (2)   Involuntary abatement. If the owner does not consent to said
removal, then the Police Department shall pursue legal remedies through the
City Court to abate the nuisances as specified in the Community Upkeep and
Beautification Ordinance 7-1-700.
      (3)   Enforcement. Proceedings for the enforcement of a municipal
infraction citation issued under this chapter shall be brought pursuant to the
provisions of MCA 7-1-4151. It is the intent of this section that fines
received ultimately be distributed to the city for costs of the enforcement of
this chapter. Any recovery of costs of abatement shall be distributed to the
fund paying the cost of the abatement.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 9-18-2017)
§ 9-1-19 GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT.
   (A)   Vehicles in excess of ten tons’ gross vehicle weight shall be
prohibited from operation upon Third Avenue Northwest along that portion of its
length lying and being between Round Butte Road and Highway 93, except for
local deliveries within the above described area.
   (B)   Signage to this effect shall be erected at both ends and at
intersections of Third Avenue Northwest by the city Public Works Department.
   (C)   Violation of this section shall constitute a civil misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-28-2011; Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-26-2022)
TITLE 10: ZONING
   Chapter
      
1.    ZONING
CHAPTER 1: ZONING
Section
   
10-1-1   Definitions
   
10-1-2   Purpose and interpretation
   
10-1-3   Districts
   
10-1-4   “A” Residential District
   
10-1-5   “B” Residential District
   
10-1-6   “C” Residential
   
10-1-7   Mixed Commercial/Residential District
   
10-1-8   Mixed Commercial/Industrial District
   
10-1-9   Highway Commercial District
   
10-1-10   Public/Recreation District
   
10-1-11   Non-conforming uses
   
10-1-12   Exceptions to height regulations
   
10-1-13   Exceptions to area regulations
   
10-1-14   District boundaries
   
10-1-15   Enforcement
§ 10-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular
number include the plural; words in the plural include the singular; the word
“building” includes the word “structure” and the word “person” includes a
corporation or other organization; the term “used” includes the term “arranged”
or “intended to be used” or “designed”; and the word “shall” is mandatory and
not directory. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDINGS. A use or building that is customarily incidental
to and accessory to the principal and ordinary use of a building or premises,
located on the same premises with such principal use or building. ACCESSORY
BUILDINGS are not inhabitable structures.
   ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS. A sexually-oriented arcade, bookstore, video store,
cabaret, motel, motion picture theater, escort agency or similar business.
   APARTMENT. See MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building, other than a hotel or club, where meals are
regularly served for compensation or more than six persons not members of the
family there residing.
   COMMUNITY GARAGE. A series of private garages of capacity of not more than
one automobile each, located jointly on a common lot, and having no public shop
or service in connection therewith.
   CONDOMINIUM. A form of individual ownership with unrestricted right of
disposal of one or more units in a multiple unit project, with the land and
other parts of the project held in common ownership or use with the owners of
the other units, pursuant to MCA Title 70, Ch. 23.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building designed for, or occupied
exclusively, by one family and is distinct from a mobile, manufactured or
modular home.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached or semidetached (via roof, wall or other
means) building designed for, or occupied exclusively, by two families living
independently of each other.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building, or portion thereof, designed for, or
occupied as a temporary or permanent home of three or more families living
independently of each other, including apartment houses, condominiums and
townhouses.
   DISTRICT. A section of the city for which the regulations governing the
area, height and use of buildings and premises are the same.
   FAMILY. One or more persons, living, sleeping and usually cooking and eating
on the premises, as a single housekeeping unit. A FAMILY may or may not be
related by blood, marriage or adoption.
   FILLING STATION. A building and appurtenances located on a lot where
gasoline or other liquids used in the operation of motor vehicles is retailed
and usually delivered directly into such vehicles.
   FRONT YARD. An open space extending across the front of the lot (where the
property is addressed) measured from the property line to the closest extension
of the structure and occupied only by uncovered steps.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING. The vertical distance from the ground in front of the
building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of
a mansard roof, to the junction of the wall and the eaves of a building with a
gable or a hip roof.
   HOTEL. A building in which lodging is provided, with or without meals, and
open to transient guests.
   LOT. A parcel, plot, tract or other land area created by platting,
subdivision for sale, rent or lease or other duly recognized means in
compliance with state and local requirements.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot having at least two sides that abut for their full length
upon streets. Such lots have one front yard abutting a street and one side yard
abutting a street, in accordance with the development setback distance pattern
that exists on developed lots for two blocks along the street frontages.
   LOT COVERAGE. The area of a lot with pavement, concrete, roof and other
surfaces that does not allow water to infiltrate the ground.
   MOBILE HOME. A detached residential dwelling unit, which may consist of two
or more sections, fabricated at a factory and designed to be towed on its own
chassis to a building site for occupation as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation. The term includes, but is not limited to, TRAILER HOMES,
HOUSE TRAILERS and MANUFACTURED HOMES, whether or not the unit has been
constructed after 7-1-1976, in conformance with Federal Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards and does not include “park models”.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any park or court, site, block, parcel or contiguous
tracts of land, designed, maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying
the permanent location or accommodation for mobile homes, and upon which mobile
homes are parked and shall include all buildings used or intended for use as
part of the purpose thereof whether a charge is made for that use of the mobile
home park and its facilities or not.
   MODULAR HOME. A single-family dwelling, built off-site at a factory on or
after 1-1-1990, that is placed on a permanent foundation without a chassis used
as a means of support, is at least 1,000 square feet in size, has a pitched
roof and siding and roofing materials that are customarily used on site-built
homes, and is in compliance with the applicable prevailing standards of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. A building or premises that does not conform with the
regulations of the district in which it is situated and/or other standards
contained in this code.
   PRIVATE GARAGE. A garage with capacity of not more than four motor-driven
vehicles and having no public shop or service in connection therewith.
   PUBLIC GARAGE. Any premises used for housing or care of more than four
motor-driven vehicles, or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation,
repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale, including show rooms or
exhibition for modern cars.
   REAR YARD. An open, unoccupied space measured from the farthest extension of
a building to the rear lot line, for the full width of the lot, and unoccupied,
except by accessory buildings.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A vehicular type unit primarily designed as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use that either
has its own motor power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle and has a
gross trailer area not exceeding 400 square feet in the set-up mode.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK OR COURT (RV PARK OR RV COURT). A tract of land
available to and principally used by the public for camping, where persons can
park recreational vehicles for camping and sleeping purposes.
   RETAIL. Establishments selling goods directly to the consumer.
   SIDE YARD. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building,
measured from the closest extent of a building to the side line of the lot, and
extending through from the front yard to the rear yard.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION. A land use that would not be appropriate generally or
without restrictions throughout the zoning district, but which, if controlled
as to number, area, location, design, buffering, relation to the neighborhood
and/or other factors, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals,
order, comfort, convenience, appearance prosperity or general welfare.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders; except such
alterations as may be required for the safety of the building.
   TOWNHOUSE. An arrangement under which units share a common wall and
individuals own their own units and hold separate title to the land beneath the
unit.
   VEHICLE TRIP. A movement by one or more person in a motor vehicle that
begins or ends at a particular location.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. Commercial radio and television antenna,
unlicensed wireless service antenna/tower, common carrier wireless exchange
structure(s)/antennas/ tower(s). Commonly referred to as CELLULAR
COMMUNICATIONS.
   YARD. The open space not occupied by one or more permanent structures
located between a building and property line. It is the landowner’s
responsibility to identify property lines for yard measurement purposes.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-101)
§ 10-1-2 PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   This chapter has been made for the purpose of promoting the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of Ronan. It has been made
in accordance with the Ronan Growth Policy and is designed to: lessen
congestion in the streets; secure from fire, panic and other dangers; promote
health and general welfare; provide adequate light and air; prevent the
overcrowding of land; avoid undue concentration of population; and facilitate
the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and
other public improvements. Furthermore, these regulations have been made with
reasonable consideration to the character of the districts and their peculiar
suitability for particular uses and with a view to conserving the value of
buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
   (B)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, welfare and protection of the public. Where
conflicts with adopted building codes or other ordinances exist, the more
stringent shall prevail.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-102)
§ 10-1-3 DISTRICTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of regulating, classifying and restricting the
location and impacts of trades, industries and enterprises, and the location of
the buildings designed, erected or altered for specified uses, and limiting the
height and size of such buildings, and the use of lot areas and regulating the
density of population in the city, and regulating and determining the areas of
the yards and other open spaces surrounding buildings hereafter erected, and
preventing additions to and alterations or remodeling of, existing buildings or
structures in such a manner as to avoid the restrictions and limitations in
this chapter contained, the city is hereby divided into seven districts termed
respectively as follows:
      (1)   “A” Residential;
      (2)   “B” Residential;
      (3)   “C” Residential;
      (4)   Mixed Commercial and Residential;
      (5)   Mixed Commercial and Industrial;
      (6)   Highway Commercial; and
      (7)   Public Recreation.
   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, no building shall be erected or
structurally altered to exceed in height the limit herein established for the
district in which such building is located. No lot shall be so reduced or
diminished, that the yard or other open spaces, shall be smaller than
prescribed by this chapter, nor shall the lot area per family be reduced,
except in conformity with the regulations hereby established for the district
in which such building is located. No building shall be erected or structurally
altered, nor shall any building or premises be used for any purpose other than
that permitted in the district in which such building or premises are located.
   (C)   On any property within the city limits, all inhabited buildings must
be property connected to the sewer system unless otherwise authorized by City
Council. For the purposes of these regulations, each residential unit shall be
served by a separate, metered water and sewer hook-up.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-103)
§ 10-1-4 “A” RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   This is intended for larger lot single-family and two-family dwellings with
the potential for parks and home occupations that generate very little vehicle
traffic.
   (A)   Height. No building shall exceed 40 feet or three stories.
   (B)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than 30 feet; provided, however, that, where 40% or more of the developed lots
within 150 feet on both sides of the subject property having an average front
yard variation of not more than six feet, no building hereafter erected or
altered shall project beyond the average front yard line so established;
provided further that, this regulation shall not require a front yard of more
than 40 feet in depth.
   (C)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
25 feet, except where a garage is located in the rear yard, the rear yard may
be reduced to ten feet.
   (D)   Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the building
having a width of not less than ten feet.
   (E)   Obstruction to view. On any corner lot in which a front yard is
required by this chapter, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected,
and no hedge, shrub, tree or other growth shall be maintained at a height of
four feet or greater within a distance of 30 feet or less of the property line
abutting an intersection, or in such location between such front yard line and
the street line as to cause danger to traffic by obscuring the view.
   (F)   Use. No building, structure or premises shall be used, and no building
or structure shall be erected, structurally altered or maintained, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, except for one or more of the following
uses:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings;
      (3)   Churches and similar places of worship;
      (4)   Libraries;
      (5)   Schools;
      (6)   Public and private parks and playgrounds;
      (7)   Fire station, telephone exchange where no public business office
and no repair or storage facilities are maintained, or any necessary public
utility building and/or structure; provided that, such building be constructed
to resemble the appearance of a residential building;
      (8)   Accessory buildings incidental to the above uses located on the
same lot, including one private garage per dwelling;
      (9)   Occupations engaged in by the occupants of a dwelling. Home
occupations within this district shall not involve the conduct of a retail
business on the premises, and may include the office of a engineer, musician,
artist, writer or similar profession when situated in the dwelling or an
accessory building not larger than one-half the square footage of the dwelling;
provided that, traffic generated by the home occupation shall not exceed four
vehicle trips per day and customer parking shall be on the property. Signs
identifying the home occupation shall not exceed six square feet in area. No
other signs advertising a business, except those pertaining to the lease or
sale of a building or premises, shall be permitted in this district; except
that, bulletin boards not exceeding 12 square feet in area may be permitted on
premises occupied by churches, temples, libraries, schools, colleges and
playgrounds;
      (10)   Foster and group homes;
      (11)   Guest and servant quarters;
      (12)   Bed and breakfast establishments of not more than four rooms for
rent; and
      (13)   Day care (registered home, up to 12 individuals).
   (G)   Fence regulations. No fence shall exceed eight feet in height where
the fence faces an alley, six feet on side yard boundary line and six feet in
height on a front yard boundary line; provided further that, no fence shall
exceed four feet in height within 30 feet of a curb line of an intersection.
   (H)   Maximum lot coverage area. 35%.
   (I)   Lot area per family. Every dwelling hereafter erected, altered or
maintained shall be upon a lot of not less than 7,500 square feet. Two-family
dwellings shall have a lot area of not less than 10,000 square feet.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-104)
§ 10-1-5 “B” RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   This district is intended to provide areas for detached, single- and two-
family dwellings and modular homes as well as apartments, condominiums and
townhouses. This area is also appropriate for group homes such as retirement
communities.
   (A)   Height. No building shall exceed 40 feet or three stories in height.
   (B)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than 20 feet; provided, however, that, where 40% or more of the developed lots
within 150 feet on both sides of the subject property having an average front
yard variation of not more than six feet, no building hereafter erected or
altered shall project beyond the average front yard line so established;
provided further that, this regulation shall not require a front yard of more
than 30 feet in depth.
   (C)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
20 feet, except where a garage is located in the rear yard, the rear yard may
be reduced to ten feet.
   (D)   Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the building,
having a width of not less than five feet.
   (E)   Obstruction to view. On any corner lot in which a front yard is
required by this chapter, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected,
and no hedge, shrub, tree or other growth shall be maintained at a height of
four feet or greater within a distance of 30 feet or less of the property line
abutting an intersection, or in such location between such front yard line and
the street line as to cause danger to traffic by obscuring the view.
   (F)   Use. No building, structure or premises shall be used, and no building
or structure shall be erected, structurally altered or maintained, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, except for one or more of the following
uses:
      (1)   Any use permitted in the “A” Residence District according to the
stipulations therein (if any);
      (2)   Modular homes;
      (3)   Apartments of up to eight units per building with or without a
community garage. All apartment buildings shall provide: all required vehicle
parking preferably at the rear of the structures; storm water management in
compliance with Montana Department of Environmental Quality Circular 8;
internal access road(s) built to city standards, paved bicycle/pedestrian
facilities a minimum of six feet wide with suitable subgrade materials and
compaction connecting to all adjacent streets; landscaped buffers a minimum of
ten feet in width surrounding the exterior boundaries of the property
consisting of a minimum of one large canopy tree (minimum 15 feet in height),
two small ornamental trees and four shrubs (minimum six inches in height),
including irrigation, for each 40 lineal feet. Such landscaping may be
clustered to provide a “natural” look; at least 200 square feet of usable open
park area per unit developed with benches, picnic facilities, landscaping,
playground equipment or similar improvements; and architectural design that
includes visual variety among structures in the neighborhood in terms of color,
orientation on the site, roofline, design, height and form and that breaks
structural planes by including multiple roof lines, bays and similar features;
      (4)   Condominiums subject to the standards listed under division (F)(3)
above;
      (5)   Townhouses subject to the standards listed under division (F)(3)
above;
      (6)   Hospitals and clinics;
      (7)   Institutions of a philanthropic nature;
      (8)   Undertaking parlors; and
      (9)   Accessory buildings incidental to the above uses located on the
same lot including one private garage per dwelling.
   (G)   Fence regulations. No fence shall exceed eight feet in height where
the fence faces an alley, six feet on side yard boundary line and six feet in
height on a front yard boundary line; provided further that, no fence shall
exceed four feet in height within 30 feet of a curb line of an intersection.
   (H)   Lot area per family. Every single family dwelling hereafter erected,
altered or maintained shall be upon a lot area of not less than 7,500 square
feet. Every single-story multiple dwelling building shall be upon a lot area of
not less than 4,000 square feet per family unit and every multiple story multi-
dwelling building shall be upon a lot area of not less than 3,000 square feet
per family unit.
   (I)   Maximum lot coverage area. 50%.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-105)
§ 10-1-6 “C” RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   This district is intended to provide locations for mobile and manufactured
homes. This section is intended to compliment Ord. 05-01. Where conflicts
occur, the more stringent shall prevail.
   (A)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than 20 feet.
   (B)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
ten feet.
   (C)   Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of all buildings
having a width of not less than ten feet.
   (D)   Lot area. Each mobile or manufactured home lot shall have a minimum of
four square feet of lot area for each one square foot of home and accessory
building floor area; however, in no case shall a lot or space be less than
2,000 square feet in area.
   (E)   Lot width. Each mobile or manufactured home lot shall have a minimum
width at any point of 30 feet.
   (F)   Number of structures. One mobile or manufactured home may be placed on
any lot or space if located within a mobile home park.
   (G)   Tie downs required for mobile homes. Each mobile home must be tied or
otherwise secured to the site within ten days of installation.
   (H)   Obstruction to view. On any corner lot in which a front yard is
required by this chapter, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected,
and no hedge, shrub, tree or other growth shall be maintained at a height of
four feet or greater within a distance of 30 feet or less of the property line
abutting an intersection, or in such location between such front yard line and
the street line as to cause danger to traffic by obscuring the view.
   (I)   General provisions applying to all mobile homes. It shall be unlawful
within the city for any persons to park any mobile home upon any street, avenue
or highway upon any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied,
except as provided in this section and in the following divisions.
      (1)   Storage of only one unoccupied mobile home recreational vehicle in
an accessory private garage building or in the rear yard is permitted;
providing that, no living quarters shall be maintained or any business
practiced in said mobile home while such mobile home is so parked and stored.
      (2)   The erection and maintenance of structures accessory to a mobile
home, including additional living space, storage, carports and awnings shall be
regulated by the Zoning Officer. All such structures shall satisfy all
applicable setback, building, health and sanitation code requirements.
      (3)   All mobile home parks are must comply with applicable local and
state regulations and laws and be licensed by the State of Montana.
   (J)   Fence regulations. No fence constructed within five feet of the
boundary line of each lot shall exceed eight feet in height where the fence
faces an alley, six feet on a side yard boundary line and six feet in height on
front yard boundary; provided further that, no fence is to exceed four feet in
height within five of neighbor’s residence; and, provided further that, no
fence shall be more than four feet high within 30 feet of curb line of an
intersection.
   (K)   Maximum lot coverage area. 40%.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-106)
§ 10-1-7 MIXED COMMERCIAL/RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   This provides area for a compatible mixture of business and residential land
uses.
   (A)   Height. Buildings shall not be more than 50 feet.
   (B)   Front yard. No front yard in this district shall be required for
commercial buildings, but for residential buildings, the front yard regulation
for the “B” Residential District shall govern.
   (C)   Rear yard. No rear yard in this district shall be required for
commercial buildings, but for residential buildings, the rear yard regulations
for “B” Residential District shall govern.
   (D)   Side yard. No side yard in this district shall be required for
commercial buildings, but, for residential buildings, the side yard regulations
for “B” Residential Districts shall govern.
   (E)   Lot area per family. Every building hereafter erected, structurally
altered or maintained for residential purposes shall provide a lot area of not
less than 7,500 square feet per family.
   (F)   Use. No building, structure or premises shall be used, and no building
or structure shall be erected, structurally altered or maintained, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, except for one or more of the uses listed
below. No business, trade or industry shall be permitted in this district which
is noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas,
vibration or noise, or which imposes any extraordinary hazard to life or
property:
      (1)   Adult oriented businesses located not less than 500 feet from a
church or similar place of worship or a school;
      (2)   Any use permitted in the “B” Residential District along with any
specific requirements therein unless otherwise indicated in this section;
      (3)   Apartments, condominiums and townhouses. Apartments or condominiums
may or may not be located above retail or business operations. The minimum lot
area per family in division (E) above and the design standards located in the
“B” Residential District do not apply when located above retail or business
operations. The minimum living area per family unit is 750 square feet. When
one or more residences is located above a business, one off-street parking
space per unit is required;
      (4)   Amusement arcade providing games of skill to patrons at a cost
where wholly within the building;
      (5)   Art galleries and studios;
      (6)   Assembly hall;
      (7)   Automobile repair shops, garages and sales;
      (8)   Bakery;
      (9)   Bank;
      (10)   Bar;
      (11)   Barber shop/beauty parlor;
      (12)   Boarding house;
      (13)   Bowling alley;
      (14)   Building supply store;
      (15)   Business or professional office;
      (16)   Car wash;
      (17)   Casino;
      (18)   Coffee shop, café, espresso stand;
      (19)   Computer services;
      (20)   Dry cleaning and dyeing;
      (21)   Electronics service and repair;
      (22)   Florist shop;
      (23)   Feed store;
      (24)   Food products or preparation, except such uses as are involved in
handling live animals or fowls to finished products;
      (25)   Furniture store;
      (26)   Gasoline or oil retail supply station, including filling station;
      (27)   Gift store;
      (28)   Grocery store;
      (29)   Governmental, cultural and institutional facilities;
      (30)   Hardware store;
      (31)   Health studio, gym;
      (32)   Hospitals, clinics and related medical goods and services;
      (33)   Hotels, motels and other hospitality and entertainment uses;
      (34)   Ice plant or ice storage for less than five tons;
      (35)   Laundry;
      (36)   Light manufacturing in connection with uses herein permitted;
provided that, no more than 25% of the total floor space of the building or
structure in this district is not used for manufacturing;
      (37)   Machine shop;
      (38)   Motor vehicle sales;
      (39)   Music and video studio;
      (40)   Public or private garage or parking area;
      (41)   Newspaper publishing, printing and bookbinding;
      (42)   Radio or television broadcasting station;
      (43)   Recreational vehicle park;
      (44)   Retail sales and service;
      (45)   Restaurant;
      (46)   Senior citizen center;
      (47)   Sheet-metal working;
      (48)   Shoe shining or shoe repairing;
      (49)   Signs;
      (50)   Sporting good store;
      (51)   Storage facility;
      (52)   Theater;
      (53)   Upholstery and drapery shops;
      (54)   Veterinarian office, small animal;
      (55)   Wireless communication facility with one or all antennae located
on an existing tower or monopole or attached to an existing building or
structure, camouflaged and/or hidden to the extent possible, collocated to the
extent possible and not greater than 70 feet in height; and
      (56)   Wholesale business.
   (G)   Fence regulations. No fence shall exceed eight feet in height where
the fence faces an alley, six feet on side yard boundary line and six feet in
height on a front yard boundary line; provided further that, no fence shall
exceed four feet in height within 30 feet of a curb line of an intersection.
   (H)   Maximum lot coverage area. 75%.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-107)
§ 10-1-8 MIXED COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Note: There is no mixed commercial/industrial area within the city
limits as of 6-23-2008. This text is intended to be applied to the mixed
commercial and industrial areas shown on the Future Land Use Map of the Ronan
Growth Policy as those areas are annexed into the city.
   (B)   This district provides for commercial and industrial uses that
generate noise, dust, odor and other impacts and require substantial amounts of
space while having a reasonable degree of control that is desirable for the
general well being of the community.
      (1)   Height. Buildings shall not be more than 50 feet in height.
      (2)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than 30 feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least five feet when
abutting an alley, 30 feet when abutting a public street and 30 feet when
abutting a residential or mixed commercial/residential district.
      (4)   Visual buffering. When abutting a public street, a residential or a
commercial/residential district, within the required setback, there shall be a
fenced and landscaped visual screen suitable to buffer the visual impact of the
land use. The visual screen shall contain a minimum of two large-canopy trees
(minimum 15 feet in height), four small ornamental trees and ten shrubs
(minimum six inches in height), including irrigation, for each 40 lineal feet.
Such landscaping may be clustered to provide a “natural” look. Fencing shall
generally be made of wood, but shall be designed to visually screen the land
use and provide for safety where appropriate.
      (5)   Use. Buildings and premises may be used for any purpose whatsoever
unless otherwise indicated below; the following industrial operations as
hereinafter defined shall be permitted with Zone “D” Mixed Commercial/
Industrial of the city’s zoning area:
         (a)   The construction, maintenance and operation of wood product
manufacturing plants;
         (b)   The loading and unloading of unprocessed logs by railroad and
truck;
         (c)   The storage of unprocessed logs and finished timber products and
the movement thereof;
         (d)   The processing of logs into manufactured products;
         (e)   The construction, maintenance and operation of machinery and
physical plant for such manufacturing purposes;
         (f)   The construction, maintenance and operation of waste and by-
product disposal facilities and processing equipment, including, but not
limited to, storage bins, conveyors, de-barkers, cruppers, saws and related
equipment together with needed utility installation for use in connection
therewith; and
         (g)   Wireless communication facility with one or all antennae located
on an existing tower or monopole or attached to an existing building or
structure, camouflaged and/or hidden to the extent possible, collocated to the
extent possible and not greater than 70 feet in height; and
         (h)   The slaughter and processing of animals.
      (6)   Non-permitted uses.
         (a)   No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following uses, until and unless, the location of such uses shall have been
approved by the Council:
            1.   Wood pulp or paper processing plant;
            2.   Acid manufacture;
            3.   Distillation of bones, coal or wood;
            4.   Explosive manufacture or storage;
            5.   Fat rendering;
            6.   Fertilizer manufacture;
            7.   Garbage, offal or dead animal reduction;
            8.   Petroleum refining;
            9.   Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores;
            10.   Stock yards; and
            11.   Any residences such as would be permitted under §§ 10-1-4 or
10-1-5.
         (b)   When the Council or Zoning Commission is to consider the above
land uses, it shall conduct a public hearing after collecting a required fee,
notifying all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property and
publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation for a period of at
least 15 days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the Council will consider
the land use’s potential impacts related to noise, smell, air quality, light,
public health and safety and other appropriate factors. Where residences are
proposed, the Council will consider the compatibility of such use in relation
to nearby land uses. The Council may place reasonable conditions on any such
use.
      (7)   Maximum lot coverage area. 60%.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-108; Ord. 2023-02, passed 8-9-2023)
§ 10-1-9 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   This district provides area for commercial development that residents and
visitors use for quick stops, overnight stays and convenience as well as those
land uses that require large spaces for vehicle parking.
   (A)   Height. No restriction as to height of buildings.
   (B)   Front yard. The front yard in this district shall be a minimum 20-foot
wide landscaped area between the highway right-of-way and pavement with a
landscaped buffer intended to soften the visual impact of the land use. The
visual screen shall contain a minimum of two large canopy trees (minimum 15
feet in height), two small ornamental trees and ten shrubs (minimum six inches
in height), including irrigation, for each 40 lineal feet of frontage. Such
landscaping may be clustered to provide a “natural” look. Attractive fencing,
boulders, rockwork and other items are strongly encouraged.
   (C)   Rear yard. A 15-foot rear yard shall be required that meets the
landscape requirements in division (B) above.
   (D)   Side yard. A 15-foot side yard shall be required that meets the
landscape requirements in division (B) above; except that, roads and driveways
may penetrate the side yards in order to connect businesses along the highway
frontage so to minimize highway use to get from one business to another.
   (E)   Use. No building, structure or premises shall be used, and no building
or structure shall be erected, structurally altered or maintained, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, except for one or more of the uses listed
below:
      (1)   Automobile repair shops, garages;
      (2)   Bank;
      (3)   Gasoline or oil retail supply station, including filling station;
      (4)   Hotels, motels and other hospitality and entertainment uses;
      (5)   Motor vehicle, recreational vehicle and boat sales;
      (6)   Recreational vehicle park;
      (7)   Restaurant; and
      (8)   Signs.
   (F)   Maximum lot coverage area. 75%.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-109)
§ 10-1-10 PUBLIC/RECREATION DISTRICT.
   This district provides area for public facilities as well as outdoor and
combination outdoor/indoor recreation areas.
   (A)   Height. No restriction as to height of buildings.
   (B)   Front yard. The front yard in this district shall be a minimum 30-foot
wide landscaped area containing a minimum of two large canopy trees (minimum 15
feet in height), two small ornamental trees and five shrubs (minimum six inches
in height), including irrigation, for each 40 lineal feet of frontage. Such
landscaping may be clustered to provide a “natural” look. Attractive fencing,
boulders, rockwork and other items are strongly encouraged.
   (C)   Rear yard. A 30-foot rear yard shall be required that meets the
landscape requirements in division (B) above.
   (D)   Side yard. A 30-foot side yard shall be required that meets the
landscape requirements in division (B) above; except that, roads and driveways
may penetrate the side yards in order to connect businesses along the highway
frontage so to minimize highway use to get from one business to another.
   (E)   Use. No building, structure or premises shall be used, and no building
or structure shall be erected, structurally altered or maintained, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, except for one or more of the uses listed
below:
      (1)   Accessory uses and buildings;
      (2)   Arena;
      (3)   Camping;
      (4)   Concert area;
      (5)   Fair;
      (6)   Golf course;
      (7)   Governmental and cultural facilities;
      (8)   Pow-wow ground;
      (9)   Recreational vehicle park;
      (10)   School;
      (11)   Senior citizen center;
      (12)   Signs not to exceed 144 square feet in area, ten feet in height
and externally lit;
      (13)   Sports fields;
      (14)   Park, playground;
      (15)   Skate and bicycle park;
      (16)   Skating rink;
      (17)   Swimming pool;
      (18)   Vending; and
      (19)   Youth camps and facilities.
   (F)   Maximum lot coverage area. 50%.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-110)
§ 10-1-11 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   The lawful uses of land, existing at the time of the adoption of this
chapter, although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof, may be
continued, but if such non-conforming use is discontinued for a period of six
months, any future use of said premises shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. A landowner may seek to extend this six-month time
period where an undue hardship exists through an appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
   (B)   A variance may be granted to allow development on a lot that exists at
the time of adoption or revision of this chapter where reasonable development
cannot conform to yard setback or lot coverage requirements due to substandard
size of the lot.
   (C)   When a district shall hereafter be changed, any then existing non-
conforming use in such changed district may be continued.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-111)
§ 10-1-12 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Ordinary exceptions. This chapter shall not be deemed to limit or
restrict the height of belfries, chimneys, church steeples, clock towers,
cooling towers, elevators, stacks, water towers or any similar appurtenances to
buildings, but these structures shall be subject to such restrictions and
regulations as may be imposed by other ordinances.
   (B)   Restricted exceptions. Churches, public or semi-public buildings,
hospitals, schools, colleges and private clubs may exceed the height
restrictions of the district in which they are constructed; provided, such
structures shall have side yards on both sides, complying with the area
regulations of the district and, in addition, the side yards shall be increased
one foot in width for each five feet that the height of the building exceeds
the height regulation of the district.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-112)
§ 10-1-13 EXCEPTIONS TO AREA REGULATIONS.
   Where churches, schools, hospitals or colleges are located in any “A” or “B”
Residential District and have no portion used as a place for habitation, the
depth of the rear yard may be reduced to six feet. The front, side and rear
yards shall be waived where dwellings are erected above stores, shops or other
commercial uses. No lot area shall at any time be so reduced or diminished that
the front, rear or side yards shall be smaller than prescribed by this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-113)
§ 10-1-14 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   Building in district boundaries. The boundaries of districts are shown
on the map on display in the office of the City Clerk and of the Zoning
Officer. All changes in zoning will be shown on revised map on display in the
office of the City Clerk and of the Zoning Officer. Such map is hereby adopted
and made a part of this code.
   (B)   Change in district boundaries, regulations and restrictions. Changes
in the boundaries of any district or part thereof or changes of regulations or
restrictions within any such district may be made by the City Council. The City
Council shall use the following procedure when altering or establishing zoning
district regulations and/or boundaries.
      (1)   A petition requesting such change shall first be presented to the
City Council, duly signed by the owners of 35% or more, either of the area of
the lots included within such change or of the lots immediately adjacent in the
area thereof, extending 300 feet from the street frontage of such opposite
lots. In the case of corner lots, the petitioners shall be owners of property
along each street frontage.
      (2)   Such petition shall be referred to the Board of Adjustment which
shall make a careful investigation of such proposed change and file a written
report thereon within 30 days after the same has been referred. The City
Council shall thereupon cause notice to be published twice in a paper of
general circulation within the city of the time and place set for the hearing
upon such petition and report. The publication of such notice shall be made at
least 15 days prior to the time of such hearing. At such hearing, the City
Council shall hear all persons and all objections and recommendations relative
to such proposed change and thereupon, action shall be taken upon such petition
by said City Council and such action shall be final and conclusive as to all
matters and things involved in said petition.
      (3)   Provided, however, that, if written protest against such change
signed by the owners of 25% or more, either of the area of the lots included in
such proposed change or, of those within 300 feet of the area proposed for
change, such amendment shall not become effective, except by the favorable vote
of three-fourths of all the members of the City Council.
      (4)   When such proposed amendment has been rejected by the City Council,
neither it, nor one involving only the same property, shall be offered for
adoption within one year after such rejection.
      (5)   Changes in the regulations and restrictions in any district may be
made from time to time by the City Council in the same manner as is prescribed
in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(4) above for making changes in the boundaries;
except that, such action may be initiated without the presentation of a
petition requesting it.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-114)
§ 10-1-15 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement.
      (1)   This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer, his or her
assistants or other duly appointed officer of the city, subject to such
variations and interpretations which may be made by the Board of Adjustment.
Appeal of any decision of the enforcing officer may be made to the Board of
Adjustment as provided in the laws of the State of Montana.
      (2)   A zoning conformance permit shall be issued by the enforcing
officer before any building, or premises, or part thereof may hereafter be
created, erected, changed or converted, wholly or in part, in its use or
structure, to the effect that such building and use proposed therefor conform
to the provisions of this chapter. These certificates shall be applied for and
issued at the same time, or before, the Building Inspector grants a building
permit for the premises.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to allow any basement excavations upon which a
building is not constructed to be left unfilled, uncovered, if construction of
intended building is not started upon said excavation within 60 days of
excavation, and worked on continuously until completed. If construction on said
excavation is not completed within 180 days of excavation, the City Zoning
Officer shall order the excavation to be filled in.
      (4)   No person shall move or demolish a building within the city limits
without first obtaining a permit from the Zoning Officer. Where buildings have
been removed or demolished, the ground shall be leveled and all debris removed.
   (B)   Penalty for violation. Any person, firm or corporation owning,
controlling or managing any building or premises wherein or whereon there shall
be placed, or there exists anything in violation to the provisions of this
chapter; or any person, firm or corporation who shall assist in the commission
of any violation of this chapter, or who shall build contrary to the plans and
specifications submitted to, and approved by, the Zoning Officer; or any
person, form or corporation who shall omit, neglect or refuse to do any act
required in this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $250, nor more than $500, for
each offense, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Procedure in the case of non-conformity.
      (1)   If, on any inspection, the use of a premises is found not to
conform to the requirements of this chapter, or the conditions of an existing
certificate therefore, the Zoning Officer or other duly appointed official
shall at once issue written notice to the owner, specifying the manner in which
the use of the premises fails to so conform and the owner shall, at once, take
steps to make it so conform or file a written notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof, both with the Zoning Officer and the Board of Adjustment,
within 48 hours following receipt of notice of non-conforming use by the Zoning
Officer. If necessary for the proper protection of the occupants, he or she
shall order the use or premises vacated until its condition is made
satisfactory and in conformity with the requirements of this chapter, at which
time a certificate will be issued as herein provided for new buildings or for
the use of premises.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing
of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as issue notice to the
parties in interest, and decide the same within 15 days following the date
notice of appeal was filed.
   (D)   Interpretation and purpose.
      (1)   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare.
      (2)   It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, or abrogate
or annul rules or permits previously adopted or issued according to the law
relating to the use of buildings or premises, nor to interfere with, abrogate
or annul any easement, covenants or agreements between parties; provided,
however, that, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions as to use, or
requires larger open spaces or less height than are required by such rules or
permits or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
   (E)   Enforcement and remedies. In case any building or structure is
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or
maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this
chapter, the City Council, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or
use, to retrain, correct, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
(1992 Code, § 9-1-115)
TITLE 11: FLOOD CONTROL
   Chapter
      
1.    FLOODPLAINS
CHAPTER 1: FLOODPLAINS
Section
General Provisions
   
11-1-1   Floodplain hazard mitigation regulations
   
11-1-2   Statutory authority
   
11-1-3   Finding of fact
   
11-1-4   Purpose
   
11-1-5   Methods to reduce losses
   
11-1-6   Jurisdictional area
   
11-1-7   Floodplain Administrator
   
11-1-8   Compliance
   
11-1-9   Abrogation and greater responsibility
   
11-1-10   Regulation interpretation
   
11-1-11   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
11-1-12   Severability
   
11-1-13   Disclosure provision
   
11-1-14   Amendment of regulations
   
11-1-15   Public records
   
11-1-16   Land divisions and subdivision review
   
11-1-17   Flood disaster recovery
   
11-1-18   Definitions
   
11-1-19   Penalty
Forms and Fees
   
11-1-30   Forms
   
11-1-31   Fees
Jurisdictional Area
   
11-1-45   Regulated flood hazard areas
   
11-1-46   Interpretation of regulated flood hazard area boundaries
   
11-1-47   Alteration of jurisdictional area
Permits, Regulations and Standards
   
11-1-60   Uses allowed without a permit within the jurisdictional area
   
11-1-61   Prohibited uses, activities and structures within the jurisdictional
area
   
11-1-62   Permit requirements
   
11-1-63   Application evaluation
Development Requirements in the Floodway
   
11-1-75   Uses requiring permits
   
11-1-76   General requirements
   
11-1-77   Mining of material requiring excavation from pits or pools
   
11-1-78   Railroad, highway and street stream crossings
   
11-1-79   Limited filling for road, and railroad embankments
   
11-1-80   Buried or suspended utility transmission lines
   
11-1-81   Storage of materials and equipment
   
11-1-82   Domestic water supply wells
   
11-1-83   Buried and sealed vaults for sewage disposal in campgrounds and
recreational areas
   
11-1-84   Public and private campgrounds
   
11-1-85   Structures accessory or appurtenant
   
11-1-86   Construction of or modifications to surface water diversions
   
11-1-87   Flood control and bank protection measures
   
11-1-88   Stream and bank restoration
Development Requirements in the Flood Fringe or
Regulated Flood Hazard Area with No Floodway
   
11-1-100   Uses requiring permits
   
11-1-101   General requirements
   
11-1-102   Residential requirements
   
11-1-103   Non-residential requirements
Emergencies
   
11-1-115   General
   
11-1-116   Emergency application requirements
   
11-1-117   Permit evaluation
Variances
   
11-1-130   General
   
11-1-131   Variance application requirements
   
11-1-132   Notice requirements for floodplain variance application
   
11-1-133   Evaluation of variance application
   
11-1-134   Decision
   
11-1-135   Judicial review
Appeals
   
11-1-150   General
   
11-1-151   Appeals requirements
   
11-1-152   Notice and hearing
   
11-1-153   Decision
   
11-1-154   Judicial review
Enforcement
   
11-1-165   Investigation request
   
11-1-166   Notices to enter and investigate lands or waters
   
11-1-167   Notice to respond and order to take corrective action
   
11-1-168   Administrative review
   
11-1-169   Appeal of administrative decision
   
11-1-170   Failure to comply with order to take corrective action
   
11-1-171   Judicial review
   
11-1-172   Other remedies
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 11-1-1 FLOODPLAIN HAZARD MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.
   These regulations are known and may be cited as the “Floodplain Hazard
Management Regulations”; hereinafter referred to as “these regulations”.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-2 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Floodplain and floodway management is incorporated in MCA Title 76,
Ch. 5, and describes the authority, procedures and minimum standards for local
regulations.
   (B)   The authority to regulate development in specifically identified flood
hazard areas is granted to communities by MCA 76-5-301 and municipalities have
authority to adopt regulations as provided for in MCA 7-1-4123 to promote the
general public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-3 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   Flood hazard areas specifically adopted herein as regulated flood
hazard areas have been delineated and designated by the Department of Natural
Resources and Conservation (DNRC) and/or the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) pursuant to MCA 76-5-201.
   (B)   The proposed regulations have been reviewed and approved by the
Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to meet the prescribed minimum standard for
development and procedures.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-4 PURPOSE.
   (A)   These regulations promote public health, safety and general welfare of
the residents and minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
regulated flood hazard areas.
   (B)   These regulations are intended to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health;
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects;
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business and public service interruptions;
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges;
      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
disruptions; and
      (7)   Ensure compliance with the minimum standards for the continued
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program for the benefit of the
residents.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-5 METHODS TO REDUCE LOSSES.
   These regulations are intended to reduce flood losses through the following
methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flooding or that may cause excessive increases in flood
heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses of land vulnerable to floods, including public
facilities, be developed or constructed to at least minimum standards or to
otherwise minimize flood damage;
   (C)   Regulate the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are needed to accommodate flood waters;
   (D)   Regulate filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
impact other land, flood water depth or velocity of flood waters;
   (F)   Distinguish between the land use regulations applied to the floodway
within the regulated flood hazard area and those applied to that portion of the
regulated flood hazard area not contained in the floodway;
   (G)   Apply more restrictive land use regulations within the floodway of the
regulated flood hazard area; and
   (H)   Ensure that regulations and minimum standards balance the greatest
public good with the least private injury.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-6 JURISDICTIONAL AREA.
   (A)   These regulations apply only to the flood hazard areas specifically
adopted herein as regulated flood hazard areas and are more fully and
specifically described in §§
11-1-45 through
11-1-47 of this chapter. The requirements and approvals for alterations to the
specific jurisdictional area are in §§
11-1-45 through
11-1-47 of this chapter as well. Areas within the regulated flood hazard area
also include areas specifically identified, labeled and illustrated on maps as
floodway or flood fringe that have differing uses allowed and minimum building
standards that apply. The jurisdictional areas are those areas of the 100-year
floodplain illustrated and depicted in the referenced studies and maps.
   (B)   The regulated flood hazard area supporting study and maps illustrating
the regulatory area are generally studies and maps completed for the DNRC by
FEMA or the Natural Resources and Conservation Service (NRCS) that have been
adopted by DNRC pursuant to MCA 76-5-201 et seq. The regulated flood hazard
area may include those areas collectively identified as special flood hazard
areas by FEMA on Flood Insurance Rate Maps and are those areas subject to flood
hazard caused by the 100-year flood. FEMA also utilizes the maps of special
flood hazard areas and accompanying flood insurance studies for determining
flood risk for National Flood Insurance premiums. The maps and accompanying
study becomes the regulatory flood hazard area only when formally adopted by
DNRC and community within an ordinance.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-7 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   A Floodplain Administrator is hereby officially appointed and is the
responsibility of the city’s Building and Planning Department and is maintained
to serve to administer and implement the provisions of these regulations and
meet and maintain the commitments pursuant to 44 C.F.R. § 59.22(a) to FEMA when
FEMA Flood Insurance was made available in the community.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Prerequisites for sale of flood insurance, see 44 C.F.R. § 59.22
Statutory reference:
   Person designated for review, see ARM 36.14.204(2)(h)
§ 11-1-8 COMPLIANCE.
   Development, new construction, alteration or substantial improvement may not
commence without full compliance with the provisions of these regulations.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-9 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESPONSIBILITY.
   It is not intended by these regulations to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions or underlying zoning. However,
where these regulations impose greater restrictions, the provision of these
regulations must prevail.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Purpose of regulations, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.1
§ 11-1-10 REGULATION INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions
must be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit, nor repeal, any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Purpose of regulations, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.1
§ 11-1-11 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   These regulations do not imply that land outside the regulated flood hazard
areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the
community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-12 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, sentence or phrase of these regulations is held to
be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then
said holding will in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of
these regulations.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-13 DISCLOSURE PROVISION.
   (A)   All property owners or their agents in the regulated flood hazard
areas shall notify potential buyers or their agents that such property is
located within the regulated flood hazard areas and is subject to regulation
and any permitted uses that are transferred.
   (B)   Information regarding regulated flood hazard areas and the repository
for floodplain maps is available in the Floodplain Administrator’s office.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Notification and disclosure, see ARM 36.15.204(2)(g)
§ 11-1-14 AMENDMENT OF REGULATIONS.
   Once adopted, these regulations may be amended after a public hearing and
notice and approval of DNRC and FEMA.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-15 PUBLIC RECORDS.
   Records including permits and applications, elevation and flood-proofing
certificates, certificates of compliance, fee receipts and other matters
relating to these regulations must be maintained by the Floodplain
Administrator and are public records and must be made available for inspection
and for copies upon reasonable request. A reasonable copying cost for copying
documents for members of the public may be charged and may require payments of
the costs before providing the copies.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Person designated; fee, see 44 C.F.R. §§ 59.22(a)(9)(iii) and 60.3(b)(5)
(iii)
§ 11-1-16 LAND DIVISIONS AND SUBDIVISION REVIEW.
   (A)   Any land divisions and subdivision approval including new or expansion
of existing manufactured home parks within the regulated flood hazard area must
be designed to meet the following criteria:
      (1)   The base flood elevations and boundary of the regulated flood
hazard area are determined and considered during lot layout and building
location design;
      (2)   Locations for future structures and development are reasonably safe
from flooding;
      (3)   Adequate surface water drainage is provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards;
      (4)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
and
      (5)   For development within the regulated flood hazard area, permits
according to these regulations must be obtained before development occurs.
   (B)   The NFIP program standard for community floodplain management
ordinances specifies that the local government is to consider flood hazards
when reviewing and approving subdivisions within the special flood hazard area.
Floodplain Administrators should check their subdivision ordinances to ensure
flood hazards outside of regulated flood hazard areas are addressed in
development proposals. For example, the montana model subdivision regulations
suggests that any portion of a proposed subdivision is within 2,000 horizontal
feet and 20 vertical feet of a stream draining an area of 25 square miles or
more, where no official floodplain studies of the stream have been made, the
subdivider may be required to conduct a flood hazard evaluation study. The
Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation may, if requested,
review the flood hazard analysis on the merit of its technical adequacy and
make a recommendation back to the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Review of subdivision proposals, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3, 60.3(a)(4)(ii), 60.3
(a)(4)(iii) and 60.3(b)
§ 11-1-17 DISASTER RECOVERY.
   (A)   Upon completion of structure condition survey within the regulated
flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify owners that a
permit may be necessary before repair or reconstruction commences on structures
that:
      (1)   Have sustained 30% or more in flood damages;
      (2)   Have been swept away;
      (3)   Have one or more collapsed or missing walls;
      (4)   Cannot be reoccupied without major structural work; or
      (5)   Have sustained more than two feet of water over the first floor.
   (B)   Structures that have suffered substantial damage or will undergo
substantial improvements require a floodplain application and permit and must
be upgraded to meet the minimum building standards herein during repair or
reconstruction.
   (C)   Floodplain Administrators coordinate assistance and provide
information to structure owners concerning Hazard Mitigation and Recovery
measures with Federal Emergency Management Agency, Montana Department of
Natural Resources and Conservation, and other state, local and private
emergency service organizations.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-18 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   100-YEAR FLOOD. See FLOODPLAIN.
   ALTERATION. Any change or addition to an artificial obstruction that either
increases its external dimensions or increases its potential flood hazard. See
also, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
(ARM 36.15.101(2))
   ARTIFICIAL OBSTRUCTION. Any obstruction which is not natural and includes
any development, dam, diversion, wall, riprap, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, revetment, excavation, channel rectification, road,
bridge, conduit, culvert, building, refuse, automobile body, fill or other
analogous structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any
regulated flood hazard area that may impede, retard, or change the direction of
the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried
by the water, or that is placed where the natural flow of the water would carry
the same downstream to the damage or detriment of either life or property. See
also DEVELOPMENT.
(ARM 36.15.101(3)) (MCA 76-5-103(1))
   BASE FLOOD (FLOOD OF 100 YEAR FREQUENCY). A flood having a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
(ARM 36.15.101(4))
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation above sea level of the base flood
in relation to the National Geodic Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American
Vertical Datum of 1988 or unless otherwise specified.
(ARM 36.15.101(5))
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its lowest floor below ground
level on all sides.
   CHANNEL. The geographical area within either the natural or artificial banks
of a watercourse or drain way.
(MCA 76-5-103(2))
   CRAWL SPACE. Any area below the ground level and below the lowest floor
having an interior dimension of four feet or less measured from the interior
ground surface to the top of the stem wall.
   DNRC. Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials. See also ARTIFICIAL OBSTRUCTION.
   ENCROACHMENT. Activities or construction within the floodplain including
fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development.
   ENCROACHMENT ANALYSIS. An analysis performed by an engineer to assess the
impacts of the proposed artificial obstruction or non-conforming use to the
100-year floodplain, base flood elevation and velocity.
   ESTABLISH. To construct, place, insert or excavate.
(ARM 36.15.101(9) (MCA 76-5-103(7))
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOODPLAIN. The area including and adjoining the watercourse or drainway
that would be covered by the flood water of a flood of a 100-year frequency.
   FLOOD OF 100-YEAR FREQUENCY (BASE FLOOD). A flood magnitude expected to
recur on the average of once every 100 years or a flood magnitude that has a 1%
chance of occurring in any given year.
(MCA 76-5-103(9))
   FLOOD FRINGE. The identified portion of the regulated flood hazard area
outside the limits of the floodway.
(ARM 36.15.101(10))
   FLOODWAY. The identified portion of the regulated flood hazard area and is
the channel and the areas adjoining the channel that are reasonably required to
carry the discharge of the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface by more than one-half foot.
(MCA 76-5-103(5), 76-5-103(11))
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. Community official or representative appointed to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, HVAC
systems, structures and their contents.
   LOWEST FLOOR. Any floor of a building including a basement used for living
purposes, storage or recreation. This includes any floor that could be
converted to such a use.
(ARM 36-15-101(14))
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. Includes the construction of
facilities for servicing the manufactured home lots and, at a minimum, includes
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
   MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME. A structure that is transportable in one or
more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and
includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a
site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
(ARM 36.15.101(15))
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the commencement of clearing,
grading, filling or excavating to prepare a site for construction occurs on or
after the effective date of these ordinances and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
(ARM 36.15.101(20))
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads and is completed on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   OWNER. Any person who has dominion over, control of or title to an
artificial obstruction.
(ARM 76-5-103(13))
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A park trailer, travel trailer or other similar
vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a truck;
and
      (4)   Designed primarily for use as temporary living quarters for
recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use, not for use as a permanent
dwelling.
   REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREA. A floodplain whose limits have been designated
pursuant to MCA Title 76, Ch. 5, Part 2 and is determined to be the area
adjoining the watercourse that would be covered by the flood water of a base
flood, a flood of a 100-year frequency. The REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREA
consists of the floodway and flood fringe where specifically designated.
(ARM 36-15-101(11)) (MCA 76-5-103(4), 76-5-103(10))
   RIPRAP. Stone, rocks, concrete blocks or analogous material that is placed
within the floodplain for the purpose of preventing or alleviating erosion.
(ARM 36.15.101(18))
   RESIDENTIAL. A building for living purposes or place of assembly or
permanent use by human beings. All other buildings are non-residential.
   SCOUR DEPTH. The maximum depth of streambed scour caused by erosive forces
of the base flood discharge.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. A
STRUCTURE is also, bridge, culvert, dam, diversion, wall, revetment, dike or
other projection that may impede, retard or alter the pattern of flow of water.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damage condition would exceed
50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure where the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure either:
      (1)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
      (2)   If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first construction of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences. The term
does not include:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or state inventory of historic places.
   SUITABLE FILL. Fill material which is stable, compacted, well graded and
pervious, not adversely affected by water and frost, devoid of trash or similar
foreign matter, tree stumps or other organic material; and is fitting for the
purpose of supporting the intended use and/or permanent structure.
(ARM 36.15.101(22))
   VIOLATION. A failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with these regulations.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Certification requirements, 44 C.F.R. § 65.2(b)
   Definitions, see 44 C.F.R. § 59.1
§ 11-1-19 PENALTY.
   (A)   Misdemeanor.
      (1)   Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to
comply with any of the requirements, including failure to obtain permit
approval prior to development in the regulated flood hazard area, shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be treated as a public nuisance.
      (2)   Any person who violates these regulations or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than
$100 or imprisoned for not more than ten days or both. Each day’s continuance
of a violation shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
(MCA 76-5-110)
   (B)   Declaration to the Federal Flood Insurance Administrator.
      (1)   Upon finding of a violation and failure of the owner to take
corrective action as ordered, the Floodplain Administrator may submit notice
and request a 1316 Violation Declaration to the Federal Insurance
Administrator. The Federal Insurance Administrator has the authority to deny
new and renewal of flood insurance policies for a structure upon finding a
valid violation declaration.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall provide the Federal Insurance
Administrator the following declaration:
         (a)   The name(s) of the property owner(s) and address or legal
description of the property sufficient to confirm its identity and location;
         (b)   A clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in
violation of a cited state or local law, regulation or ordinance;
         (c)   A clear statement that the public body making the declaration
has authority to do so and a citation to that authority;
         (d)   Evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the
violation and the prospective denial of insurance; and
         (e)   A clear statement that the declaration is being submitted
pursuant to § 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended (44
C.F.R. § 73.3).
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
FORMS AND FEES
§ 11-1-30 FORMS.
   The following forms may be required by the Floodplain Administrator:
   (A)   Floodplain permit application. The “Joint Application for Proposed
Work in Montana’s Steams, Wetlands, Regulated Flood Hazard Areas and Other
Waterbodies”, or other designated form;
   (B)   Floodplain permit compliance report. Required to be submitted by the
applicant to the Floodplain Administrator once the permitted project in the
regulated flood hazard area is completed or within the designated time
stipulated on the floodplain permit. A compliance report including an elevation
and or flood-proofing certificate may be required where specified;
   (C)   Floodplain variance application. Submitted by the applicant to the
Floodplain Administrator for review of the proposed project prior to the
initiation of the project requiring a variance;
   (D)   Floodplain appeal. Submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain
Administrator for review of the proposed project prior to the initiation of the
project;
   (E)   Floodplain emergency notification. Required to be used by persons to
notify the Floodplain Administrator of projects undertaken during an emergency
to safeguard life or structures. This is not a permit application and the
person must take additional steps, as outlined in §§ 1-1-115 through 11-1-117
of this chapter; and
   (F)   Official complaint form. May be used by any person to notify the
Floodplain Administrator of an activity taking place without an official signed
floodplain permit. Persons may make signed complaints without use of this form.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-31 FEES.
   Reasonable fees may be adopted for permit applications, notices, variances,
inspections, certifications or other administrative actions required by these
regulations.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
JURISDICTIONAL AREA
§ 11-1-45 REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   (A)   The jurisdictional areas referenced herein as the regulated flood
hazard area are the 100-year floodplains illustrated and referenced in:
      (1)   Lake County Flood Insurance Study, effective date 2-6-2013; and
      (2)   Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel 300122 0790C, effective date 2-6-
2013.
   (B)   The regulated flood hazard area specifically described or illustrated
in the specific study including maps that have been delineated, designated and
established by order of the DNRC or FEMA pursuant to MCA 76-5-201.
   (C)   Use allowances, design and construction requirements in these
regulations vary by the specific areas identified as floodway and flood fringe.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-46 INTERPRETATION OF REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREA BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The mapped boundaries illustrated in the referenced studies in this
section are a guide for determining whether property is within the regulated
flood hazard area.
   (B)   A determination of the outer limits and boundaries of the regulated
flood hazard area or the flood fringe and floodway within the regulated flood
hazard area includes an evaluation of the maps as well as the particular study
data of the referenced study in this section.
   (C)   Boundary points of the regulated flood hazard area may be illustrated
for guidance on reference maps, but the boundary is the actual intersection of
the applicable base flood elevation with the natural adjacent terrain of the
watercourse or channel.
   (D)   The floodway boundary is as illustrated on the referenced maps and
studies.
   (E)   Any owner or lessee of property who believes his property has been
inadvertently included in the regulated flood hazard area may submit scientific
and/or technical information to the Floodplain Administrator. Changes to the
National Flood Insurance Rate Maps for the National Flood Insurance Program
through a FEMA letter of map change process are the responsibility of the owner
or lessee.
   (F)   The Floodplain Administrator may require elevation information
provided by an engineer or land surveyor or other information as needed for any
development that may be considered to be subject to these regulations. The
Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of the boundaries and decision may be
appealed as set forth in §§ 11-1-150 through 11-1-154 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-47 ALTERATION OF JURISDICTIONAL AREA.
   (A)   An alteration in this paragraph is a change to the existing boundary
to the specific maps and data of the referenced studies in this section that
form the basis for the regulated flood hazard area.
   (B)   An alteration may be the result of new data and information or when
technical or scientific flood data show that the base flood elevation has or
may be changed or was erroneously established and the boundaries of the
regulated flood hazard area are incorrect.
   (C)   Any alteration must be based on reasonable hydrological certainty.
   (D)   Any alteration or proposed alteration of one-half feet or more in the
base flood elevation requires approval of the DNRC in addition to an amendment
of the adopted jurisdictional map.
   (E)   Any additional notices or approvals required by FEMA for the purpose
of updating flood insurance rate maps of changes as a result of permitted
activity that cause any change in topography by fill or changes in the base
flood elevation is the responsibility of the permit applicant. The Floodplain
Administer may represent any necessary approvals or endorsements by the permit
authority to FEMA.
   (F)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
alterations.
   (G)   An alteration is not required when property located within the
regulated flood hazard area is shown to be naturally above the base flood
elevation.
   (H)   Except in a flood fringe, alteration approval from DNRC is required if
property is to be raised to a level above the base flood elevation by suitable
fill and where the encroachment by the fill causes a rise in the base flood
elevation of more than one-half feet. No portion of the fill may be within the
floodway.
   (I)   No alteration of a regulated flood hazard area is required when
property located within the regulated flood hazard area is elevated with fill
to at or above the base flood elevation and is permitted.
   (J)   When property located within the regulated flood hazard area is
naturally above the base flood elevation as proven by a certified elevation
survey provided by an engineer or land surveyor, the property owner may be
required to submit a letter of map change (LOMA) to FEMA in order to affect the
flood risk designation for insurance purposes. Information on the process and
requirements are available through FEMA.
   (K)   Alteration of the floodplain usually requires FEMA approval for
modification to their FEMA Insurance Rate Maps and may require preapproval by
conditional letter of map revision, and/ or letter of map revision or other map
change approvals in addition to approval from the Floodplain Administrator and
DNRC.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of floodplains, see ARM 36.15.505, 36.15.505(1)(b), 36.15.505(2)
   Floodway delineation, see ARM 36.15.502
PERMITS, REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS
§ 11-1-60 USES ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT WITHIN THE JURISDICTIONAL AREA.
   In addition to existing non-conforming uses and artificial obstructions
established before the effective date of floodplain hazard management
regulations, the following open space uses shall be allowed without a permit in
the regulated flood hazard area; provided that, such uses are not prohibited by
any other resolution or statute, do not require structures and do not require
alteration of the floodplain such as fill, grading, excavation or storage of
materials or equipment:
   (A)   Agricultural uses, not including related structures, such as tilling,
farming, irrigation, ranching, harvesting, grazing and the like;
   (B)   Accessory uses, not including structures, such as loading and parking
areas, or emergency landing strips associated with industrial or commercial
facilities;
   (C)   Forestry, including processing of forest products with portable
equipment;
   (D)   Recreational vehicle use; provided that, the use is on the site for
fewer than 180 consecutive days and the vehicle is fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system with wheels intact, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions;
   (E)   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas;
   (F)   Maintenance of existing open space uses or artificial obstructions;
   (G)   Preventive maintenance activities such as bridge deck rehabilitation
and roadway pavement preservation activities are considered maintenance;
   (H)   Public or private recreational uses not requiring structures such as
picnic grounds, swimming areas, parks, campgrounds, golf courses, driving
ranges, archery ranges, wildlife management and natural areas, alternative
livestock ranches (game farms), fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target
ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and hiking and
horseback riding trails;
   (I)   Fences such as those that have a low impact to the flow of water, such
as barbed wire fences and wood rail fences and shall not include permanent
fences crossing channels;
   (J)   Addition of highway guard rail, signing and utility poles along an
existing roadway; and
   (K)   Irrigation and livestock supply wells; provided that, they are located
at least 500 feet from domestic water supply wells and with the top of casing
18 inches above the base flood elevation.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Recreational vehicles placed on sites, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(14)
Statutory reference:
   Allowed uses, see ARM 36.15.701
   Uses allowed without permits, see ARM 36.15.601
§ 11-1-61 PROHIBITED USES, ACTIVITIES AND STRUCTURES WITHIN THE JURISDICTIONAL
AREA.
   (A)   Floodway. The following artificial obstructions and non-conforming
uses are prohibited in the floodway within the regulated flood hazard area:
      (1)   A building or structure including alterations for living purposes,
place of assembly or permanent use by human beings or commercial and industrial
buildings, or mobile homes and manufactured homes;
      (2)   A structure, fill or excavation that would cause water to be
diverted from the floodway, cause erosion, obstruct the natural flow of waters
or reduce the carrying capacity of the floodway. Minor excavation or fill where
compatible and related and incidental may be allowed with a permitted use;
      (3)   The construction or storage of an object (artificial obstruction)
subject to flotation or movement during flood level periods;
      (4)   Solid and hazardous waste disposal and individual and multiple
family sewage disposal systems unless otherwise allowed pursuant to ARM
17.36.101-116 and 17.36.309-345;
      (5)   Storage of toxic, flammable, hazardous or explosive materials; and
      (6)   Cemeteries, mausoleums or any other burial grounds, which are
subject to a more stringent standard found in other regulations.
   (B)   Flood fringe or regulated flood hazard area without a floodway. The
following artificial obstructions and non-conforming uses are prohibited in the
flood fringe or floodplain without a floodway of the regulated flood hazard
area:
      (1)   Solid and hazardous waste disposal;
      (2)   Storage of toxic, flammable, hazardous or explosive materials;
      (3)   Cemeteries, mausoleums or any other burial grounds; and
      (4)   Critical facilities, including buildings and associated facilities
that provide essential community care and emergency operation functions such as
schools, hospitals and nursing home facilities, fire stations and police
stations, as otherwise regulated in 44 C.F.R. § 60.22.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Prohibited uses, see ARM 36.15.605)(1a), 36.15.605(1)(c), 36.15.605(2b),
36.15.605(2)(a), 36-15-605(2c), 36.15.605(2d), 36-15-703(1), 36-15-703(2)
   Prohibited uses within a floodway, see MCA 76-5-403(1), 76-5-403(2), 76-5-
403(3)
§ 11-1-62 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   A permit is required within the regulated flood hazard area for a
person to establish or alter an artificial obstruction, non-conforming use or
development.
      (2)   Artificial obstructions, non-conforming uses and uses not
specifically listed in §§
11-1-75 through
11-1-88 and
11-1-100 through
11-1-103 of this chapter requires a permit, except as allowed without a permit
in §
11-1-60 of this chapter or as prohibited as specified in §
11-1-61 of this chapter.
      (3)   A permit is required to reconstruct or repair an existing structure
that has experienced substantial damage or substantial improvement.
      (4)   A permit is not required for existing artificial obstructions or
non-conforming uses established in the floodplain before the effective date of
floodplain management regulations.
      (5)   Artificial obstruction and non-conforming uses in a regulated flood
hazard area not exempt under §
11-1-60 of this chapter is a public nuisance unless a permit has been obtained.
      (6)   These regulations do not affect any existing artificial obstruction
or non-conforming use in the regulated flood hazard area before the land use
regulations have been adopted.
      (7)   An alteration that is any change or addition to an artificial
obstruction or non-conforming use not exempt under §
11-1-60 of this chapter that increases the size or increases its potential
flood hazard, requires a permit.
      (8)   Maintenance of an artificial obstruction or non-conforming use is
not an alteration.
   (B)   Required permit application information. A permit application shall
include, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   A completed and signed floodplain permit application;
      (2)   The required review fee;
      (3)   Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions
and elevation of proposed project (i.e., landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes and the
like) and the location of the foregoing in relation to the regulated flood
hazard areas;
      (4)   A copy of other required applicable permits which may include, but
is not limited to, a 310 permit, SPA 124 permit, Section 404 permit, a 318
authorization, 401 certification or a navigable rivers land use license or
easement from other permits from federal, state and local agencies, for the
proposed floodplain project and must show that the application is not in
conflict with other relevant and applicable permits; and
      (5)   Additional information related to the specific use or activity that
demonstrates the design criteria and construction standards are met or exceeded
as specified in §§
11-1-75 through
11-1-88 and
11-1-100 through
11-1-103 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Purpose and floodplain regulations, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.1
Statutory reference:
   Artificial obstructions and non-conforming uses, see MCA 76-5-103(1), 76-5-
404(1), 76-5-404(2), 76-5-404(3), 76-5-404(3)(b)
   Definitions, see ARM 36.15.101(2), 36.15.101(3)
   Local regulations, see ARM 36.15.204
§ 11-1-63 APPLICATION EVALUATION.
   (A)   Application review.
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review and evaluate the
application and shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application
within 60 days of receipt of a correct and complete application.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall determine whether the
application contains the applicable elements required in these regulations and
shall notify the applicant of the Floodplain Administrator’s determination as
to completeness within seven working days of receipt.
      (3)   If the application is found insufficient and if the applicant
corrects the identified deficiencies and resubmits the application, the
Floodplain Administrator shall notify the applicant whether the resubmitted
application contains all the elements required by these regulations, as
applicable, within seven working days of receipt of the resubmitted
application.
      (4)   This process shall be repeated until the applicant submits a
complete application containing all the elements required by these regulations
or the application is withdrawn.
      (5)   If after a reasonable effort the Floodplain Administrator
determines that the application remains incomplete, the Floodplain
Administrator shall deny the application and notify the applicant of missing
elements. No further action shall be taken on the application by the Floodplain
Administrator until the application is resubmitted.
      (6)   A determination that an application contains the appropriate
information for review does not ensure that the floodplain permit application
will be approved or conditionally approved and does not limit the ability of
the Floodplain Administrator in requesting additional information during the
review process.
   (B)   Notice requirements for floodplain permit applications. Upon receipt
of a complete application for a permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall:
      (1)   Prepare a notice containing the facts pertinent to the application
and shall publish the notice at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the area;
      (2)   Serve notice by first-class mail upon adjacent property owners, if
any;
      (3)   The State National Flood Insurance Program Coordinator located in
DNRC shall also receive notice by the most efficient method. Notice to other
stream activity permitting agencies shall also be considered;
      (4)   The notice shall provide a reasonable period of time, not less than
15 days, for interested parties to submit comments on the proposed activity;
and
      (5)   Prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse in the
regulated flood hazard area, additionally provide notice to FEMA and adjacent
communities.
   (C)   Permit criteria.
      (1)   Permits shall be granted or denied on the basis of whether the
proposed new construction, substantial improvement or alteration of an
artificial obstruction is not a prohibited use and meets the requirements of
the minimum standards and criteria in §§
11-1-75 through
11-1-88 and
11-1-100 through
11-1-103 of this chapter.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator must determine that all necessary
permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval
is required by federal or state law, including § 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, 36 U.S.C. § 1334.
   (D)   Decision.
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator shall approve, conditionally approve
or deny the proposed application. The Floodplain Administrator shall notify the
applicant of his or her action and the reasons thereof within 60 days of
receipt of a correct and complete application unless otherwise specified. A
copy of the approved permit must be provided to DNRC.
      (2)   The granting of a permit does not affect any other type of approval
required by any other statute or ordinance of the state, any political
subdivision or the United States, but is an added requirement.
   (E)   Floodplain permit application approval. Upon approval or conditional
approval of the floodplain permit application, the Floodplain Administrator
shall provide the applicant with a permit including, but not limited to, the
following requirements and conditions:
      (1)   The floodplain permit will become valid when all other necessary
permits are in place;
      (2)   Set forth the time limit of up to one year from the date of permit
issuance or as commensurate with the project construction time line for
completion of the project or development. The applicant may request an
extension for completion for up to an additional year. The request for
extension must be made within a reasonable period of the original deadline;
      (3)   Notify all subsequent property owners and their agents and
potential buyers of the floodplain development permit issued on the property
and that such property is located within a regulated flood hazard area;
      (4)   Maintain the artificial obstruction or use to comply with the
conditions and specifications of the permit;
      (5)   Allow the Floodplain Administrator to perform on site inspections
at select intervals during construction or completion;
      (6)   Impose interim reporting to the Floodplain Administrator of
construction data to confirm design elevations and other project design
criteria, which may be undertaken contemporaneously with any building permit
inspections;
      (7)   Submit a certificate of compliance report and elevation certificate
where applicable within 30 days of completion or other time as specified; and
      (8)   Require FEMA approval of revisions that affected National Flood
Insurance Rate Map, in the manner set forth above.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Alteration or relocation os watercourse, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(6)
   Review of proposed development, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(2)
Statutory reference:
   Notice requirements; local regulations, see ARM 36.15.204(2)(c), 36.15.204
(2)(e), 36.15.204(2)(g)
   Permit requirements, see MCA 76-5-108
   Variances, see MCA 76-5-405(2)
DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS IN THE FLOODWAY
§ 11-1-75 USES REQUIRING PERMITS.
   Uses specifically listed in this subchapter may be allowed by permit within
the floodway, subject to the described requirements.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-76 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   An application for a permit must demonstrate the following goals and
criteria are considered and incorporated into the design of any use or
artificial obstruction in the floodway requiring a permit.
   (A)   All projects in the floodway where specifically required herein as
requiring an encroachment analysis, must undergo a thorough hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis prepared by an engineer to demonstrate their effect on flood
flows, velocities and the base flood elevation.
   (B)   A conditional approval from FEMA of any proposed increase of more than
zero (0.00) feet in the base flood elevation must accompany the application. An
application for a FEMA conditional letter of map revision approval requires a
supporting encroachment analysis.
   (C)   The maximum allowable increase to the base flood elevation is one-half
foot (0.50), unless approval of an alteration of the regulated flood hazard
area pursuant to §§
11-1-45 through
11-1-47 of this chapter occurs with approval of the variance pursuant to §§
11-1-130 through
11-1-135 of this chapter:
      (1)   Projects must assure that the carrying capacity of the altered or
relocated watercourse is maintained;
      (2)   Projects must be designed and constructed to ensure that they do
not increase the flood hazard on other properties and be reasonably safe from
flooding;
      (3)   The danger to life and property due to backwater or diverted flow
caused by the obstruction or use;
      (4)   The danger that the obstruction or use may be swept downstream to
the injury of others;
      (5)   The availability of alternative locations;
      (6)   The construction or alteration of the obstruction or use in such
manner as to lessen the flooding danger;
      (7)   The permanence of the obstruction or use;
      (8)   The anticipated development in the foreseeable future of the area
which may be affected by the obstruction or use;
      (9)   Relevant and related permits for the project have been obtained;
      (10)   Projects must conform to the additional minimum standards and
provisions of this chapter as specified for the use or artificial obstruction
specified herein;
      (11)   Such other factors as are in harmony with the purposes of these
regulations, the Montana Floodplain and Floodway Management Act and the
accompanying Administrative Rules of Montana; and
      (12)   The safety of access to property in times of flooding for ordinary
and emergency services is subject to other more stringent regulations.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Encroachments and community considerations, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3
   Planning considerations for flood-prone areas, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.22
   Revision of flood insurance maps, see 44 C.F.R. § 65.12
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of floodplains, see ARM 36.15.505
   Minimum criteria for permits, see ARM 36.15.604
   Permit criteria, see ARM 36.15.216(2)
   Prohibited uses, see ARM 36.15.605(b)
   Variance request considerations, see MCA 76-5-406
§ 11-1-77 MINING OF MATERIAL REQUIRING EXCAVATION FROM PITS OR POOLS.
   Mining of materials requiring excavation from pits or pools may be
permitted; provided that:
   (A)   A buffer strip of undisturbed land of sufficient width as determined
by an engineer to prevent flood flows from channeling into the excavation is
left between the edge of the channel and the edge of the excavation;
   (B)   The excavation meets all applicable laws and regulations of other
local and state agencies; and
   (C)   Excavated material may be processed on site, but is stockpiled outside
the floodplain.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Mining of material requiring excavation from pits or pools, see ARM
36.15.602(1)
§ 11-1-78 RAILROAD, HIGHWAY AND STREET STREAM CROSSINGS.
   Railroad, highway and street stream crossings may be permitted; provided
that:
   (A)   Crossings are designed to offer minimal obstructions to the flood
flow;
   (B)   Where failure or interruption of public transportation facilities
would result in danger to public health or safety and where practicable and in
consideration of FHWA Federal-Aid Policy Guide, 23 C.F.R. part 650A:
      (1)   Bridge lower chords shall have freeboard to at least two feet above
the base flood elevation to help pass ice flows, the base flood discharge and
any debris associated with the discharge; and
      (2)   Culverts are designed to pass the base flood discharge and maintain
at least two feet freeboard on the crossing surface.
         (a)   If possible, normal overflow channels are preserved to allow
passage of sediments to prevent aggradations;
         (b)   Mid stream supports for bridges, if necessary, have footings
buried below the maximum scour depth; and
         (c)   An encroachment analysis is prepared by an engineer.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Uses requiring permits, see ARM 36.15.602
§ 11-1-79 LIMITED FILLING FOR ROAD AND RAILROAD EMBANKMENTS.
   Limited filling for road and railroad embankments not associated with stream
crossings and bridges may be permitted; provided that:
   (A)   The fill is the suitable fill;
   (B)   Reasonable alternate transportation routes outside the floodway are
not available;
   (C)   The encroachment is located as far from the stream channel as
possible;
   (D)   The project includes mitigation of impacts to other property owners in
the vicinity of the project and the natural stream function; and
   (E)   An encroachment analysis is prepared by an engineer.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Uses requiring permits, see ARM 36.15.602(3)
§ 11-1-80 BURIED OR SUSPENDED UTILITY TRANSMISSION LINES.
   Buried or suspended utility transmission lines may be permitted; provided
that:
   (A)   Suspended utility transmission lines are designed such that the lowest
point of the suspended line is at least six feet higher than the base flood
elevation;
   (B)   Towers and other appurtenant structures are designed and placed to
withstand and offer minimal obstruction to flood flows;
   (C)   When technically feasible, the crossing will not disturb the bed and
banks of the stream and alternatives such as alternative routes, directional
drilling and aerial crossings are considered; and
   (D)   Utility transmission lines carrying toxic or flammable materials are
buried to a depth of at least twice the calculated maximum scour depth
determined by an engineer for the base flood.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Uses requiring permits, see ARM 36.15.602(4)
§ 11-1-81 STORAGE OF MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
   Storage of materials and equipment may be permitted; provided that:
   (A)   The material or equipment is not subject to major damage by flooding
and is properly anchored to prevent flotation or downstream movement; and
   (B)   The material or equipment is readily removable within the limited time
available after flood warning. Storage of flammable, toxic or explosive
materials shall not be permitted.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Uses requiring permits, see ARM 36.15.602(5)
§ 11-1-82 DOMESTIC WATER SUPPLY WELLS.
   Domestic water supply wells may be permitted; provided that:
   (A)   They are driven or drilled wells located on ground higher than
surrounding ground to assure positive drainage from the well;
   (B)   They require no other structures (e.g., a well house);
   (C)   Well casings are water tight to a distance of at least 25 feet below
the ground surface and the well casing height shall be a minimum of 18 inches
above the base flood elevation;
   (D)   Water supply and electrical lines have a watertight seal where the
lines enter the casing;
   (E)   All pumps and electrical lines and equipment are either of the
submersible type or are adequately flood-proofed; and
   (F)   Check valves are installed on main water lines at wells and at all
building entry locations.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Utility guidelines, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.39
Statutory reference:
   Domestic water wells; permit required, see ARM 36.15.602(6)
§ 11-1-83 BURIED AND SEALED VAULTS FOR SEWAGE DISPOSAL IN CAMPGROUNDS AND
RECREATIONAL AREAS.
   Buried and sealed vaults for sewage disposal in campgrounds and recreational
areas may be permitted; provided, the same meet applicable laws and standards
administered by Montana Department of Environmental Quality. Only those
wastewater disposal systems that meet the requirements and separation distances
under ARM 17.36.101-116 and ARM 17.36.301-345 are allowed.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Sanitary sewage systems, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(6)
§ 11-1-84 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE CAMPGROUNDS.
   Public and private campgrounds may be permitted; provided that:
   (A)   Access roads require only limited fill and do not obstruct or divert
flood waters;
   (B)   Meet the accessory structures requirements;
   (C)   An encroachment analysis must be prepared by an engineer;
   (D)   No dwellings or permanent mobile homes are allowed;
   (E)   Recreational vehicles and travel trailers are ready for highway use
with wheels intact, with only quick disconnect type utilities and securing
devices, and have no permanently attached additions; and
   (F)   There is no large-scale clearing of riparian vegetation within 50 feet
of the mean annual high water mark (higher standard).
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Recreational vehicles, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(14)
Statutory reference:
   Uses requiring permits, see ARM 36.15.602(2), 36.15.602(8)
§ 11-1-85 STRUCTURES ACCESSORY OR APPURTENANT.
   Structures accessory or appurtenant to permitted uses such as boat docks,
loading and parking areas, marinas, sheds, emergency airstrips, permanent
fences crossing channels, picnic shelters and tables and lavatory, may be
permitted; provided that:
   (A)   The structures are not intended for human habitation or supportive of
human habitation;
   (B)   If the structures are substantial as determined by the permit issuing
authority, an encroachment analysis must be prepared by an engineer;
   (C)   The structures will, insofar as possible, be located on ground higher
than the surrounding ground and as far from the channel as possible;
   (D)   Only those wastewater disposal systems that meet the requirements and
separation distances under ARM 17.36.101-116 and 17.36.301-345 are allowed;
   (E)   Service facilities within these structures such as electrical, heating
and plumbing are flood- proofed;
   (F)   Structure are firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
   (G)   The structures do not require fill and/or substantial excavation;
   (H)   No large scale clearing of riparian vegetation within 50 feet of the
mean annual high water mark, and
   (I)   The structures or use cannot be changed or altered without permit
approval.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Uses requiring permits, see ARM 36.15.602(2), 36.15.602(9)
§ 11-1-86 CONSTRUCTION OF OR MODIFICATIONS TO SURFACE WATER DIVERSIONS.
   Construction of or modifications to surface water diversions shall be
permitted; provided that, the design is prepared by an engineer and includes:
   (A)   An encroachment analysis is prepared by an engineer;
   (B)   Minimize potential erosion from a base flood;
   (C)   Safely withstand up to the base flood; and
   (D)   Construction is under the supervision of an engineer.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Permit issuing authority, see ARM 36.15.603
   Uses requiring permits, see ARM 36.15.602(2)
§ 11-1-87 FLOOD CONTROL AND BANK PROTECTION MEASURES.
   (A)   Flood control and bank protection measures must be designed by an
engineer and constructed to withstand the flood depths, hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic pressures, velocities, impact, buoyancy and uplift forces
associated with the base flood and include an encroachment analysis.
   (B)   The design shall also show compliance with the following additional
criteria.
      (1)   Levee and floodwall construction or alteration.
         (a)   The proposed construction or alteration of a levee or floodwall
must be designed and constructed with suitable fill and to safely convey a base
flood;
         (b)   Except to protect agricultural land only, are constructed at
least three feet higher than the elevation of the base flood;
         (c)   Unless to protect only agricultural land, protection of
structures of more than one land owner requires engineering and construction to
meet state and federal levee standards and be publically owned for the purpose
of construction, operation and maintenance; and
         (d)   For any increase in the elevation of the base flood the
following information must be provided:
            1.   The estimated cumulative effect of other reasonably
anticipated future permissible uses;
            2.   The type and amount of existing flood prone development in the
affected area; and
            3.   Impacts to existing or foreseeable development.
      (2)   Bank stabilization projects, pier and abutment protection. Bank
stabilization projects, pier and abutment protection projects shall be
permitted if:
         (a)   The materials for the project should be the least
environmentally damaging and practicable designed to withstand a base flood
within five years or other time as required by the Floodplain Administrator and
does not require substantial yearly maintenance after that period;
         (b)   Materials for the project may be designed to erode over time but
not fail catastrophically and impact others. Erosions and raveling of the
materials may be designed to be a least similar in amount and rate to existing
natural stream banks during the base flood;
         (c)   The project must not increase erosion upstream, downstream or
adjacent to the site;
         (d)   Materials for the project may include but not limited to rip
rap, root wads, brush mattresses, willow watting, woody debris or combinations
of analogous materials;
         (e)   The stream’s biological capacity and habitat potential shall be
incorporated in the project design; and
         (f)   Projects including compensating efforts by replacing and
providing substitute resources or environments through creation, restoration,
enhancement or preservation of similar or appropriate resource areas are
subject to a higher regulatory standard.
      (3)   Channelization projects. Channelization projects where the
excavation and/or construction of an artificial channel is for the purpose of
diverting the entire flow of a stream from its established course and provided
the projects do not increase velocity to a level that will cause erosion.
      (4)   Dams.
         (a)   The design and construction is in accordance with the Montana
Dam Safety Act and applicable safety standards; and
         (b)   The project will not increase flood hazards downstream either
through operational procedures or improper hydrologic/hydraulic design.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Encroachments; substantial improvements, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(3), (d)(3)
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of floodplains, see ARM 36.15.505(1)(c)(ii)and (iii)
   Definitions, see ARM 36.15.101(7)
   Permits, see ARM 36.15.606
§ 11-1-88 STREAM AND BANK RESTORATION.
   Stream and bank restoration projects intended to reestablish the terrestrial
and aquatic attributes of a natural stream and not for protection of a
structure or development; provided:
   (A)   The project design is reviewed and approved by an engineer;
   (B)   An encroachment analysis is performed by an engineer;
   (C)   The project will not increase erosion upstream, downstream or adjacent
to the site;
   (D)   Materials may include but are not limited to rip rap, root wads, brush
mattresses, willow watting, woody debris or combinations of analogous
materials;
   (E)   Erosions and raveling of the materials are similar in amount and rate
to existing natural stream banks during the base flood; and
   (F)   The project meets the terrestrial and aquatic resource capabilities of
the area.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of floodplains, see ARM 36.15.505(1)(c)(ii)and (iii)
   Permits, see ARM 36.15.606
DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS IN THE FLOOD FRINGE OR
REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREA WITH NO FLOODWAY
§ 11-1-100 USES REQUIRING PERMITS.
   All uses and the associated requirements allowed by permit in the floodway
shall also be allowed by permit within the flood fringe or regulated flood
hazard area with no floodway. Additionally, new construction, substantial
improvements, alterations to structures (including, but not limited to,
residential, commercial, agricultural and industrial) and suitable fill shall
be allowed by permit subject to the minimum development requirements in §
11-1-76 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Allowed uses, see ARM 36.15.701(2)
§ 11-1-101 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Base flood elevation. The appropriate base flood elevation(s) shall be
determined by appropriate methods and utilized in the design and layout of the
project by an engineer demonstrating the appropriate design and construction
criteria herein are met. Regulated flood hazard areas that do not have computed
and published base flood elevations in the adopted flood hazard study
referenced in §§
11-1-45  through
11-1-47  of this chapter, the base flood elevation must be computed as well,
using appropriate engineering methods and analysis.
   (B)   Flood damage. Projects must be constructed by methods and practices
that minimize flood damage and are reasonably safe from flooding.
   (C)   Materials. Structures are reasonably safe from flooding and
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   Structures or fill. Structures or fill must not be prohibited by any
other statute, regulation, ordinance or resolution and must be compatible with
subdivision, zoning and any other land use regulations, if any.
   (E)   Anchoring. All construction and substantial improvements shall be
designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   (F)   Certification. Certification by an engineer, architect or other
qualified person must accompany the application as to an encroachment analysis
where required, adequacy of structural elevations, determination of the base
flood elevation, flood-proofing, wet-proofing, dry-proofing, design and
construction to withstand the flood depths, hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
pressures, velocities, impact, buoyancy and uplift forces associated with the
base flood. A certification is not intended to constitute a warranty or
guarantee of performance, expressed or implied.
   (G)   Access. Whether structures must have safe access during times of
flooding up to the base flood for ordinary and emergency services; provided,
there are no reasonable alternate locations for structures is subject to a
higher regulatory standard.
   (H)   Encroachment limit. Allowable encroachment for developments in the
regulated flood hazard area without a floodway must be supported by an
encroachment analysis and cannot exceed one-half feet increase to the base
flood elevation. An encroachment analysis is not required for any development
in the flood fringe where an accompanying floodway has been designated within
the regulated flood hazard area.
   (I)   Electrical systems.
      (1)   All incoming power service equipment including all metering
equipment, control centers, transformers, distribution and lighting panels and
all other stationary equipment must be located at least two feet above the base
flood elevation.
      (2)   Portable and movable electrical equipment may be placed below the
elevation of the base flood elevation; provided that, the equipment can be
disconnected by a single plug and socket assembly of the submersible type.
      (3)   The main power service lines must have automatically operated
electrical disconnect equipment or manually operated electrical disconnect
equipment located at an accessible remote location outside the floodplain or
two feet above the base flood elevation.
      (4)   All electrical wiring systems installed below the base flood
elevation must be suitable for continuous submergence and may not contain
fibrous components.
   (J)   Heating and cooling systems.
      (1)   Be installed with float operated automatic control valves so that
fuel supply is automatically shut off when flood waters reach the floor level
where located;
      (2)   Have manually operated gate valves installed in gas supply lines.
The gate valves must be operable from a location above the base flood
elevation;
      (3)   Be installed in accordance with the provisions of electrical
systems flood-proofing; and
      (4)   Have furnaces and cooling units and ductwork installed at least two
feet above the base flood elevation.
   (K)   Plumbing systems.
      (1)   Sewer lines, except those to be buried and sealed, must have check
valves installed to prevent sewage backup into permitted structure.
      (2)   All toilets, stools, sinks, urinals, vaults and drains must be
located so the lowest point of possible entry is at least two feet above the
base flood elevation.
   (L)   Structural fill. Fill used to elevate structures, including, but not
limited to, residential, commercial and industrial structures must be suitable
and meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The filled area is at or above the base flood elevation and extends
at least 15 feet beyond the structure in all directions;
      (2)   The fill is compacted to minimize settlement and compacted to 95%
of the maximum density. Compaction of earthen fill must be certified by a
registered professional engineer;
      (3)   No portion of the fill is within the floodway;
      (4)   The fill slope must not be steeper than one and one-half horizontal
to one vertical unless substantiating data justifying a steeper slope is
provided and adequate erosion protection is provided for fill slopes exposed to
flood waters. The erosion protection for fill slopes exposed to velocities of
four feet per second and less may consist of vegetative cover consisting of
grasses or similar undergrowth as approved by the permit issuing authority.
Slopes exposed to velocities greater than four feet per second shall be
protected by armoring with stone or rock slope protection;
      (5)   The fill must be a minimum of 0.5 feet above the base flood
elevation;
      (6)   No portion of the fill is in the estimated floodway if none has
been designated; and
      (7)   Mitigation may be required for lost natural flood storage due to
added fill.
   (M)   Water and sewage systems. All new construction or substantial
improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other services designed and located
so as to prevent waters from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding or to prevent impairment or contamination during
flooding.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Substantial improvements; permits, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(3)
   Utility requirements, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(5) and (a)(6)
Statutory reference:
   Flood-proofing for electrical and plumbing systems, see ARM 36.15.901,
36.15.902, 36.15.903
   Flood-proofing for residential structures, see ARM 36.15.702
   Uses allowed, see ARM 36.15.701
§ 11-1-102 RESIDENTIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   New construction, alterations and substantial improvements of residential
dwellings, including manufactured homes and recreational vehicles on site for
more than 180 consecutive days, must be constructed such that:
   (A)   The lowest floor elevation (including basement) including electrical,
heating, duct work, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and
other services is two feet above the base flood elevation. Elevating may be by
either suitable fill, stem walls, pilings or other acceptable means;
   (B)   Crawl spaces must be designed so that the crawl space floor is at or
above the base flood elevation. Crawl spaces having an inside dimension of more
than five feet from the ground to the living floor level must meet the
requirements in this section for a basement;
   (C)   Where existing streets, utilities, lot dimensions or additions onto
existing structures make strict compliance with these provisions impossible, a
lesser amount of fill or alternative flood-proofing measures may be permitted
only by variance approval; and
   (D)   All manufactured homes for residential use shall:
      (1)   Use methods and practices which minimize flood damage;
      (2)   Elevate the lowest floor two feet above the base flood elevation;
      (3)   Elevate on suitable fill or be raised on a permanent foundation;
      (4)   Have a foundation consisting of reinforced concrete, reinforced-
mortared block, reinforced piers or other foundation elements of equal
strength; and
      (5)   Secure the chassis, including additions by anchoring to the
foundation system so that it will resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement. Anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Over-the-top ties to ground anchors be provided at each of the
four corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at
intermediate locations for manufactured homes less than 50 feet long;
         (b)   Frame ties to ground anchors be provided at each corner of the
home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, for
manufactured homes more than 50 feet long; and
         (c)   Components of the anchoring system capable of carrying a force
of 4,800 pounds.
      (6)   Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Manufactured homes, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(6) and (c)(12)
Statutory reference:
   Flood-proofing for residential structures, see ARM 36.15.702(a)
§ 11-1-103 NON-RESIDENTIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General. New construction, alterations and substantial improvements of
commercial and industrial buildings must be constructed on suitable fill, stem
walls, pilings or other suitable means such that the lowest floor elevation
(including basement) is two feet above the base flood elevation or, if not, the
building must be adequately dry or wet flood-proofed as follows. Manufactured
homes proposed for use as commercial or industrial buildings cannot be wet- or
dry-flood-proofed.
   (B)   Exemptions. Also, agricultural structures used solely for agricultural
purposes and used exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting,
storage, drying or raising agricultural commodities including raising of
livestock, not be intended for human habitation, and having low flood damage
potential are exempt from dry- or wet-flood-proofing, but shall:
      (1)   Be located on higher ground and as far from the channel as
possible;
      (2)   Offer minimum obstruction to flood flows;
      (3)   Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or collapse;
      (4)   Where electrical, heating and plumbing systems are installed, must
meet flood-proofing requirements in this section; and
      (5)   Meet the elevation or dry-flood-proofing requirements if the
structure is an animal confinement facility.
   (C)   Wet flood-proofing. Building designs to allow internal flooding of the
lowest floor must:
      (1)   Limit uses to parking, loading areas and storage of equipment or
materials not appreciably affected by flood waters;
      (2)   Use materials for walls and floors that are resistant to flooding
to an elevation two feet or more above the base flood elevation;
      (3)   Equalize hydrostatic forces on walls by designing for entry and
exit of flood waters that include screens, louvers, valves and other coverings
or devices that:
         (a)   Automatically allow entry and exit of flood waters;
         (b)   Have two or more openings with a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
and
         (c)   Have the bottom of all openings no higher than one foot above
grade.
   (D)   Dry-flood-proofing. Buildings designs that do not allow internal
flooding of the lowest floors must be:
      (1)   Used for a purpose other than parking, loading or storage of
materials resistant to flooding shall be dry-flood-proofed;
      (2)   Flood-proofed to an elevation no lower than two feet above the BFE;
      (3)   Constructed of impermeable membranes or materials for floors and
walls and water-tight enclosures for all windows, doors and other openings; and
      (4)   Designed to withstand the hydrostatic pressures and hydrodynamic
forces resulting from the base flood.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Areas of special flood hazard, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)
   Substantial improvements, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)
Statutory reference:
   Allowed uses, see ARM 36.15.701
   Flood-proofing for residential structures, see ARM 36.15.702
EMERGENCIES
§ 11-1-115 GENERAL.
   (A)   Emergency repair and replacement of severely damaged artificial
obstructions and development including public transportation facilities, public
water and sewer facilities, flood control works and private projects in the
regulated flood hazard area are subject to the permitting requirements of these
regulations.
   (B)   The provisions of these regulations are not intended to affect other
actions that are necessary to safeguard life or structures during periods of
emergency.    
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-116 EMERGENCY APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prior to any action, the property owner and or the person responsible
for taking emergency action shall notify the Floodplain Administrator and
follow-up by submitting an emergency notification form within five days of the
action taken as a result of an emergency.
   (B)   Unless otherwise specified by the Floodplain Administrator, within 30
days of initiating the emergency action, a person who has undertaken an
emergency action must submit a floodplain permit application that describes
what action has taken place during the emergency and describe any additional
work that may be required to bring the project in compliance with these
regulations.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Permit waiver for repair, see ARM 36.15.217
§ 11-1-117 PERMIT EVALUATION.
   A person who has undertaken an emergency action may be required to modify or
remove the project in order to meet the permit requirements.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
VARIANCES
§ 11-1-130 GENERAL.
   A variance from the minimum development standards of these regulations may
be allowed. An approved variance would permit construction in a manner
otherwise as required or prohibited by these regulations.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Definitions of NFIP terms, see 44 C.F.R. § 59.1
§ 11-1-131 VARIANCE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A completed floodplain permit application and required supporting
material must be submitted.
   (B)   Additionally, a completed variance application specific to the
variance request including facts and information addressing the criteria in
this section must be submitted.
   (C)   If the floodplain permit application and variance application is
deemed not correct and complete, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify the
applicant of deficiencies within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days. Under
no circumstances should it be assumed that the variance is automatically
granted.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-132 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR FLOODPLAIN VARIANCE APPLICATION.
   Public notice of the floodplain permit and variance application shall be
given pursuant to §
11-1-63 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-133 EVALUATION OF VARIANCE APPLICATION.
   (A)   A variance shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum allowance necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief from these regulations and provided all of these findings are met:
      (1)   There is a a good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship
to the applicant;
      (3)   There are no basements nor a residential dwelling that has the
lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation;
      (4)   Crawl spaces’ floor are no more than two feet below the exterior
lowest adjacent grade and must have an inside dimension from interior ground to
the bottom of the living floor of less than five feet. The crawl spaces must
meet the dry-flood-proofing requirements in §
11-1-103 of this chapter.
      (5)   Granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights
to existing insurable buildings, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public or conflict with other existing local laws or ordinances;
      (6)   The proposed use is adequately flood-proofed;
      (7)   The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief;
      (8)   Reasonable alternative locations are not available;
      (9)   There is no danger to life and property by water that may be backed
up or diverted by the obstruction or use;
      (10)   There is no danger that the obstruction or use will be swept
downstream to the injury of others;
      (11)   Incorporates measures in the construction or alteration of the
obstruction or use that lessens the danger;
      (12)   The permanence of the obstruction or use;
      (13)   There is no adverse affect to anticipated development in the
foreseeable future of the area that may be affected by the obstruction or use;
      (14)   There is no adverse affect to existing properties or structures;
and
      (15)   Any increase to the base flood elevation in a floodway has been
approved by FEMA for flood insurance purposes and any increase to the base
flood elevation in the floodway or floodplain of more than one-half feet is an
alteration of the regulated flood hazard area has been duly amended pursuant to
§§
11-1-45 through
11-1-47 of this chapter.
   (B)   Special considerations for variance approval.
      (1)   If the new construction or substantial improvements on a lot of
one-half acres or less is contiguous to and surrounded by lots of existing
structures constructed below the base flood elevation, a variance may be
approved. However, as lot sizes increase beyond one-half acre additional
technical justification may be required.
      (2)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum relief necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Variances and exceptions, see 44 C.F.R. 60.6(a), 60.6(a)(3), 60.6(a)(4)
Statutory reference:
   Variance criteria, MCA 76-5-406(2), 76-5-406(4), 76-5-406(5), 76-5-406(6)
   Variances generally, see ARM 36.15.218
§ 11-1-134 DECISION.
   (A)   The city’s Board of Adjustment shall:
      (1)   Evaluate the application using the criteria and findings in this
section, the application requirements and minimum development standards in §§
11-1-75 through
11-1-88 and
11-1-100 through
11-1-103 of this chapter;
      (2)   Hear, make findings and approve, conditionally approve or deny a
variance within 60 days of a complete application;
      (3)   Attach conditions to the granting of variance, including a project
completion date and inspections during and after construction;
      (4)   Notify the applicant that the issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood level may result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance and that flood insurance premiums are determined by actuarial
risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance; and
      (5)   Grant approval only if the jurisdictional area of the regulated
flood hazard area has been approved pursuant to §
11-1-47 of this chapter.
   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving a variance, including the Board’s findings and decision and shall
send a copy of each variance granted to DNRC.
   (C)   The Floodplain Administrator shall report such variances issued in the
biennial report submitted to FEMA.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Federal law reference:
   Variances and exceptions, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.6(a)(6)
Statutory reference:
   Variances for obstructions or non-conforming uses, see MCA 76-5-405
§ 11-1-135 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person or persons aggrieved by the variance decision may appeal such
decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Appeal from order, see MCA 76-5-209(1)
APPEALS
§ 11-1-150 GENERAL.
   An appeal is a formal review by the Board of Adjustment of the Floodplain
Administrator’s decision granting or denial of a floodplain development permit.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-151 APPEALS REQUIREMENTS.
   An appeal to the Board shall include:
   (A)   An appeal shall include the basis of the appeal and supporting
information including specific findings and conclusions of the Floodplain
Administrator’s decision being appealed;
   (B)   An appeal must be submitted by an applicant or anyone who may be
aggrieved by the Floodplain Administrator’s decision or order;
   (C)   Appeals must be received within 30 days of the date of the decision or
order of the Floodplain Administrator; and
   (D)   Additional information specific to the appeal request may be
requested.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-152 NOTICE AND HEARING.
   (A)   Notice of the pending appeal and public hearing shall be provided
pursuant to §
11-1-63 of this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator may notify DNRC and FEMA
of pending appeals.
   (B)   A public hearing must be held within 30 days of the notice unless
applicant agrees to a different deadline.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-153 DECISION.
   A judgment on an appeal shall be made within 30 days of the hearing unless
the applicant agrees to a different deadline. The decision must grant the
permit, modify or deny the permit or remand the application to the Floodplain
Administrator with instructions or directions. A decision on an appeal of a
permit cannot grant or issue a variance.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-154 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision may appeal such decision in
the courts of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Appeal of decision, see MCA 76-5-209(1)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 11-1-165 INVESTIGATION REQUEST.
   An investigation of an artificial obstruction or non-conforming use within
the regulated flood hazard area may be made either on the initiative of the
Floodplain Administrator or on the written request of three titleholders of
land which may be affected by the activity within the regulated flood hazard
area. The names and addresses of the persons requesting the investigations
shall be released if requested.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to enter and investigate, see MCA 76-5-105
§ 11-1-166 NOTICES TO ENTER AND INVESTIGATE LANDS OR WATERS.
   Upon at least 48 hours’ prior notice, the Floodplain Administrator may make
reasonable entry upon any lands and waters for the purpose of making an
investigation, inspection or survey to verify compliance with these
regulations.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator shall provide notice of entry by mail,
electronic mail, phone call, personal delivery to the owner, owner’s agent,
lessee or lessee’s agent whose lands will be entered at least 48 hours in
advance of such entry.
   (B)   If none of these persons can be found, the Floodplain Administrator
shall affix a copy of the notice to one or more conspicuous places on the
property for five days.
   (C)   If the owners do not respond, cannot be located or refuse entry to the
Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain Administrator may only enter the
property through a search warrant.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-167 NOTICE TO RESPOND AND ORDER TO TAKE CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   (A)   When the Floodplain Administrator determines that a violation may have
occurred, the Floodplain Administrator may issue written notice to the owner or
an agent of the owner, either personally or by certified mail.
   (B)   Such notice shall cite the regulatory offense and include an order to
take corrective action within a reasonable time or respond requesting an
administrative review.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-168 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   The order is final, unless within five working days or any granted
extension, after the order is received, the owner submits a written request for
an administrative review before the Floodplain Administrator. A request for an
administrative review does not stay the order.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-169 APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION.
   Within ten working days or any granted extension of receipt of the
Floodplain Administrator’s decision concluding the administrative review, the
property owner or owner’s agent may appeal the decision to the Board.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-170 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER TO TAKE CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   If the owner fails to comply with the order for corrective action, remedies
may include administrative or legal actions or penalties through court.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-171 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision may appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
§ 11-1-172 OTHER REMEDIES.
   This section does not prevent efforts to obtain voluntary compliance through
warning, conference or any other appropriate means. Action under this
subchapter shall not bar enforcement of these regulations by injunction or
other appropriate remedy.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-30-2013)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Montana Code Annotated
References to 1992 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MONTANA CODE ANNOTATED
MCA Cites Code Section
MCA Cites                   Code Section
3-1-302                     2-1-15
Title 3, Ch. 10, Part 3     2-1-16
3-11-104                    2-1-17
7-1-4123                    11-1-2
                            5-2-15;
7-1-4150                    5-3-4 ;
                            9-1-18
7-1-4150 through 7-1-4152   7-5-14
                            5-2-15;
7-1-4151                    5-3-4;
                            9-1-18
7-6-4134                    1-6-2
7-6-4501 et seq.            1-6-1
7-13-4306                   7-5-14
7-32-4151 through 7-32-4164 2-2-8
13-35-226                   1-4-2
16-12-101 et seq.           3-3-1
16-12-102                   3-3-1
16-12-102(20)(b) or (c)     3-3-1
20-5-109                    3-3-1
20-5-402                    3-3-1
Title 25, Ch. 22            2-1-20
Title 45                    3-3-1;
                            6-2-1
46-6-310                    5-1-18
46-17-203                   2-1-19
Title 61                    9-1-14
Title 70, Ch. 23            10-1-1
                            5-2-2;
75-10-501(4)                5-3-1 ;
                            9-1-18
Title 76, Ch. 5             11-1-2
76-5-105                    11-1-165
76-5-108                    11-1-63
76-5-110                    11-1-19
76-5-201                    11-1-3;
                            11-1-45
76-5-201 et seq.            11-1-6
76-5-301                    11-1-2
76-5-405                    11-1-134
76-5-406                    11-1-76
76-5-103(1)                 11-1-18;
                            11-1-62
76-5-103(2)                 11-1-18
76-5-103(4)                 11-1-18
76-5-103(5)                 11-1-18
76-5-103(7)                 11-1-18
76-5-103(9)                 11-1-18
Title 76, Ch. 5, Part 2     11-1-18
76-5-209(1)                 11-1-135;
                            11-1-154
76-5-403(1)                 11-1-61
76-5-403(2)                 11-1-61
76-5-403(3)                 11-1-61
76-5-404(1)                 11-1-62
76-5-404(2)                 11-1-62
76-5-404(3)                 11-1-62
76-5-404(3)(b)              11-1-62
76-5-405(2)                 11-1-63
76-5-406(2)                 11-1-133
76-5-406(4)                 11-1-133
76-5-406(5)                 11-1-133
76-5-406(6)                 11-1-133
76-5-103(10)                11-1-18
76-5-103(11)                11-1-18
                            
 
REFERENCES TO 1992 CODE
1992 Code 2020 Code
1992 Code 2020 Code
1-1-101   1-1-1
1-1-102   1-1-2
1-1-103   1-1-3
1-1-104   1-1-4
1-1-105   1-1-5
1-1-106   1-1-6
1-1-107   1-1-7
1-1-108   1-1-8
1-1-201   1-1-20
1-1-202   1-1-21
1-1-203   1-1-22
1-1-301   1-2-1
1-1-401   1-2-2
1-1-501   1-5-1
1-1-502   1-5-2
1-1-503   1-5-3
1-1-504   1-5-4
1-1-505   1-5-5
1-1-601   1-1-35
1-1-602   1-1-36
1-1-701   1-2-3
1-1-702   1-2-3
1-1-703   1-2-3
1-1-704   1-2-3
2-1-101   1-3-1
2-1-102   1-3-2
2-1-103   1-3-3
2-1-104   1-3-4
2-1-105   1-3-5
2-1-106   1-3-6
2-1-107   1-3-7
2-1-108   1-3-8
2-1-109   1-3-9
2-1-201   1-3-20
2-1-202   1-3-21
2-1-203   1-3-22
2-1-204   1-3-22
2-1-205   1-3-23
2-1-206   1-3-24
2-1-207   1-3-25
2-1-208   1-3-26
2-1-209   1-3-27
2-1-210   1-3-28
2-1-211   1-3-29
2-1-301   1-4-90
2-1-302   1-4-90
2-1-303   1-4-90
2-2-101   1-4-91
2-2-102   1-4-91
2-2-201   1-4-92
2-2-202   1-4-92
2-2-203   1-4-92
2-2-301   1-4-93
2-2-302   1-4-93
2-2-401   1-4-94
2-2-402   1-4-94
2-2-501   1-4-95
2-2-502   1-4-95
2-2-503   1-4-95
2-2-601   1-4-15
2-2-602   1-4-16
2-2-603   1-4-17
2-2-604   1-4-18
2-2-605   1-4-19
2-3-101   1-4-30
2-3-102   1-4-31
2-3-103   1-4-32
2-3-104   1-4-33
2-3-105   1-4-34
2-3-201   1-4-1
2-3-202   1-4-1
2-3-203   1-4-1
2-3-204   1-4-1
2-3-301   1-4-2
2-3-401   1-4-50
2-3-402   1-4-51
2-3-403   1-4-52
2-3-404   1-4-53
2-3-405   1-4-54
2-3-406   1-4-55
2-3-407   1-4-56
2-4-501   1-4-70
2-4-502   1-4-71
2-4-503   1-4-72
2-4-504   1-4-73
2-4-505   1-4-74
2-4-506   1-4-75
3-1-101   2-1-35
3-1-102   2-1-36
3-1-103   2-1-37
3-1-104   2-1-38
3-1-105   2-1-38
3-1-106   2-1-38
3-1-107   2-1-39
3-1-108   2-1-40
3-1-109   2-1-41
3-1-110   2-1-42
3-1-111   2-1-43
3-1-112   2-1-44
3-1-113   2-1-45
3-1-114   2-1-46
3-1-301   2-1-60
3-1-302   2-1-61
3-1-303   2-1-62
3-1-501   2-2-8
4-1-101   1-6-1
4-1-102   1-6-1
4-1-201   1-6-2
4-1-301   1-6-3
4-1-302   1-6-3
4-1-303   1-6-3
4-1-401   1-6-4
4-1-501   1-6-20
4-1-502   1-6-21
4-1-503   1-6-22
4-1-504   1-6-23
4-1-601   1-6-5
5-1-101   2-2-1
5-1-102   2-2-2
5-1-103   2-2-3
5-1-104   2-2-4
5-1-105   2-2-4
5-1-106   2-2-4
5-1-107   2-2-4
5-1-108   2-2-4
5-1-109   2-2-5
5-1-110   2-2-5
5-1-111   2-2-5
5-1-112   2-2-6
5-1-113   2-2-7
5-1-201   2-2-20
5-1-202   2-2-21
5-1-203   2-2-22
5-1-204   2-2-23
5-1-205   2-2-24
5-1-301   2-1-1
5-1-302   2-1-2
5-1-303   2-1-2
5-1-304   2-1-3
5-1-305   2-1-4
5-1-501   2-1-15
5-1-502   2-1-16
5-1-503   2-1-17
5-1-504   2-1-18
5-1-505   2-1-19
5-1-506   2-1-20
5-1-507   2-1-21
5-1-508   2-1-22
6-1-301   3-1-1
6-1-302   3-1-15
6-1-303   3-1-16
6-1-304   3-1-17
6-1-305   3-1-18
6-1-306   3-1-19
6-1-307   3-1-20
6-1-308   3-1-21
6-1-309   3-1-22
6-1-310   3-1-23
6-1-311   3-1-24
6-1-312   3-1-25
6-1-313   3-1-26
6-1-314   3-1-26
6-1-315   3-1-26
6-1-316   3-1-26
6-1-317   3-1-2
6-1-318   3-1-3
6-2-101   3-2-1
6-2-102   3-2-2
6-2-103   3-2-3
6-2-104   3-2-4
6-2-105   3-2-5
6-2-106   3-2-6
6-2-107   3-2-17
7-1-1     4-1-1
7-1-3     4-1-2
7-1-4     4-1-3
7-1-5     4-1-4
7-1-6     4-1-5
7-1-8     4-1-6
7-1-9     4-1-7
7-1-201   6-6-1
7-1-202   6-6-2
7-1-203   6-6-3
7-1-204   6-6-4
7-1-205   6-6-5
7-1-206   6-6-6
7-1-207   6-6-7
7-1-208   6-6-8
7-1-209   6-6-9
7-1-301   7-2-1
7-1-302   7-2-2
7-1-303   7-2-3
7-1-304   7-2-4
7-1-305   7-2-5
7-1-306   7-2-6
7-1-307   7-2-7
7-1-308   7-2-8
7-1-309   7-2-9
7-1-310   7-2-10
7-1-311   7-2-11
7-1-401   8-1-1
7-1-402   8-1-25
7-1-403   8-1-26
7-1-404   8-1-27
7-1-405   8-1-28
7-1-406   8-1-29
7-1-407   8-1-30
7-1-408   8-1-31
7-1-409   8-1-31
7-1-410   8-1-31
7-1-411   8-1-2
7-1-412   8-1-3
7-1-413   8-1-4
7-1-414   8-1-5
7-1-415   8-1-6
7-1-416   8-1-7
7-1-417   8-1-8
7-1-418   8-1-9
7-1-419   8-1-10
7-1-420   8-1-11
7-1-421   8-1-12
7-1-422   8-1-13
7-1-423   8-1-14
7-1-501   8-1-45
7-1-502   8-1-46
7-1-503   8-1-47
7-1-504   8-1-48
7-1-505   8-1-49
7-1-601   8-1-60
7-1-602   8-1-61
7-1-603   8-1-62
7-1-1101  7-3-1
7-1-1102  7-3-2
7-1-1103  7-3-3
7-1-1104  7-3-4
7-1-1105  7-3-5
7-1-1106  7-3-6
7-1-1107  7-3-7
7-1-1108  7-3-45
7-1-1109  7-3-46
7-1-1110  7-3-47
7-1-1111  7-3-48
7-1-1112  7-3-49
7-1-1113  7-3-50
7-1-1114  7-3-8
7-1-1115  7-3-9
7-1-1116  7-3-10
7-1-1117  7-3-11
7-1-1118  7-3-12
7-1-1119  7-3-13
7-1-1120  7-3-14
7-1-1121  7-3-15
7-1-1122  7-3-16
7-1-1123  7-3-17
7-1-1124  7-3-18
7-1-1125  7-3-19
7-1-1126  7-3-20
7-1-1127  7-3-21
7-1-1128  7-3-22
7-1-1129  7-3-23
7-1-1130  7-3-24
7-1-1131  7-3-25
7-1-1132  7-3-26
7-1-1133  7-3-27
7-1-1134  7-3-28
7-1-1135  7-3-29
7-1-1136  7-3-30
7-1-1201  7-4-1
7-1-1202  7-4-2
7-1-1203  7-4-3
7-1-1204  7-4-4
7-1-1205  7-4-5
7-1-1206  7-4-6
7-1-1207  7-4-7
7-1-1208  7-4-8
7-1-1209  7-4-9
7-1-1210  7-4-10
7-1-1211  7-4-11
7-1-1212  7-4-12
7-1-1213  7-4-13
7-1-1214  7-4-14
7-1-1215  7-4-15
7-1-1216  7-4-16
7-1-1217  7-4-17
7-1-1218  7-4-18
7-1-1219  7-4-19
7-1-1220  7-4-45
7-1-1221  7-4-46
7-1-1222  7-4-47
7-1-1223  7-4-48
7-1-1224  7-4-49
7-1-1225  7-4-50
7-1-1226  7-4-51
7-1-1227  7-4-20
7-1-1228  7-4-52
7-1-1229  7-4-21
7-1-1230  7-4-22
7-1-1231  7-4-23
7-1-1232  7-4-24
7-1-1233  7-4-25
7-1-1234  7-4-26
7-1-1235  7-4-27
7-1-1236  7-4-28
7-1-1237  7-4-29
8-1-101   6-2-15
8-1-102   6-2-16
8-1-103   6-2-17
8-1-104   6-2-18
8-1-105   6-2-19
8-1-106   6-2-20
8-1-107   6-2-21
8-1-201   6-2-1
8-1-301   9-1-1
8-1-302   9-1-2
8-1-303   9-1-3
8-1-304   9-1-4
8-1-305   9-1-5
8-1-306   9-1-6
8-1-307   9-1-7
8-1-308   9-1-8
8-1-309   9-1-9
8-1-310   9-1-10
8-1-311   9-1-11
8-1-312   9-1-12
8-1-313   9-1-13
8-1-314   9-1-14
8-1-315   9-1-15
8-1-316   9-1-16
8-1-317   9-1-17
8-1-318   5-3-1—
          5-3-4
8-2-101   6-3-1
8-2-102   6-3-2
8-2-103   6-3-3
8-2-104   6-3-4
8-2-105   6-3-5
8-2-106   6-3-6
9-1-101   10-1-1
9-1-102   10-1-2
9-1-103   10-1-3
9-1-104   10-1-4
9-1-105   10-1-5
9-1-106   10-1-6
9-1-107   10-1-7
9-1-108   10-1-8
9-1-109   10-1-9
9-1-110   10-1-10
9-1-111   10-1-11
9-1-112   10-1-12
9-1-113   10-1-13
9-1-114   10-1-14
9-1-115   10-1-15
9-1-201   8-2-1
9-1-401   8-3-1
9-1-402   8-3-2
9-1-403   8-3-3
9-1-404   8-3-4
9-1-405   8-3-5
9-1-406   8-3-6
9-1-407   8-3-7
9-1-408   8-3-8
9-1-409   8-3-9
9-1-410   8-3-10
9-1-411   8-3-11
9-1-412   8-3-12
9-1-413   8-3-13
9-1-414   8-3-14
9-1-415   8-3-15
9-1-416   8-3-16
9-1-501   8-4-1
9-1-502   8-4-2
9-1-503   8-4-3
9-1-504   8-4-4
9-1-505   8-4-5
9-1-506   8-4-6
9-1-507   8-4-7
9-1-508   8-4-8
9-1-509   8-4-9
9-1-510   8-4-10
10-1-101  6-7-1
10-1-102  6-7-2
10-1-103  6-7-3
10-1-104  6-7-4
10-1-105  6-7-5
10-1-106  6-7-6
10-1-107  6-7-7
10-1-108  6-7-8
10-1-109  6-7-9
10-1-110  6-7-10
10-1-111  6-7-11
10-1-112  6-7-12
10-1-201  6-4-1
10-1-202  6-4-2
10-1-203  6-4-3
10-1-204  6-4-4
          
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
04-1     - -         6-6-1;
                     6-6-9
04-01    - -         7-2-8
2004-03  - -         6-4-1—
                     6-4-4
2004-05  - -         4-1-7
97-2     6-4-1997    4-1-2
97-3     11-19-1997  3-1-2
99-2     - -1999     2-1-36
00-01    7-5-2000    6-7-11
                     7-3-1—
06-01    11-6-2006   7-3-30;
                     7-3-45—
                     7-3-50
                     7-4-1—
07-01    1-22-2007   7-4-29;
                     7-4-45—
                     7-4-52
07-04    9-10-2007   2-2-5
2009-02  5-11-2009   1-4-90
2009-04  9-14-2009   7-5-1—
                     7-5-14
                     3-2-1—
2010-03  5-10-2010   3-2-6;
                     3-2-17
2011-01  3-28-2011   9-1-19
                     11-1-1—
                     11-1-19;
                     11-1-30;
                     11-1-31;
                     11-1-45—
                     11-1-47;
                     11-1-60—
                     11-1-63;
                     11-1-75—
2013-01  1-30-2013   11-1-88;
                     11-1-100—
                     11-1-103;
                     11-1-115—
                     11-1-117;
                     11-1-130—
                     11-1-135;
                     11-1-150—
                     11-1-154;
                     11-1-165—
                     11-1-172
2014-02  7-16-2014   6-7-12
2015-01  4-22-2015   9-1-15
2015-02  - -2015     9-1-16
2016-01  8-1-2016    9-1-1;
                     9-1-17
2016-02  8-15-2016   9-1-7
2016-03  9-12-2016   9-1-8
2017-05  6-5-2017    6-5-1—
                     6-5-6
2017-02  7-17-2017   5-2-1—
                     5-2-15
2017-06  9-5-2017    5-3-1—
                     5-3-4
2017-04  9-18-2017   9-1-18
2017-07  11-6-2017   1-6-5
2019-01  6-19-2019   3-2-1—
                     3-2-17
2020-01  3-2-2020    4-1-1;
                     4-1-5
2020-02  5-6-2020    1-1-35;
                     1-1-36
2020-03  5-6-2020    9-1-11
2021-01  4-5-2021    Adopting Ordinance
2021-02  4-19-2021   4-1-1
2021-03  11-8-2021   1-4-93
2021-05  12-20-2021  3-3-1;
                     3-3-2
2022-01  3-9-2022    3-3-1
2022-02  3-9-2022    1-4-90
2022-03  8-24-2022   4-1-1
2022-05  10-26-2022  5-1-1—
                     5-1-21
2022-06  10-26-2022  9-1-19
2023-02  8-9-2023    10-1-8
                     5-1-15;
2023-03  8-9-2023    5-1-20—
                     5-1-22
2023-04  9-13-2023   8-5-1
                    
 
