VILLAGE CODE
of
HATCH, NEW MEXICO
Code current through:
Ord. 428, passed 9-9-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the Village of Hatch, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 428, passed September 9, 2025. Ordinances of the
Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to
the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
TITLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Reserved   1.01
General Provisions   1.04
General Penalty   1.08
Village Jail   1.12
Working Of Prisoners   1.16
CHAPTER 1.01
RESERVED
CHAPTER 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1.04.010: Definitions
1.04.020: Title Of Office
1.04.030: Interpretation Of Language
1.04.040: Grammatical Interpretation
1.04.050: Acts By Agents
1.04.060: Prohibited Acts Include Causing And Permitting
1.04.070: Computation Of Time
1.04.080: Construction
1.04.090: Repeal Shall Not Revive Any Ordinances
1.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the village
of Hatch, New Mexico, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from
the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is
specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or
phrases:
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The board of trustees of the village of Hatch. "All its
members" or "all board members" means the total number of board members holding
office.
CITY AND VILLAGE: Each mean the village of Hatch, New Mexico, or the area
within the territorial limits of the village of Hatch, New Mexico, and such
territory outside of the village of Hatch boundaries over which the village has
jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.
COUNTY: The county of Dona Ana.
LAW: Denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the state
of New Mexico, the ordinances of the village of Hatch, New Mexico, and, when
appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated
thereunder.
MAY: Is permissive.
MONTH: A calendar month.
MUST AND SHALL: Are each mandatory.
OATH: Includes an affirmation of declaration in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear"
and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OWNER: Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part
of such building or land.
PERSON: Includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of
any of them.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and
evidences of debt.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE: The state of New Mexico.
STREET: Includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places,
squares, curbs or other public ways in the village which have been or may
hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so
designated in any law of this state.
TENANT AND OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, include any person who
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
WRITTEN: Includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or
otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.
YEAR: A calendar year. (Ord. 204 § 1, 1985)
1.04.020: TITLE OF OFFICE:
Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission
means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the village.
(Ord. 204 § 2, 1985)
1.04.030: INTERPRETATION OF LANGUAGE:
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved
usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may
have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed
and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 204 §
3, 1985)
1.04.040: GRAMMATICAL INTERPRETATION:
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the village,
unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is
intended:
   A.   Gender: Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter
genders.
   B.   Singular And Plural: The singular number includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular.
   C.   Tenses: Words used in the present tense include the past and the future
tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 204 § 4, 1985)
1.04.050: ACTS BY AGENTS:
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be
done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 204
§ 5, 1985)
1.04.060: PROHIBITED ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING AND PERMITTING:
Whenever in the ordinances of the village any act or omission is made unlawful,
it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or
concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 204 § 6, 1985)
1.04.070: COMPUTATION OF TIME:
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be
done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day,
unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be
excluded. (Ord. 204 § 7, 1985)
1.04.080: CONSTRUCTION:
The provisions of the ordinances of the village, and all proceedings under
them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote
justice. (Ord. 204 § 8, 1985)
1.04.090: REPEAL SHALL NOT REVIVE ANY ORDINANCES:
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an
ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 204 §
9, 1985)
CHAPTER 1.08
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1.08.010: Maximum Penalty
1.08.020: Mandatory Fees Collected Upon Conviction
1.08.030: Disposition And Use Of Fees Collected
1.08.040: Severability
1.08.050: Repealer
1.08.060: Delayed Effective Date And Repealer
1.08.070: Separate Offense
1.08.010: MAXIMUM PENALTY:
Unless a lesser maximum penalty or a specific penalty is established by
ordinance for a particular offense, the maximum penalty for violation of any
municipal ordinance shall be as follows:
   A.   Except for those violations of ordinances described in subsections B
and C of this section, a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or both;
   B.   For violations of an ordinance prohibiting driving a motor vehicle
while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, a fine of not more
than nine hundred ninety nine dollars ($999.00) or imprisonment for not more
than one hundred seventy nine (179) days or both; and
   C.   For violations of an industrial user wastewater pretreatment ordinance
as required by the United States environmental protection agency, a fine of not
more than nine hundred ninety nine dollars ($999.00) a day for each violation.
(Ord. 266, 1994)
1.08.020: MANDATORY FEES COLLECTED UPON CONVICTION:
In addition to any fine or imprisonment described in section
1.08.010 of this chapter, there is imposed upon any person convicted of
violating any municipal ordinance the penalty for which carries a potential
jail term or any ordinance relating to the operation of a motor vehicle the
following mandatory fees:
   A.   A corrections fee of twenty dollars ($20.00);
   B.   A judicial education fee of three dollars ($3.00); and
   C.   A court automation fee of six dollars ($6.00).
As used in this chapter, "convicted" means the defendant has been found guilty
of a criminal charge by the municipal judge, either after trial, a plea of
guilty or a plea of nolo contendere, or has elected to pay a penalty assessment
in lieu of trial. (Ord. 354, 2009: Ord. 318, 2003: Ord. 291, 1998: Ord. 266,
1994: Ord. 257 §§ 1, 2, 1993)
1.08.030: DISPOSITION AND USE OF FEES COLLECTED:
   A.   All money collected pursuant to subsection
1.08.020A of this chapter shall be deposited in a special fund in the municipal
treasury and shall be used for:
      1.   Municipal jailer or juvenile detention officer training;
      2.   The construction planning, construction, operation and maintenance
of a municipal jail or juvenile detention facility;
      3.   Paying the cost of housing municipal prisoners in a county jail or
detention facility or housing juveniles in a detention facility;
      4.   Complying with match or contribution requirements for the receipt of
federal funds relating to jails or juvenile detention facilities;
      5.   Providing inpatient treatment or other substance abuse programs in
conjunction with or as an alternative to jail sentencing;
      6.   Defraying the cost of transporting prisoners to jails or juveniles
to juvenile detention facilities; or
      7.   Providing electronic monitoring systems.
   B.   A municipality may credit the interest collected from fees deposited in
the special fund pursuant to subsection A of this section to the municipality's
general fund.
   C.   All money collected pursuant to subsection
1.08.020B of this chapter shall be remitted monthly to the state treasurer for
credit to the judicial education fund and shall be used for the education and
training, including production of bench books and other written materials, of
municipal judges and other municipal court employees.
   D.   All money collected pursuant to subsection
 1.08.020C of this chapter shall be remitted monthly to the state treasurer for
credit to the municipal court automation fund and shall be used for the
purchase and maintenance of court automation systems in the municipal courts.
The court automation systems shall have the capability of providing, on a
timely basis, electronic records in a format specified by the judicial
information systems council. (Ord. 318, 2003: Ord. 266, 1994)
1.08.040: SEVERABILITY:
Should any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter, for any
reason, be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the invalidity or
unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 266, 1994)
1.08.050: REPEALER:
All ordinances or resolutions, or parts thereof, inconsistent herewith are
repealed to the extent only of such inconsistency. This repealer shall not be
construed to revive any ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, heretofore
repealed. (Ord. 266, 1994)
1.08.060: DELAYED EFFECTIVE DATE AND REPEALER:
The provisions of subsection
1.08.020C of this chapter become effective July 1, 1998, and will be repealed
effective July 1, 2001, and subsection
1.08.030C of this chapter is effective July 1, 1994, and repealed effective
July 1, 1999. (Ord. 291, 1998: Ord. 266, 1994)
1.08.070: SEPARATE OFFENSE:
Each person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any
portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the
village is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he is
punishable accordingly. (Ord. 266, 1994)
CHAPTER 1.12
VILLAGE JAIL
SECTION:
1.12.010: Designated
1.12.010: DESIGNATED:
The county jail of Dona Ana County, New Mexico, is designated the village jail
of Hatch and the sheriff of the county is designated the village jailer. He is
authorized and directed to take charge of and safely keep all persons committed
to jail for violation of any of the ordinances of Hatch, or failure to pay any
fine or costs, or both, imposed by reason of the violation of any such
ordinance. (Ord. 2 § 1)
CHAPTER 1.16
WORKING OF PRISONERS
SECTION:
1.16.010: Work By Prisoners
1.16.020: Credit For Work Done
1.16.030: Release From Incarceration
1.16.010: WORK BY PRISONERS:
Every person who has violated a municipal ordinance, has been incarcerated in
the municipal jail, county jail, prison farm or other place provided by the
municipality for the incarceration of such offenders, and who has not paid in
full any fine or penalty levied by the municipal judge, shall work for the
municipal corporation, at such labor as the person's strength will permit,
within or without the place of incarceration, as directed by the supervisor of
the place of incarceration, and not exceeding ten (10) hours each working day.
(Ord. 196 § 1, 1983)
1.16.020: CREDIT FOR WORK DONE:
Each prisoner required to work, as provided in section
1.16.010 of this chapter, shall be credited with twenty dollars ($20.00) per
day worked toward the reduction of any fine. (Ord. 196 § 2, 1983)
1.16.030: RELEASE FROM INCARCERATION:
Each prisoner shall be released from incarceration upon working enough days to
reduce the fine to nothing, unless a jail sentence was imposed by the municipal
judge and the prisoner has not served the full term. In determining whether a
jail sentence has been served, days worked for twenty dollars ($20.00) credit
shall also be counted against the sentence imposed by the municipal court.
(Ord. 196 § 3, 1983)
TITLE 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Municipal Judge   2.04
Salaries Of Officers   2.08
Fire Department   2.12
Public Library   2.16
Labor-Management Relations   2.20
Village Clerk Treasurer   2.24
Hatch/Northern Dona Ana County
Recreation Committee   2.30
CHAPTER 2.04
MUNICIPAL JUDGE
SECTION:
2.04.010: Statutory Authority
2.04.020: Police Court And Police Judge Established
2.04.030: Duties Of Police Judge
2.04.040: Hours; Compensation
2.04.050: Authority To Suspend Sentence And Grant Probation
2.04.060: Discharge Of Liability
2.04.070: Failure To Pay Assessed Fines
2.04.080: Temporary Municipal Judge
2.04.010: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
The village, having taken a census as provided by section 14-2010, which census
shows that there are nine hundred seventy (970) actual residents in the
village, and having fully complied with the requirements of sections 14-2009
and 14-2010 of the New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1941, has all the powers of
towns, and among other powers the right to have a magistrate court presided
over by a police judge. (Ord. 87 § 1, 1952)
2.04.020: POLICE COURT AND POLICE JUDGE ESTABLISHED:
There is established in and for the village a police magistrate court, which
shall be presided over by a police judge, who shall keep his office in the
village at such quarters as the board of trustees may provide. (Ord. 87 § 2,
1952)
2.04.030: DUTIES OF POLICE JUDGE:
The police judge shall keep a docket wherein he shall enter the history of all
cases that come before him for trial, and the disposition of the same, whether
dismissed or prosecuted to the final judgment. He shall keep a record of all
fines, and pay all such fines to the village treasurer as required by law. He
shall make a monthly report to the board of trustees at its regular meetings
showing the names of all defendants, the charges against them, the amount of
fines collected or imprisonment imposed. (Ord. 87 § 3, 1952)
2.04.040: HOURS; COMPENSATION:
The police judge shall have regular hours and be on call when needed. He shall
receive for his services an annual salary of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
(Ord. 420, 2022: Ord. 335, 2006)
2.04.050: AUTHORITY TO SUSPEND SENTENCE AND GRANT PROBATION:
When the municipal judge is satisfied that the public will be served and the
ends of justice will be served, the municipal judge may:
   A.   Suspend in whole or in part the execution of a sentence;
   B.   Place the defendant on probation for a period not exceeding one year on
terms and conditions the court deems best, including, but not limited to,
deferment of sentence, making restitution or performing community service; or
   C.   Impose any or all of the provisions of both subsections A and B of this
section on the defendant. (Ord. 195 § 1, 1983)
2.04.060: DISCHARGE OF LIABILITY:
Upon successful completion of the terms and conditions of probation, the
defendant's liability for any fine or other punishment imposed shall be fully
discharged. (Ord. 195 § 2, 1983)
2.04.070: FAILURE TO PAY ASSESSED FINES:
   A.   If an assessed fine is not paid within five (5) days from the date of
the assessment, the municipal judge shall issue a warrant for the arrest of the
violator.
   B.   Any person who wilfully violates this section shall upon conviction be
fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00), or shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than one
day nor more than thirty (30) days or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord.
173, 1976)
2.04.080: TEMPORARY MUNICIPAL JUDGE:
   A.   Appointment:
      1.   Whenever the municipal judge determines that he will be temporarily
unable or unavailable to perform the duties of municipal judge, whether by
reason of recusal or disqualification, absence, sickness or other incapacity,
he shall appoint in advance of the event a temporary municipal judge to serve
during his absence. For the purposes of this section, "appointment" shall mean
the municipal judge's designation of a temporary judge by actual notice to the
temporary judge and by written notice filed with the clerk of the court.
Written notice shall indicate the name of the temporary judge, the reason for
the appointment and the anticipated duration of the appointment. The
appointment shall automatically cease when the municipal judge returns to his
duties.
      2.   In the event the municipal judge becomes unable or unavailable to
perform the duties of municipal judge and has failed to appoint a temporary
judge, the governing body shall appoint a temporary judge who shall serve until
the regular municipal judge returns to his duties. If the governing body
declares a vacancy in the office of municipal judge due to death, removal,
resignation or other circumstances causing a vacancy as provided by New Mexico
Statutes Annotated 1978, section 10-3-1, it may appoint a temporary judge to
serve until a successor municipal judge has been duly appointed by the
governing body pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, section 35-14-4.
   B.   Qualifications: The temporary municipal judge shall be a registered
qualified elector of the municipality of the village of Hatch and shall reside
within the corporate limits of the municipality of Hatch.
   C.   Oath Of Office: Before assuming the duties of temporary judge, the
temporary municipal judge shall take the oath of office as required by New
Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, section 3-10-2. Once a qualified elector has
taken the oath of office as temporary judge, he shall not be required to repeat
the oath on subsequent appointments. Upon taking the oath of office, the
temporary municipal judge shall be covered by the corporate surety bond
covering all municipal officials.
   D.   Salary: The temporary municipal judge shall be paid the sum of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each day that he shall actually sit and serve as municipal
judge, such sum to be paid out of the general fund of the municipality.
   E.   Administrative Duties: The requirements of law relating to money
collected, monthly reports, itemized statements and penalties shall apply to
the temporary municipal judge.
   F.   Repealer: All ordinances or resolutions, or parts thereof, inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed to the extent only of such inconsistency. The
repealer shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or resolution, or part
thereof, heretofore repealed.
   G.   Severability: If any subsection, paragraph, phrase or other portion of
this section shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever by a court of
competent jurisdiction, then such decision shall not affect the validity or
enforceability of the remaining portions of this section.
   H.   Effective Date: This section shall be in full force and effect five (5)
days after its adoption, approval and publication as provided by law. (Ord.
348, 2007)
CHAPTER 2.08
SALARIES OF OFFICERS
SECTION:
2.08.010: Mayor And Trustees
2.08.010: MAYOR AND TRUSTEES:
   A.   The compensation of the mayor shall be: Fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) a year.
   B.   The compensation of the trustees shall be: Ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) a year, each trustee. (Ord. 421, 2022: Ord. 349, 2008: Ord. 336,
2006: Ord. 305 § 1, 2001)
CHAPTER 2.12
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
2.12.010: Created; Organization
2.12.020: Officers
2.12.030: Duties Of Officers And Members
2.12.040: Police Authority
2.12.050: Drills; Pay
2.12.060: Records And Reports
2.12.070: Loan Or Rental Of Apparatus
2.12.080: Outside Alarms
2.12.090: Indebtedness
2.12.100: Inspections
2.12.110: Right Of Entry
2.12.120: Water Department Cooperation
2.12.010: CREATED; ORGANIZATION:
   A.   There is created the fire department of the village whose duties it
shall be to prevent and extinguish fires, to educate the public in all matters
pertaining to fires and fire prevention, to care for all fire apparatus and
other village property in its charge and to perform such other duties as may be
assigned to it by the board of village trustees.
   B.   The fire department, immediately after its organization or after the
effective date hereof, shall adopt suitable bylaws and all fire prevention
ordinances shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place in each fire
station and filed with the village clerk, together with any revisions and
additions.
   C.   The existing fire department, if any, is designated as the official
fire department of the village. If no fire department exists, either at the
time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter or at any future
time, the mayor shall appoint a committee of five (5) representative citizens
who shall organize a new fire department in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 47 § 1, 1935)
2.12.020: OFFICERS:
Officers of the fire department shall be a chief, assistant chief, secretary-
treasurer, a captain and a lieutenant, and such other officers as may be
provided for in the bylaws of the fire department. Officers and members shall
be selected as provided for in the bylaws. No member shall assume the office of
chief or assistant chief whose entire time, both day and night, is not
habitually spent within the village limits, and who has not been a member of
the fire department for at least two (2) years, except when less than five (5)
members are qualified. (Ord. 47 § 2, 1935)
2.12.030: DUTIES OF OFFICERS AND MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of each officer and member of the fire department to obey
without question the orders of his superior officer at all times while in the
fire station or at or going to or returning from fires. Each member of the fire
department shall wear at all times when on duty such distinctive uniform or
insignia as shall be prescribed in the bylaws. The chief of the fire department
shall be responsible for the discipline, good order and proper conduct of the
whole fire department or in its charge. He shall have command and control of
all officers and members of the department and of all houses, fire apparatus,
and all other property of the department in his charge and he likewise shall
have control of all persons present at fires, and shall have power, if need be,
to summon any and all able bodied persons present to aid in extinguishing any
fire, in removing any property from any building and exposed building and in
guarding the same, and any able bodied person refusing to obey such summons
shall be liable to the penalties of this code. In the absence of the chief when
responding to alarms the assistant chief, captain, lieutenant or senior member
present, in order of rank and seniority, shall assume the duties and full
authority of the chief until the arrival of a superior officer. After
responding to an alarm no member shall leave the scene of the fire or the
apparatus until the fire shall have been extinguished and the apparatus
returned to the station and properly cared for, except by permission of the
commanding officer. (Ord. 47 § 3, 1935)
2.12.040: POLICE AUTHORITY:
   A.   The chief of the fire department and the members acting under his
orders shall have full and complete police powers and authority within the fire
station, at fires and proceeding to or returning from them in all matters
pertaining to the fire department and shall also have authority to make arrests
for violations of all village ordinances, the enforcement of which is under his
jurisdiction. The chief of police and all members of the police department
shall be subject to his orders at fires and shall cooperate with him in the
enforcement of the above mentioned ordinances.
   B.   The chief of the fire department may prescribe limits at fires within
which no person shall be admitted except by his order. (Ord. 47 § 4, 1935)
2.12.050: DRILLS; PAY:
   A.   Each member of the fire department shall be paid thirty-five dollars
($35.00) stipend per meeting/training and an additional twenty-five dollars
($25.00) per answered call. Meetings shall be held once monthly. Payment shall
be made from the Village of Hatch general fund.
   B.   The chief of the fire department shall be paid one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for the administration of the fire department. Payment shall be
made from the Village of Hatch general fund. (Ord. 419, 2022: Ord. 409, 2020:
Ord. 296A, 2013: Ord. 296, 1999: Ord. 47 § 5, 1935)
2.12.060: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
   A.   The chief of the fire department shall keep or cause to be kept a
complete record of the activities of the fire department and shall make a
thorough investigation of each fire and report to the mayor and village council
at least quarterly, giving in detail the following information in regard to
each if possible: cause, location, time, owner, tenant, occupancy, type of
building, insurance carried, insurance paid, building loss, contents loss, how
extinguished, apparatus used, firemen present, adequacy of water supply and
pressure and any other valuable information.
   B.   The chief of the fire department, immediately after assuming office and
annually thereafter shall make an inventory of all property owned by the fire
department or in its charge, noting the condition of each article, which shall
be submitted to the mayor and village council, together with recommendations
for the purchase of additional equipment needed and any other recommendation he
may desire to submit affecting the fire department.
   C.   The chief of the fire department shall inspect or cause to be inspected
by members of the fire department, at least twice annually and oftener if
needed, all fire hydrants and shall list those needing attention in his next
report to the council. He shall also maintain in the office of the village
clerk an accurate list of the members of the fire department and shall report
promptly any additions or withdrawals from the membership.
   D.   Loss of or damage to equipment and accidents involving members of the
fire department in the performance of their duties shall be reported
immediately to the mayor and council by the chief of the fire department. (Ord.
47 § 6, 1935)
2.12.070: LOAN OR RENTAL OF APPARATUS:
Fire apparatus and other village property in charge of the fire department
shall not be loaned or rented except by permission of the chief of the fire
department and with the approval of a majority of the members of the fire
department. (Ord. 47 § 7, 1935)
2.12.080: OUTSIDE ALARMS:
The fire department shall not respond to alarms outside the corporate limits,
leaving the village unprotected, except that not more than one-half (1/2) of
the membership may respond to such alarms with reserve equipment, only, when
authorized to do so by the chief of the fire department. (Ord. 47 § 8, 1935)
2.12.090: INDEBTEDNESS:
No member of the fire department or other person shall contract any
indebtedness on behalf of the fire department unless authorized to do so by
vote of the fire department and no debts shall be contracted by the fire
department exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) unless approved by the village
council. (Ord. 47 § 9, 1935)
2.12.100: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to inspect or
cause to be inspected by the fire department officers or members, as often as
may be necessary, but not less than twice a year in outlying districts and four
(4) times a year in a closely built portion of the village, all buildings,
premises, and public thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings,
for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions
liable to cause fire, or any violation of the provisions or intent of any
ordinance of the village affecting the fire hazard.
   B.   When any officer or member shall find in any building, or upon any
premises or other place, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous
accumulation of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of waste paper, boxes,
shavings or any other highly inflammable materials especially liable to fire,
which is so situated as to endanger property, or shall find obstructions to or
on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows liable to interfere with
the operations of the fire department, or egress of occupants, in case of fire,
or shall find any other condition dangerous to life or property by reason of
the fire hazard, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such
order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such
premises or buildings, subject to appeal within twenty four (24) hours to the
mayor, who shall within ten (10) days review such order and file his decision
thereon, and unless the order is revoked or modified it shall remain in full
force and be obeyed by such owner or occupant.
   C.   Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within ten (10)
days after said appeal shall have determined or is not appealed, then within
ten (10) days after the service of the said order shall be liable to a penalty
as hereinafter stated.
   D.   The chief of the fire department shall have authority to order the
immediate discontinuance of the use of any stove, stovepipe, flue, furnace,
electric wiring or any other hazardous device pending the result of the appeal.
(Ord. 47 § 11, 1935)
2.12.110: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The chief of the fire department and members acting under his order shall have
authority to enter any building in the proper performance of their duties.
(Ord. 47 § 12, 1935)
2.12.120: WATER DEPARTMENT COOPERATION:
The water department shall cooperate with the fire department in every way
possible to provide an adequate supply of water at pressures suitable for
firefighting and shall supply the fire department one or more accurate maps of
the distributing system, showing the sizes and location of all mains, valves
and fire hydrants, which shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place
in each fire station, and shall report promptly to the fire department the
opening and closing of any valves in street mains and any other information
relative to the water supply to any and all parts of the village, which
information shall also be posted for the information of firemen and others.
(Ord. 47 § 13, 1935)
CHAPTER 2.16
PUBLIC LIBRARY
SECTION:
2.16.010: Established; Board Members
2.16.020: Library Fund Established
2.16.030: Library Fund Disbursements
2.16.010: ESTABLISHED; BOARD MEMBERS:
The Library Board is composed of five (5) members elected by the Library Board.
Three (3) representatives will be from service organizations, and two (2)
members will be at large. The appointments will serve for six (6) year
staggered terms. (Ord. 377, 2015)
2.16.020: LIBRARY FUND ESTABLISHED:
All monies, except gifts, bequests and donations, will be received by the
Village Clerk Treasurer and deposited into a regular bank account by the
Village of Hatch called the Hatch Public Library account. Expenditures and
revenues are approved by the Village of Hatch. Monies such as gifts, bequests
and donations, will be received by the Library Board's Representative/Librarian
and deposited into a money market account by the Hatch Public Library called
the Hatch Library Board account. Expenditures and donations are to be approved
by the Hatch Public Library Board. (Ord. 392, 2018: Ord. 371, 2013)
2.16.030: LIBRARY FUND DISBURSEMENTS:
All disbursements from the Hatch Public Library account will be paid by checks
signed by the Village of Hatch authorized signatories. All requests for
payments must be supported by invoices and vouchers before checks are issued.
(Ord. 371, 2013)
CHAPTER 2.20
LABOR-MANAGEMENT RELATIONS
SECTION:
2.20.010: Short Title
2.20.020: Purpose
2.20.030: Conflicts
2.20.040: Definitions
2.20.050: Rights Of Employees
2.20.060: Management Rights
2.20.070: Labor-Management Relations Board Created; Terms
2.20.080: Board Powers And Duties
2.20.090: Hearing Procedures
2.20.100: Appropriate Bargaining Units
2.20.110: Elections
2.20.120: Exclusive Representation
2.20.130: Decertification Of Exclusive Representative
2.20.140: Scope Of Bargaining
2.20.150: Negotiations And Impasse Resolution
2.20.160: Employers; Prohibited Practices
2.20.170: Employees; Labor Organizations; Prohibited Practices
2.20.180: Strikes And Lockouts Prohibited
2.20.190: Agreements Valid; Enforcement
2.20.200: Judicial Enforcement; Standard Of Review
2.20.210: Severability
2.20.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the VILLAGE OF HATCH LABOR- MANAGEMENT RELATIONS
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 279 § 1, 1996)
2.20.020: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to guarantee employees the right to organize and
bargain collectively with their employer, to protect the rights of the employer
and promote harmonious and cooperative relationships between the employer and
the employees; and to acknowledge the rights of the citizens to the orderly and
uninterrupted delivery of services. (Ord. 279 § 2, 1996)
2.20.030: CONFLICTS:
In the event of conflict with other village ordinances, the provisions of this
chapter shall supersede other previously enacted ordinances.
Village sanctioned rules and regulations, administrative directives,
departmental rules and regulations, and workplace practices shall control
unless there is a conflict with a collective bargaining agreement. Where a
conflict exists the collective bargaining agreement shall control. (Ord. 279 §
3, 1996)
2.20.040: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNIT: A group of employees designated by the board for
the purpose of collective bargaining. Appropriate units shall be formed by
occupational group, such as blue collar (unskilled, semiskilled, and skilled),
white collar (clerical, secretarial, administrative employees) technical, para-
professional, professional, corrections, sheriff's officers, and fire.
BOARD: The village of Hatch labor-management relations board.
CERTIFICATION: The designation by the board of a labor organization as the
exclusive representative for all employees in an appropriate bargaining unit.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: The act of negotiating between the employer and an
exclusive representative for the purpose of entering into a written agreement
regarding wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment.
CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE: A person who assists and acts in a confidential capacity
with respect to a person who formulates, determines and effectuates management
policies.
EMPLOYEE: A regular nonprobationary employee of village of Hatch.
EMPLOYER: Village of Hatch.
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE: A labor organization that, as a result of
certification by the board, represents all employees in an appropriate
bargaining unit for the purposes of collective bargaining.
FACT FINDING: The procedure following mediation whereby the parties involved in
an impasse submit their differences to a third party for an advisory
recommendation.
GOVERNING BODY: The board of trustees of the village of Hatch.
IMPASSE: Failure of the employer and an exclusive representative, after good
faith bargaining, to reach agreement in the course of negotiating a collective
bargaining agreement.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: Any employee organization, one of whose purposes is the
representation of public employees in collective bargaining and in otherwise
meeting, consulting and conferring with employers on matters pertaining to
employment relations.
LOCKOUT: An act by the employer to prevent its employees from going to work for
the purpose of resisting demands of the employees' exclusive representative or
for the purpose of gaining a concession from the exclusive representative.
MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE: An employee who is engaged primarily in executive and
management functions and is charged with the responsibility of developing,
administering or effectuating management policies. An employee shall not be
deemed a management employee solely because the employee participates in
cooperative decision making programs on an occasional basis.
MEDIATION: Assistance by an impartial third party to resolve an impasse in
contract negotiation between the employer and an exclusive representative
through interpretation, suggestion and advice.
PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYEE: An employee whose work is predominantly intellectual and
varied in character and whose work involves the consistent exercise of
discretion and judgment in its performance and requires knowledge of an
advanced nature in a field of learning customarily requiring specialized study
at an institution of higher education or its equivalent. The work of a
professional employee is of such character that the output or result
accomplished cannot be standardized in relation to a given period of time.
STRIKE: An employee's refusal, in concerted action with other employees, to
report for duty or his wilful absence or withholding of service in whole or in
part from the full, faithful, and proper performance of the duties of
employment for the purpose of inducing, influencing or coercing a change in the
working conditions, compensation, rights, privileges or obligations of
employment.
SUPERVISOR: An employee who devotes a substantial amount of work time to
supervisory duties, who customarily and regularly directs the work of two (2)
or more other employees and who has the authority in the interest of the
employer to hire, promote or discipline other employees or to recommend such
actions effectively. This definition does not include individuals who perform
merely routine, incidental or clerical duties or who occasionally assume
supervisory or directory roles or whose duties are substantially similar to
those of their subordinates and does not include lead employees or employees
who participate in peer review or occasional evaluation of employees. (Ord. 279
§ 4, 1996)
2.20.050: RIGHTS OF EMPLOYEES:
Employees, other than management, supervisors, and confidential employees, may
form, join or assist any labor organization for the purpose of collective
bargaining through representatives chosen by the employees without
interference, restraint or coercion. Employees also have the right to refuse to
form, join or assist any labor organization. (Ord. 279 § 5, 1996)
2.20.060: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS:
Unless limited by the provisions of a collective bargaining agreement or by
other statutory provision, the employer's rights shall include, but are not
limited to, the following:
   A.   To direct and supervise all operations, functions and the work of the
employees;
   B.   To hire, lay off, promote, demote, assign, reassign, transfer,
discipline, discharge or terminate employees;
   C.   To determine what, by whom and when services will be rendered to the
citizens;
   D.   To determine staffing requirements, create, abolish positions or to
eliminate or reorganize work units;
   E.   To determine the need for and the qualifications of new employees, and
to determine the qualifications for and qualifications of employees considered
for transfer and promotion;
   F.   To take actions as necessary to carry out the mission of the employer
in emergencies; and
   G.   The employer retains all rights not specifically limited by a
collective bargaining agreement or other statutory provision. (Ord. 279 § 6,
1996)
2.20.070: LABOR-MANAGEMENT RELATIONS BOARD CREATED; TERMS:
   A.   The labor-management relations board is created. The board shall be
composed of three (3) members appointed by the village of Hatch board of
trustees. One member shall be appointed on the recommendation of individuals
representing labor, one member shall be appointed on the recommendation of the
village management, and one member shall be appointed on the recommendation of
the first two (2) appointees.
   B.   Board members shall serve for a period of one year with terms
commencing in the month of September except in the initial appointment which
shall be a shorter term effective the same day as the ordinance codified in
this chapter. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment, and such appointments shall only be made for the remainder of the
unexpired term. A board member may serve an unlimited number of terms.
   C.   During the term of appointment, no board member shall hold or seek any
other political office or public employment or be an employee of a union or an
organization representing public employees or public employers.
   D.   Each board member shall be paid per diem and mileage in accordance with
the provisions of the per diem and mileage act. (Ord. 279 § 7, 1996)
2.20.080: BOARD POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The board shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary to
accomplish and perform its functions and duties as established in this chapter,
including the establishment of procedures for:
      1.   The designation of appropriate bargaining units;
      2.   The selection, certification and decertification of exclusive
representatives; and
      3.   The filing of, hearing on and determination of complaints of
prohibited practices.
   B.   The board shall:
      1.   Hold hearings and make inquiries necessary to carry out its
functions and duties;
      2.   Request from employers and labor organizations the information and
data necessary to carry out the board's functions and responsibilities.
   C.   The board may issue subpoenas requiring, upon reasonable notice, the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence,
including books, records, correspondence or documents relating to any matter in
question. The board may prescribe the form of the subpoena, but it shall adhere
insofar as practicable to the form used in civil actions in the district court.
The board may administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
   D.   The board shall decide all issues by majority vote and shall issue its
decisions in the form of written orders and opinions. The decisions of the
board on interpretation and applications of this chapter and collective
bargaining agreements are final and binding on the parties subject to the
appeal process provided in section
2.20.200 of this chapter. This section does not apply to negotiation impasses.
   E.   The board has the power to enforce provisions of the village of Hatch
labor-management relations ordinance, which includes the labor-management
agreements between parties covered by this chapter, through the imposition of
appropriate administrative remedies.
   F.   The board shall have no power to promulgate policy other than for its
own operation.
   G.   No rule or regulation promulgated by the board shall require, directly
or indirectly, as a condition of continuous employment, any employee covered by
the labor-management relations ordinance to pay money to any labor organization
that is certified as an exclusive representative. That issue shall be left to
voluntary bargaining by the parties. (Ord. 279 § 8, 1996)
2.20.090: HEARING PROCEDURES:
   A.   The board may hold hearings for the purposes of:
      1.   Information gathering and inquiry;
      2.   Adopting rules and regulations; and
      3.   Adjudicating disputes and enforcing the provisions of a labor-
management agreement, the provisions of the labor-management relations
ordinance, and rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   The board shall adopt regulations setting forth procedures to be
followed during hearings of the board. Such regulations shall meet minimal due
process requirements of the state and federal constitutions.
   C.   Prohibited labor practices that are filed within sixty (60) days of the
commission, omission or discovery of the action that generated the charges
shall be heard by the board. Charges filed beyond the sixty (60) day limit
shall not be heard by the board and are not considered timely. Such charges
must identify the specific violation and relief requested. Proceedings against
the party alleged to have committed a prohibited practice shall be commenced by
service upon it and the board of a written notice together with a copy of the
charges and relief requested. A filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
shall be paid by any party filing a prohibited practice complaint with the
board. The filing fee may be waived by the board for any party which can
establish the inability to pay.
   D.   All adopted rules and regulations shall be filed in accordance with
applicable laws.
   E.   A verbatim record made by electronic or other suitable means shall be
made of every rule making and adjudicatory hearing. The record shall not be
transcribed unless required for judicial review or unless ordered by the board.
Payment for the transcription shall be made by the party requesting the
transcript.
   F.   Each party to a prohibited labor practice shall bear the cost of
producing its own witnesses for hearings under this chapter.
   G.   No regulation proposed to be adopted by the board that affects any
person or governmental entity outside of the board and its staff shall be
adopted, amended or repealed without public hearing and comment on the proposed
action before the board. The public hearing shall be held after notice of the
subject matter of the regulation, the action proposed to be taken, the time and
place of the hearing, the manner in which interested persons may present their
views and the method in which copies of the proposed regulation, proposed
amendment or repeal of an existing regulation may be obtained. All meetings
shall be held in the village. Notice shall be published once at least thirty
(30) days prior to the hearing date in a newspaper of general circulation in
the village, and notice shall be mailed at least thirty (30) days prior to the
hearing date to all persons who have made a written request for advance notice
of hearings. (Ord. 279 § 9, 1996)
2.20.100: APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNITS:
   A.   The board shall, upon receipt of a petition for a representation
election filed by a labor organization, designate the appropriate bargaining
unit. Appropriate bargaining units shall be established on the basis of
occupational groups with a clear and identifiable community of interest in
employment terms, employment conditions and related personnel matters among the
employees involved. Occupational groups shall generally be identified as blue
collar, white collar, technical, para- professional, professional, corrections,
sheriff's officers, and fire. Bargaining units shall not be determined by craft
or trade designations. The parties, by mutual agreement and approval of the
board, may further consolidate occupational groups. Essential factors in
determining appropriate bargaining units shall include the principles of
efficient administration of government, the history of collective bargaining
with the employer and the assurance to employees of the fullest freedom in
exercising the rights guaranteed by the statute.
   B.   If the labor organization and employer cannot agree on the appropriate
bargaining unit within thirty (30) days, the board shall hold a hearing
concerning the composition of the bargaining unit. Any agreement as to the
appropriate bargaining unit between the employer and the labor organization
shall be subject to the approval of the board.
   C.   The board shall not include in any appropriate bargaining unit
probationary, supervisory, managerial or confidential employees. (Ord. 279 §
10, 1996)
2.20.110: ELECTIONS:
   A.   Whenever, in accordance with regulations prescribed by the board, a
petition is filed by a labor organization containing the signatures of at least
thirty percent (30%) of the employees in an appropriate bargaining unit, the
board shall conduct a secret ballot representation election.
   B.   Once a labor organization has filed a petition with the board calling
for a representation election, other labor organizations may seek to be placed
on the ballot. Any organization may file a petition containing the signatures
of not less than ten percent (10%) of the employees in the appropriate
bargaining unit no later than ten (10) days after the board has posted a
written notice that a petition containing the signatures of not less than
thirty percent (30%) of the employees has been filed by a labor organization.
   C.   All representation elections, except runoff elections, shall include
the option for "no representation".
   D.   In the event of an election with two (2) or more organizations on the
ballot where neither of the choices received a majority of the votes cast, a
runoff election shall be held within fifteen (15) days. The choices on the
runoff election shall consist of the two (2) choices which received the
greatest number of votes in the original election.
   E.   Where a majority of the votes cast are in favor of representation by a
labor organization and at least sixty percent (60%) of the members in the
bargaining unit have cast a vote, the board shall certify the labor
organization as the exclusive representative for all employees in that
appropriate bargaining unit. No labor organization shall be certified as an
exclusive representative unless at least sixty percent (60%) of the members of
the bargaining unit vote in the election.
   F.   No election shall be conducted if an election has been conducted in the
twelve (12) month period immediately preceding the proposed representation
election. No election shall be held during the term of an existing collective
bargaining agreement, except as provided in subsection
2.20.130(B) of this chapter.
   G.   Election disputes shall be resolved by the board. (Ord. 279 § 11, 1996)
2.20.120: EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATION:
   A.   A labor organization that has been certified by the board as
representing the employees in the appropriate bargaining unit shall be the
exclusive representative of all employees in the appropriate bargaining unit.
The exclusive representative shall act for all employees in the bargaining unit
and negotiate a collective bargaining agreement covering all employees in the
bargaining unit. The exclusive representative shall represent the interests of
all employees in the bargaining unit without discrimination or regard to
membership or nonmembership in the labor organization.
   B.   The existence of an exclusive bargaining representative shall not
prevent employees from taking their grievances through the grievance process or
filing prohibited practices with the board based upon discrimination by the
exclusive representative or the employer. The board will adjudicate
disagreements over contract interpretations only when the disagreement is
between the employer and the exclusive representative. Any settlement of a
grievance or relief given on a prohibited practice brought by an individual
shall not be inconsistent with or in violation of the collective bargaining
agreement in effect between the employer and the exclusive representative or
inconsistent with or in violation of good faith resolution made between the
employer and the exclusive representative in the day to day administration of
the collective bargaining agreement. (Ord. 279 § 12, 1996)
2.20.130: DECERTIFICATION OF EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE:
   A.   Any member of a labor organization or the labor organization itself may
initiate decertification of a labor organization as the exclusive
representative if thirty percent (30%) of the employees in the appropriate
bargaining unit make a written request to the board for a decertification
election. Decertification elections shall be held in a manner prescribed by the
board.
   B.   When there is a collective bargaining agreement in effect, a request
for a decertification election shall be made to the board no earlier than
ninety (90) days and no later than sixty (60) days before the expiration of the
collective bargaining agreement; provided, however, that a request for a
decertification election may be filed at any time after the expiration of the
third year of a collective bargaining agreement with a term of more than three
(3) years.
   C.   When, within the time period prescribed in subsection B of this
section, a competing labor organization files a petition containing signatures
of at least thirty percent (30%) of the employees in the appropriate bargaining
unit, a representation election rather than a decertification election shall be
conducted.
   D.   When an exclusive representative has been certified but no collective
bargaining agreement is in effect, the board shall not accept a request for a
decertification election earlier than twelve (12) months subsequent to a labor
organization's certification as the exclusive representative. (Ord. 279 § 13,
1996)
2.20.140: SCOPE OF BARGAINING:
   A.   Except for retirement programs provided under the public employees'
retirement act, the parties shall bargain in good faith on wages, hours and
other terms and conditions of employment and other issues agreed to by the
parties.
   B.   Bargaining in good faith shall not require either party to agree to a
proposal or to make a concession.
   C.   The obligation to bargain collectively imposed by this chapter shall
not be construed as authorizing employers and exclusive representatives to
enter into any agreement that is in conflict with state statutes or federal
statutes. In the event of conflict between the provision of any federal or
state statutes and any agreement entered into by the employer and the exclusive
representative, the former shall prevail.
   D.   Payroll deduction of the exclusive representative's membership dues
shall be a mandatory subject of bargaining if either party chooses to negotiate
the issue. The amount of dues shall be certified in writing by an official of
the labor organization and shall not include special assessments, penalties or
fines of any type levied by the exclusive representative. During the time that
a board certification is in effect for a particular exclusive representative,
the employer shall not deduct dues for any other labor organization from
members of the same bargaining unit.
   E.   Any agreement by the employer and an exclusive representative that
requires the expenditures of funds shall be contingent upon the specific
appropriation of funds by the governing body and the availability of funds to
fund the agreed upon provision.
   F.   The parties have a requirement that grievance procedures culminating
with final and binding arbitration be negotiated. This applies only to
grievances and does not apply to negotiation impasses. (Ord. 279 § 14, 1996)
2.20.150: NEGOTIATIONS AND IMPASSE RESOLUTION:
   A.   The following meetings shall be closed:
      1.   Meetings for the discussion of collective bargaining strategy
between the employer and the employer's negotiating team;
      2.   Collective bargaining sessions; and
      3.   Consultations and impasse resolution procedures at which the
employer and the exclusive representative of the appropriate bargaining unit
are present.
   B.   The following impasse procedure shall be followed by the employer and
exclusive representative:
      1.   Either party may declare an impasse if no agreement has been reached
by the contract expiration date or within one hundred twenty (120) days of the
first negotiating session on the negotiation of the first agreement. Once an
impasse exists, a mediator from the federal mediation and conciliation service
will be assigned by the board.
      2.   If the impasse continues after a sixty (60) day mediation period,
either party may request from the board that a fact finder be assigned to the
negotiations. A fact finder will be selected by the parties from a list of
individuals requested from the federal mediation and conciliation service.
      3.   The fact finder shall conduct hearings with the parties. The fact
finder shall complete all work and submit a recommendation to the parties and
the board within forty five (45) calendar days of initial appointment. If the
parties have not reached agreement within ten (10) days after receipt of the
fact finder's report, the board shall publish the report.
      4.   The cost for the mediator or the fact finder shall be borne equally
by the parties to the impasse. (Ord. 279 § 15, 1996)
2.20.160: EMPLOYERS; PROHIBITED PRACTICES:
   A.   No employer or his representative shall:
      1.   Discriminate against an employee with regard to terms and conditions
of employment because of the employee's membership in a labor organization;
      2.   Interfere with, restrain or coerce any employee in the exercise of
any right guaranteed under this chapter;
      3.   Dominate or interfere in the formation, existence or administration
of any labor organization;
      4.   Discriminate in regard to hiring, or any term or condition of
employment in order to encourage or discourage membership in a labor
organization;
      5.   Discharge or otherwise discriminate against an employee because he
has signed or filed an affidavit, petition, grievance or complaint, or given
any information or testimony under the provisions of this chapter or because an
employee is forming, joining or choosing to be represented by a labor
organization;
      6.   Refuse to bargain collectively in good faith with the exclusive
representative;
      7.   Refuse or fail to comply with any provisions of this chapter or
board regulation; or
      8.   Refuse or fail to comply with any collective bargaining agreement.
   B.   During the negotiating process, including the impasse procedure,
village elected officials and management employees are prohibited from
disclosing any information, bargaining strategy, term(s) or issue(s) which is
the subject of negotiations with employees of the bargaining unit involved in
negotiations and employees of the exclusive representative.
   C.   During the negotiation process, including the impasse procedure,
village elected officials and management employees are prohibited from
negotiating terms of the collective bargaining agreement and from making any
commitment or promise whatsoever to employees independent of the negotiating
team with respect to any matter that is the subject of the negotiation or
process and/or impasse procedure. It is the intent of this provision that all
negotiations and concessions occur only between the members of the respective
negotiating teams. (Ord. 279 § 16, 1996)
2.20.170: EMPLOYEES; LABOR ORGANIZATIONS; PROHIBITED PRACTICES:
   A.   An employee, labor organization or its representative shall not:
      1.   Discriminate against an employee with regard to labor organization
membership because of race, color, religion, creed, age, disability, sex or
national origin;
      2.   Solicit membership for an employee or labor organization during the
employee's duty hours. This does not include the break or lunch period;
      3.   Use village time, property or equipment for union business other
than as provided in a collective bargaining agreement between the parties;
      4.   Interfere with, restrain or coerce any employee in the exercise of
any right guaranteed by the provisions of this chapter;
      5.   Restrain or coerce any elected official for the purpose of gaining a
concession;
      6.   Refuse to bargain collectively in good faith with the employer;
      7.   Refuse or fail to comply with any collective bargaining agreement
with the employer;
      8.   Refuse or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter;
      9.   Picket homes or private businesses of board members, elected
officials or employees of the village;
      10.   Interfere with or coerce the employer in the selection of its agent
for bargaining.
   B.   During the negotiating process, including the impasse procedure,
employees are prohibited from disclosing to village elected officials and
management employees any information, bargaining strategy, term(s) or issue(s)
which is the subject of negotiations with employees of the bargaining unit
involved in negotiations and employees of the exclusive representative, where
it would violate bargaining ground rules.
   C.   During the negotiating process, including the impasse procedure,
employees are prohibited from negotiating terms of the collective bargaining
agreement independent of the negotiating team with respect to any matter that
is the subject of the negotiation process and/or impasse procedure. (Ord. 279 §
17, 1996)
2.20.180: STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS PROHIBITED:
   A.   No employee or labor organization shall engage in a strike. No labor
organization shall cause, instigate, encourage or support a strike. The
employer shall not cause, instigate or engage in an employee lockout.
   B.   Should the employer allege that a strike has occurred by the bargaining
unit employees, the labor-management relations board shall meet in emergency
session, within forty eight (48) hours of the filing of the charge by the
employer, and determine whether a strike has indeed occurred.
   C.   Any labor organization that causes, instigates, encourages or supports
a public employee strike, walkout, or slowdown may be decertified as the
exclusive representative for that appropriate bargaining unit by the board and
shall be barred from serving as the exclusive representative for any bargaining
unit of village employees for a period of not more than one year. (Ord. 279 §
18, 1996)
2.20.190: AGREEMENTS VALID; ENFORCEMENT:
All collective bargaining agreements and other agreements between employers and
exclusive representatives are valid and enforceable according to their terms
when entered into in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 279
§ 19, 1996)
2.20.200: JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT; STANDARD OF REVIEW:
   A.   The board may request the district court to enforce any order issued
pursuant to this chapter, including those for appropriate temporary relief and
training orders. The court shall consider the request for enforcement on the
record made before the board. The court shall uphold the action of the board
and take appropriate action to enforce it unless the court concludes that the
order is:
      1.   Arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of discretion;
      2.   Not supported by substantial evidence on the record considered as a
whole; or
      3.   Otherwise not in accordance with law.
   B.   Any person or party, including any labor organization, affected by a
final regulation, order or decision of the board, may appeal to the district
court for further relief. All such appeals shall be based upon the record made
at the board hearing. All such appeals to the district court shall be taken
within thirty (30) days of the date of the final regulation, order or decision
of the board. Actions taken by the board shall be affirmed unless the court
concludes that the action is:
      1.   Arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of discretion;
      2.   Not supported by substantial evidence on the record taken as a
whole; or
      3.   Otherwise not in accordance with law. (Ord. 279 § 20, 1996)
2.20.210: SEVERABILITY:
If any part of this chapter is held invalid, the remainder or its application
to other situations or persons shall not be affected. (Ord. 279 § 21, 1996)
CHAPTER 2.24
VILLAGE CLERK TREASURER
SECTION:
2.24.010: Appointment And Selection
2.24.020: Qualifications
2.24.030: Term Of Office
2.24.040: Compensation
2.24.050: Removal Procedure
2.24.060: Powers And Duties
2.24.070: Prohibited Acts
2.24.080: Separability
2.24.010: APPOINTMENT AND SELECTION:
The Village Clerk Treasurer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval
of a majority of all members of the Governing Body. The Village Clerk Treasurer
shall be appointed solely on the basis of administrative qualifications and his
or her selection shall not be limited by reason of former residence. (Ord. 392,
2018)
2.24.020: QUALIFICATIONS:
The Village Clerk Treasurer shall have a high school diploma and at least four
(4) years' experience in one of such fields in an administrative capacity or a
minimum of two (2) years of college and at least two (2) years' experience in
public administration. (Ord. 392, 2018)
2.24.030: TERM OF OFFICE:
The Village Clerk Treasurer shall be employed for an indefinite term and until
a vacancy is created by death, resignation or removal by the Governing Body.
(Ord. 392, 2018)
2.24.040: COMPENSATION:
The Village Clerk Treasurer shall receive such compensation or salary as
approved by the Village Governing Body. (Ord. 392, 2018)
2.24.050: REMOVAL PROCEDURE:
The Village Clerk Treasurer may be discharged by the Mayor with the approval of
a majority of all the members of the Governing Body, or the Village Clerk
Treasurer may be discharged by the Governing Body upon a vote of a majority of
all the members of the Governing Body. The Governing Body shall, in any case,
cause to be paid to him or her forthwith any unpaid balance of his or her
salary and any accrued annual leave. (Ord. 392, 2018)
2.24.060: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Under the direct supervision of the Mayor, the Village Clerk Treasurer shall:
   A.   Be responsible for the effective management of the administrative
affairs of the Municipality;
   B.   Give general direction to the programs and activities of all Municipal
departments;
   C.   Be responsible for the proper execution of the policies set by the
Governing Body;
   D.   Enforce and carry out all ordinances, rules, and regulations enacted by
the Governing Body;
   E.   Keep the Mayor and Trustees informed of the conditions and needs of the
Municipality and make such reports and recommendations as he or she may deem
desirable, or as may be requested by the Mayor or Governing Body;
   F.   Attend all meetings of the Governing Body and of committees thereof and
may make suggestions and/or recommendations, but shall not have the right to
vote;
   G.   Prepare and submit an annual budget to the Governing Body;
   H.   Supervise all employees of the Municipality;
   I.   Whenever it becomes necessary to employ or appoint any person to work
for the Municipality, the Village Clerk Treasurer shall recommend to the Mayor
the name of a person qualified for the office or position to be filled;
   J.   Recommend to the Mayor and Governing Body the discharging or suspending
of any Municipal employee when such action would appear to be in the best
interest of the Municipality; and
   K.   Perform such other duties appropriate to the office as may be assigned
by the Mayor and Governing Body or as required by law. (Ord. 392, 2018)
2.24.070: PROHIBITED ACTS:
The Village Clerk Treasurer shall:
   A.   Not either directly or indirectly engage in any political activity,
partisan or non-partisan, in any manner, while in office, and
   B.   Have no business interest in any contracts or business financial
transactions with the Municipality. (Ord. 392, 2018)
2.24.080: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof. (Ord. 392, 2018)
CHAPTER 2.30
HATCH/NORTHERN DONA ANA COUNTY RECREATION COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2.30.010: Committee Members
2.30.020: Positions/Jobs Created
2.30.030: Parks And Recreation Fund Established
2.30.040: Parks And Recreation Fund Disbursements
2.30.010: COMMITTEE MEMBERS:
The Hatch/Northern Dona Ana County recreation committee is composed of nine (9)
members appointed by the board of trustees. Two (2) members will be from the
village of Hatch and seven (7) members will be at large. The members will be
responsible directly to the village of Hatch board of trustees. (Ord. 375,
2014)
2.30.020: POSITIONS/JOBS CREATED:
The committee will submit nominations to the village of Hatch board of trustees
for the position of program director and assistant director, providing an
assistant director position is needed, for approval. The village of Hatch board
of trustees will then appoint the necessary people for the positions.
The committee will be responsible for ensuring the proper numbers of people are
utilized for jobs such as scorekeeper, umpire, concession stand workers,
groundskeepers, maintenance workers and other jobs which are necessary for the
proper operation of the program. Any salaries will be paid by the village of
Hatch clerk after being approved by the village of Hatch board of trustees.
(Ord. 340, 2006)
2.30.030: PARKS AND RECREATION FUND ESTABLISHED:
All monies will be received by the village clerk/treasurer and deposited into a
regular bank account by the village of Hatch called the Hatch parks and
recreation account. Expenditures will be approved by the village of Hatch board
of trustees.
The chairperson of the committee will ensure that a report is made to the
village of Hatch board of trustees at their regular monthly board meeting. This
report will include any information or requests that the committee feels the
board should be aware of and any bills that need to be paid. (Ord. 340, 2006)
2.30.040: PARKS AND RECREATION FUND DISBURSEMENTS:
All disbursements from the Hatch parks and recreation account will be paid by
checks signed by the mayor and clerk/treasurer of the village of Hatch. All
requests for payment must be supported by invoices and vouchers before checks
are issued. (Ord. 340, 2006)
TITLE 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Municipal Gross Receipts Tax   3.04
Municipal Gross Receipts Tax On Liquor   3.05
Municipal Infrastructure Gross Receipts Tax   3.06
Lodgers' Tax   3.08
Municipal Environmental Services Gross Receipts Tax   3.12
CHAPTER 3.04
MUNICIPAL GROSS RECEIPTS TAX
SECTION:
3.04.010: Imposition Of Tax
3.04.020: General Provisions
3.04.030: Specific Exemptions
3.04.040: Dedication
3.04.050: Effective Date
3.04.010: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality for
the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality an excise tax equal
to one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the gross receipts reported or required to
be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico gross receipts and
compensating tax act as it now exists or as it may be amended. The tax imposed
under this chapter is pursuant to the municipal gross receipts tax act as it
now exists or as it may be amended and shall be known as the "municipal gross
receipts tax". (Ord. 225 § 1, 1988: Ord. dated 7-14-1981 § 1)
3.04.020: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
This chapter adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and deductions
contained in the gross receipts and compensating tax act as it now exists or as
it may be amended. (Ord. 225 § 2, 1988)
3.04.030: SPECIFIC EXEMPTIONS:
No municipal gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts arising
from:
   A.   The transmission of messages by wire or other means from one point
within the municipality to another point outside the municipality;
   B.   Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle,
air transportation or any other means from one point within the municipality to
another point outside the municipality; or
   C.   A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land
owned by that municipality for which a gross receipts tax distribution is made
pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, section 7-1-6.4C. (Ord. 225 §
3, 1988: Ord. dated 7-14-1981 § 2)
3.04.040: DEDICATION:
Revenue from the municipal gross receipts tax will be used for the purpose
listed below:
General fund. (Ord. 225 § 4, 1988: Ord. dated 7-14-1981 § 3)
3.04.050: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The effective date of the municipal gross receipts tax shall be January 1,
1989, unless an election is held pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated
1978, section 7-19-4(C)(2) on the question of disapproving the ordinance
codified in this chapter, in which case the effective date shall be on either
July 1 or January 1, whichever date occurs first after the expiration of three
(3) months from the date when the results of the election are certified to be
in favor of the ordinance's adoption. (Ord. 225 § 5, 1988: Ord. dated 7-14-1981
§ 4)
CHAPTER 3.05
MUNICIPAL GROSS RECEIPTS TAX ON LIQUOR
SECTION:
3.05.010: Imposition Of Tax
3.05.020: Amount Of License Tax
3.05.010: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
There is imposed an annual nonprohibitive municipal license tax upon the
privilege of persons holding state licenses under the provisions of the liquor
control act to operate within the village as retailers, dispensers, canopy
licensees, restaurant licenses or club licenses. (Ord. 253, 1993)
3.05.020: AMOUNT OF LICENSE TAX:
Every applicant for a license, before receiving such license shall pay to the
village clerk the following license tax for each place of business in the
village:
   A.   Retailer's license tax: One hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00);
   B.   Dispenser's license tax: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00);
   C.   All other forms of license tax: One hundred seventy five dollars
($175.00). (Ord. 253, 1993)
CHAPTER 3.06
MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE GROSS RECEIPTS TAX
SECTION:
3.06.010: Imposition Of Tax
3.06.020: General Provisions
3.06.030: Specific Exemptions
3.06.040: Dedication
3.06.050: Effective Date
3.06.010: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality for
the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality an excise tax equal
to one-eighth of one percent (1/8%) of the gross receipts reported or required
to be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico gross receipts and
compensating tax act as it now exists or as it may be amended. The tax imposed
under this chapter is pursuant to the municipal local option gross receipts
taxes act as it now exists or as it may be amended and shall be known as the
"municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax". (Ord. 269 § 1, 1995)
3.06.020: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The ordinance codified in this chapter adopts by reference all definitions,
exemptions and deductions contained in the gross receipts and compensating tax
act as it now exists or as it may be amended. (Ord. 269 § 2, 1995)
3.06.030: SPECIFIC EXEMPTIONS:
No municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross
receipts arising from a business located outside the boundaries of a
municipality on land owned by that municipality for which a state gross
receipts tax distribution is made pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated
1978, section 7-1-6.4C. (Ord. 269 § 3, 1995)
3.06.040: DEDICATION:
Revenue from the municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax will be used for
the purpose listed below:
General fund. (Ord. 269 § 4, 1995)
3.06.050: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The effective date of the municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax shall be
either January 1 or July 1, whichever date occurs first after the expiration of
at least three (3) months from the date the ordinance codified in this chapter
is delivered or mailed to the taxation and revenue department. (Ord. 269 § 5,
1995)
CHAPTER 3.08
LODGERS' TAX
SECTION:
3.08.010: Title
3.08.020: Purpose
3.08.030: Definitions
3.08.040: Imposition Of Tax
3.08.050: Licensing
3.08.060: Exemptions
3.08.070: Collection Of The Tax And Reporting Procedures
3.08.080: Duties Of The Vendor
3.08.090: Enforcement
3.08.100: Failure To Make Return; Computation, Civil Penalty And Notice,
Collection Of Delinquencies; Occupancy Tax Is A Lien
3.08.110: Criminal Penalties
3.08.120: Refunds And Credits
3.08.130: Vendor Audits
3.08.140: Financial Reporting
3.08.150: Confidentiality Of Return And Audit
3.08.160: Administration Of Lodgers' Tax Monies Collected
3.08.170: Eligible Uses Of Lodgers' Tax Proceeds
3.08.180: Severability
3.08.190: Appeals And Hearings
3.08.200: Amendment Of Tax Rate
3.08.010: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as and cited as the LODGERS' TAX ORDINANCE. (Ord.
278 § 1, 1996)
3.08.020: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a tax which will be borne by persons
using commercial lodging accommodations, which tax will provide revenues for
the purpose of advertising, publicizing and promoting tourist related
attractions, facilities and events, and acquiring, establishing and operating
tourist related facilities, attractions or transportation systems, as
authorized in section
3.08.170 of this chapter. (Ord. 278 § 2, 1996)
3.08.030: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
BOARD: The advisory board established herein to make recommendations to the
governing body, keep minutes of its proceedings and submit its recommendations,
correspondence and other pertinent documents to the governing body.
BOOKING PLATFORM: Any person or entity, including online platforms such as
Airbnb, VRBO, or similar services, that facilitates the reservation or rental
of lodging within the Village of Hatch.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of Hatch, New Mexico.
GROSS TAXABLE RENT: The total amount of rent paid for lodging, not including
the state gross receipts tax or local sales taxes.
LODGING: The transaction of furnishing rooms or other accommodations by a
vendor to a vendee who for rent uses, possesses or has the right to use or
possess any room or rooms or other units of accommodations in or at a taxable
premises.
LODGINGS: The rooms or other accommodations furnished by a vendor to a vendee
by a taxable service of lodgings.
OCCUPANCY TAX: The tax on lodging authorized by the lodgers' tax act.
PERSON: A corporation, firm, other body corporate, partnership, association or
individual; person includes an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or
other representative appointed according to law and acting in a representative
capacity, but does not include the United States of America, the state of New
Mexico, any corporation, department, instrumentality or agency of the federal
government or the state government, or any political subdivision of the state.
RENT: The consideration received by a vendor in money, credits, property or
other consideration valued in money for lodgings subject to an occupancy tax
authorized in the lodgers' tax act.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL: Any dwelling, apartment, condominium, or portion thereof
rented for lodging purposes for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive
days.
TAXABLE PREMISES: A hotel, apartment, apartment hotel, apartment house, lodge,
lodging house, rooming house, motor hotel, guest house, guest ranch, ranch
resort, guest resort, mobile home, motor court, auto court, auto camp, trailer
court, trailer camp, trailer park, tourist camp, cabin or other premises for
lodging.
TOURIST: A person who travels for the purpose of business, pleasure or culture
to a municipality or county imposing an occupancy tax.
TOURIST RELATED EVENTS: Events that are planned for, promoted to and attended
by tourists.
TOURIST RELATED FACILITIES AND ATTRACTIONS: Facilities and attractions that are
intended to be used by or visited by tourists.
TOURIST RELATED TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS: Transportation systems that provide
transportation for tourists to and from tourist related facilities, attractions
and events.
VENDEE: A natural person to whom lodgings are furnished in the exercise of the
taxable service of lodging.
VENDOR: A person furnishing lodgings in the exercise of the taxable service of
lodging. (Ord. 428, 2025: Ord. 278 § 3, 1996)
3.08.040: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
There is imposed an occupancy tax of five percent (5%) of gross taxable rent
for lodging within the municipality paid to vendors. (Ord. 428, 2025: Ord. 278
§ 4, 1996)
3.08.050: LICENSING:
   A.   No vendor shall engage in the business of providing lodging in the
municipality of Hatch who has first not obtained a license as provided in this
section.
   B.   Applicants for a vendor's license shall submit an application to the
city clerk stating:
      1.   The name of the vendor, including identification of any person, as
defined in this chapter, who owns or operates, or both owns and operates a
place of lodging and the name or trade names under which the vendor proposes to
do business and the post office address thereof;
      2.   A description of the facilities, including the number of rooms and
the usual schedule of rates therefor;
      3.   A description of other facilities provided by vendor or others to
users of the lodgings such as restaurant, bar, cleaning, laundry, courtesy car
or others, and a statement identifying the license issued, to whom issued, the
authority issuing, and the period for which issued. If applicable, also the
identification number provided by the bureau of revenue of the state of New
Mexico;
      4.   The nature of the business of the vendor and to what extent, if any,
his business is exempt from the lodgers' tax;
      5.   Other information reasonably necessary to effect a determination of
eligibility for such license.
   C.   The city clerk shall review applications for license within ten (10)
days of receipt thereof, and grant the license in due course if the applicant
is doing business subject to the lodgers' tax.
   D.   An applicant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the city clerk
may appeal the decision to the governing body by written notice to the city
clerk of such appeal to be made within fifteen (15) days of the date of the
decision of the city clerk on the application. The matter shall be referred to
the governing body for hearing at a regular or special meeting in the usual
course of business. The decision of the governing body made thereof shall be
expressed in writing and be communicated in the same manner as the decision of
the city clerk is transmitted. The action of the governing body shall be deemed
final.
   E.   If the governing body finds for the applicant, the city clerk shall
issue the appropriate license or other notice conforming to the decision made
by the governing body.
   F.   All lodging vendors, including owners or operators of short-term
rentals and booking platforms, must register with the village and obtain a
lodgers’ tax license prior to renting or facilitating rentals of taxable
lodging. (Ord. 428, 2025: Ord. 278 § 5, 1996)
3.08.060: EXEMPTIONS:
The occupancy tax shall not apply:
   A.   If a vendee:
      1.   Has been a permanent resident of the taxable premises for a period
of at least thirty (30) consecutive days; or
      2.   Enters into or has entered into a written agreement for lodgings at
the taxable premises for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days;
   B.   If the rent paid by the vendee is less than two dollars ($2.00) a day;
   C.   To lodging accommodations at institutions of the federal government,
the state or any political subdivision thereof;
   D.   To lodging accommodations at religious, charitable, educational or
philanthropic institutions, including without limitation such accommodations at
summer camps operated by such institutions;
   E.   To clinics, hospitals or other medical facilities;
   F.   To privately owned and operated convalescent homes, or homes for the
aged, infirm, indigent or chronically ill; or (Ord. 428, 2025: Ord. 278 § 6,
1996)
3.08.070: COLLECTION OF THE TAX AND REPORTING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Every vendor providing lodgings shall collect the tax thereon on behalf
of the municipality and shall act as a trustee therefor.
   B.   The tax shall be collected from vendees and shall be charged separately
from the rent fixed by the vendor for the lodgings.
   C.   Each vendor licensed under this chapter shall be liable to the
municipality of Hatch for the tax provided herein on the rent paid for lodging
at his respective place of business.
   D.   Each vendor shall make a report by the twenty fifth day of each month,
on forms provided by the city clerk, of the receipts for lodging in the
preceding calendar month, and shall submit the proceeds of the lodgers' tax to
the municipality and include sufficient information to enable the municipality
to audit the reports and shall be verified on oath by the vendor.
   E.   Booking platforms are required to collect and remit lodgers’ tax on
behalf of lodging owners for all taxable transactions conducted through their
platform, unless the lodging owner provides proof of separate tax remittance to
the village. (Ord. 428, 2025: Ord. 278 § 7, 1996)
3.08.080: DUTIES OF THE VENDOR:
Vendor shall maintain adequate records of facilities subject to the tax and of
proceeds received for the use thereof. Such records shall be maintained in
Hatch, New Mexico, and shall be open to the inspection of the municipality
during reasonable hours and shall be retained for three (3) years. (Ord. 278 §
8, 1996)
3.08.090: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   An action to enforce the lodgers' tax act may be brought by:
      1.   The attorney general or the district attorney in the county of
jurisdiction; or
      2.   A vendor who is collecting the proceeds of an occupancy tax in the
county of jurisdiction.
   B.   A district court may issue a writ of mandamus or order an injunction or
other appropriate remedy to enforce the provisions of the lodgers' tax act.
   C.   The court shall award costs and reasonable attorney fees to the
prevailing party in a court action to enforce the provisions of the lodgers'
tax act. (Ord. 278 § 9, 1996)
3.08.100: FAILURE TO MAKE RETURN; COMPUTATION, CIVIL PENALTY AND NOTICE,
COLLECTION OF DELINQUENCIES; OCCUPANCY TAX IS A LIEN:
   A.   Every vendor is liable for the payment of the proceeds of any occupancy
tax that the vendor failed to remit to the municipality, whether due to his
failure to collect the tax or otherwise. He shall be liable for the tax plus a
civil penalty equal to the greater of ten percent (10%) of the amount not
remitted or one hundred dollars ($100.00). The city clerk shall give the
delinquent vendor written notice of the delinquency, which notice shall be
mailed to the vendor's local address.
   B.   If payments are not received within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of
the notice, the municipality may bring an action in law or equity in the
district court for the collection of any amounts due, including without
limitation penalties thereon, interest on the unpaid principal at a rate not
exceeding one percent (1%) a month. If the city attempts collection through an
attorney or the city attorney for any purpose with regard to this chapter, the
vendor shall be liable to the municipality for all costs, fees paid to the
attorney or city attorney, and all other expenses incurred in connection
therewith.
   C.   The occupancy tax imposed by a municipality constitutes a lien in favor
of the municipality upon the personal and real property of the vendor providing
lodgings. The lien may be enforced as provided in New Mexico Statutes Annotated
1978, sections 3-36-1 through 3-36-7. Priority of the lien shall be determined
from the date of filing.
   D.   Under process or order of court, no person shall sell the property of a
vendor without first ascertaining from the city clerk or treasurer the amount
of any occupancy tax due the municipality. Any occupancy tax due the
municipality shall be paid from the proceeds of the sale before payment is made
to the judgment creditor or any other person with a claim on the proceeds of
the sale. (Ord. 278 § 10, 1996)
3.08.110: CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter for a failure to pay the
tax, to remit proceeds thereof to the municipality, to properly account for any
lodging and tax proceeds pertaining thereto, or for violating the
confidentiality provisions of section
3.08.150 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by
imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. (Ord. 278 § 11, 1996)
3.08.120: REFUNDS AND CREDITS:
If any person believes he has made payment of any lodgers' tax in excess of
that for which he was liable, he may claim a refund thereof by directing to the
city clerk, no later than ninety (90) days from the date payment was made, a
written claim for refund. Every claim for refund shall state the nature of the
person's complaint and the affirmative relief requested. The city clerk shall
allow the claim in whole or in part or may deny it. Refunds of tax and interest
erroneously paid and amounting to one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more may be
made only with the approval of the governing body. (Ord. 278 § 12, 1996)
3.08.130: VENDOR AUDITS:
   A.   The governing body shall conduct random audits to verify full payment
of occupancy tax receipts.
   B.   The governing body shall determine each year the number of vendors
within the municipality to audit.
   C.   The audit(s) may be performed by the city clerk or by any other
designee of the governing body. A copy of the audit(s) shall be filed annually
with the local government division of the department of finance and
administration. (Ord. 278 § 13, 1996)
3.08.140: FINANCIAL REPORTING:
   A.   The governing body shall furnish to the advisory board that portion of
any proposed budget, report or audit filed or received by the governing body
pursuant to either New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, chapter 6, article 6 or
the audit act that relates to expenditure of occupancy tax funds within ten
(10) days of the filing or receipt of such proposed budget, report or audit by
the governing body.
   B.   The governing body shall report to the local government division of the
department of finance and administration on a quarterly basis any expenditure
of occupancy tax funds pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, sections
3-38-15 and 3-38-21 and shall furnish a copy of this report to the advisory
board when it is filed with the division. (Ord. 278 § 14, 1996)
3.08.150: CONFIDENTIALITY OF RETURN AND AUDIT:
It is unlawful for any employee of the municipality of Hatch to reveal to any
individual other than another employee of the municipality of Hatch any
information contained in the return or audit of any taxpayer, including vendors
subject to the lodgers' tax act, except to a court of competent jurisdiction in
response to an order thereof in an action relating to taxes to which the
municipality of Hatch is a party, and in which information sought is material
to the inquiry; to the taxpayer himself or to his authorized representative;
and in such manner, for statistical purposes, the information revealed is not
identified as applicable to any individual taxpayer. (Ord. 278 § 15, 1996)
3.08.160: ADMINISTRATION OF LODGERS' TAX MONIES COLLECTED:
The governing body shall administer the lodgers' tax monies collected. The
mayor shall appoint a five (5) member advisory board that consists of two (2)
members who are owners or operators of lodgings subject to the occupancy tax
within the municipality, two (2) members who are owners or operators of
industries located within the municipality that primarily provide services or
products to tourists and one member who is a resident of the municipality and
represents the general public. The board shall advise the governing body on
expenditure of funds authorized under section
3.08.170 of this chapter for advertising, publicizing and promoting tourist
attractions and facilities in the municipality and surrounding area. (Ord. 278
§ 16, 1996)
3.08.170: ELIGIBLE USES OF LODGERS' TAX PROCEEDS:
The municipality may use the proceeds from the tax to defray the costs of:
   A.   Collecting and otherwise administering the tax, including the
performance of audits required by the lodgers' tax act pursuant to guidelines
issued by the department of finance and administration;
   B.   Establishing, operating, purchasing, constructing, otherwise acquiring,
reconstructing, extending, improving, equipping, furnishing or acquiring real
property or any interest in real property for the site or grounds for tourist
related facilities, attractions or transportation systems of the municipality,
the county in which the municipality is located or the county;
   C.   The principal of and interest on any prior redemption premiums due in
connection with and any other charges pertaining to revenue bonds authorized by
New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, section 3-38-23 or section 3-38-24;
   D.   Advertising, publicizing and promoting tourist related attractions,
facilities and events of the municipality or county and tourist facilities or
attractions within the area;
   E.   Providing police and fire protection and sanitation service for tourist
related events, facilities and attractions located in the municipality; or
   F.   Any combination of the foregoing purposes or transactions stated in
this section, but for no other municipal purpose. (Ord. 278 § 17, 1996)
3.08.180: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent
provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter. (Ord. 278 § 18, 1996)
3.08.190: APPEALS AND HEARINGS:
Any vendor who disagrees with an audit determination, penalty assessment, or
other decision under this chapter may request a hearing before the village
clerk-treasurer or a designated hearing officer within thirty (30) days of
receiving written notice of such determination. The hearing shall be conducted
in accordance with procedures established by the village, providing the vendor
an opportunity to present evidence and argument. The village’s decision
following the hearing shall be final. (Ord. 428, 2025)
3.08.200: AMENDMENT OF TAX RATE:
Any changes to the lodgers’ tax rate shall be made only by ordinance approved
by the village council following a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall
be published in accordance with applicable law. (Ord. 428, 2025)
CHAPTER 3.12
MUNICIPAL ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES GROSS RECEIPTS TAX
SECTION:
3.12.010: Imposition Of Tax
3.12.020: General Provisions
3.12.030: Specific Exemptions
3.12.040: Dedication
3.12.050: Effective Date
3.12.010: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality for
the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality an excise tax equal
to one-sixteenth of one percent (1/16%) of the gross receipts reported or
required to be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico gross receipts
and compensating tax act as it now exists or as it may be amended. The tax
imposed under this chapter is pursuant to the municipal environmental services
gross receipts tax act as it now exists or as it may be amended and shall be
known as the "municipal environmental service gross receipts tax". (Ord. 237 §
1, 1990)
3.12.020: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
This chapter adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and deductions
contained in the gross receipts and compensating tax act as it now exists or as
it may be amended. (Ord. 237 § 2, 1990)
3.12.030: SPECIFIC EXEMPTIONS:
No municipal environmental services gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the
gross receipts arising from:
   A.   The transmission of messages by wire or other means from one point
within the municipality to another point outside the municipality;
   B.   Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle,
air transportation or any other means from one point within the municipality to
another point outside the municipality; or
   C.   A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land
owned by that municipality for which a gross receipts tax distribution is made
pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, section 7-1-6.4C. (Ord. 237 §
3, 1990)
3.12.040: DEDICATION:
Revenue from the municipal environmental services gross receipts tax will be
used for the purpose(s) listed below:
For the acquisition, construction, operation and maintenance of solid waste
facilities, water facilities, wastewater facilities, sewer systems and related
facilities. (Ord. 237 § 4, 1990)
3.12.050: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The effective date of the municipal environmental services gross receipts tax
shall be January 1, 1991, unless an election is held pursuant to New Mexico
Statutes Annotated 1978, section 7-19-4(C)(2) on the question of disapproving
the ordinance codified in this chapter, in which case the effective date shall
be either July 1 or January 1, whichever date occurs first after the expiration
of three months from the date when the results of the election are certified to
be in favor of the ordinance's adoption. (Ord. 237 § 5, 1990)
TITLE 4
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Economic Development Plan   4.04
Economic Development Council   4.08
CHAPTER 4.04
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN
SECTION:
4.04.010: Short Title
4.04.020: Authority
4.04.030: Purpose
4.04.040: Local Economic Development Act
4.04.050: Definitions
4.04.060: Economic Development Plan
4.04.070: Application Requirements
4.04.071: Application Requirements For Small Businesses
4.04.080: Applicable Review Criteria
4.04.090: Public Safeguards
4.04.100: Project Participation Agreement
4.04.110: Project Monies
4.04.120: Termination
4.04.130: Joint Regional Projects
4.04.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN ORDINANCE. (Ord. 343
§ 1.1, 2007)
4.04.020: AUTHORITY:
   A.   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the statutory authority conferred
upon municipalities to allow public support of economic development 1 . This
chapter is adopted as part of the Village's economic development plan. (Ord.
343 § 2.1, 2007)
 
Notes
1 1. NMSA 1978, §§ 5-10-1 - 5-10-13.
4.04.030: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to allow public support of economic
projects to foster, promote and enhance local economic development efforts
while continuing to protect against the unauthorized use of public money and
other public resources. Further, the purpose of this chapter is to allow the
Village of Hatch to enter into one or more joint powers agreements with other
local governments to plan and support regional economic development projects.
(Ord. 343 § 3.1, 2007)
4.04.040: LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ACT:
Local governments are allowed to provide direct or indirect assistance to
qualifying businesses for furthering or implementing economic development plans
and projects. Furthermore, local and regional governments have the authority to
contribute assets to development projects; however, the imposition of a tax
must be approved by the voters in referendum.
   A.   Eligible Uses: Municipalities may impose Municipal Infrastructure Gross
Receipts Tax and dedicate the revenue for economic development projects. A
total of 0.25 percent tax (in 4 increments of 0.0625 percent) may be imposed.
(Ord. 343 § 3.2, 2007)
4.04.050: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: The provision of direct or indirect assistance to
a qualifying business and includes the purchase, lease, grant, or construction,
reconstruction, improvement or other acquisition or conveyance of land,
buildings or other infrastructure; public works improvements essential to the
location expansion of a qualifying business; and payments for professional
services contracts necessary for local or regional governments to implement a
plan or project.
ENABLING ORGANIZATION: The Hatch Valley Economic Development Council.
GOVERNING BODY: The Village of Hatch Board of Trustees.
PROJECT PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT: An agreement between a qualifying entity and
the Village of Hatch whereby the Village of Hatch provides assistance to an
economic development project in exchange for the benefits received as set forth
in this chapter.
QUALIFYING ENTITY: An existing or proposed corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, association or other person
that is one or a combination of two (2) or more of the following:
   A.   Agricultural Or Manufactured Products: An industry for manufacturing,
processing, or assembling of any agricultural or manufactured products;
   B.   Commercial Enterprise: A commercial enterprise for storing,
warehousing, distributing, or selling products of agriculture, mining or
industry, but other than provided in subsection D of this definition, not
including any enterprise for sale of goods or commodities at retail or for the
distribution to the public of electricity, gas, water, or telephone or other
services commonly classified as public utilities;
   C.   Services For General Public Or Government Agencies: A business in which
all or part of the activities of the business involves the supplying of
services to the general public or to government agencies or to a specific
industry or customer, but, other than provided in subsection D of this
definition, not including business primarily engaged in the sale of goods or
commodities at retail;
   D.   Interstate Telecommunication Sales: A telecommunications sales
enterprise that makes the majority of its sales to persons outside of New
Mexico;
   E.   New Mexico Spaceport: A company involved with the New Mexico spaceport
launch, launch support, payload, or logistics support business segments;
   F.   Conservation Technologies: A company providing clean renewable energy
(with a focus on the solar industry), water conservation and waste reduction
technologies.
   G.   Small Businesses: A business entity which has or projects annual gross
receipts of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per year or less. (Ord.
402, 2019: Ord. 398, 2019: Ord. 355, 2009: Ord. 343 § 4, 2007)
4.04.060: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   A.   The enabling organization, after approval of the Governing Body, may
assist economic development projects in any legally permissible manner
including, but not limited to:
      1.   Provisions of land, buildings and infrastructure provided that all
the requirements of this chapter are met. The Village may provide land,
buildings or infrastructure it already owns, or it may build, purchase or lease
the facilities needed for an economic development project.
      2.   Bearing the full cost or contributing a portion of the costs
including the waiver of applicable fees.
      3.   Contributing to the payment of costs for professional service
contracts such as industry feasibility studies and planning and design services
needed to implement a project.
      4.   Providing access to low cost loans offered by the Village of Hatch
Economic Development Loan Committee.
      5.   Offering lots in the Village of Hatch industrial park at negotiable
rates other than existing market rates.
      6.   Providing a reduction, up to twenty percent (20%), on applicable
Lodging Taxes.
      7.   Providing a reduction, up to twenty percent (20%), on Village owned
utilities.
   B.   The enabling organization, after approval of the Governing Body, may
consider offering all forms of assistance allowed under this chapter and any
other legally permissible forms of assistance; however, this does not establish
any obligation on the Village's part to offer any specific type or level of
assistance. (Ord. 343 § 5, 2007)
4.04.070: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Any "qualifying entity" meeting the definition set forth in section
4.04.050 of this chapter may propose an economic development project to the
Village. Meeting the definition of a "qualifying entity" does not create any
obligation on the part of the Village of Hatch.
   B.   Applications shall contain the following information:
      1.   Identification information:
         a.   Complete name and address of entity;
         b.   Incorporation papers with bylaws;
         c.   List of board of directors and executive director, with
addresses; and resumes of all directors and officers.
      2.   Evidence of financial solvency may include:
         a.   Financial statement (income statement and balance sheets) for the
past three (3) years;
         b.   Federal tax number, New Mexico State taxation and revenue number
and Village business license;
         c.   Projected income statement for at least three (3) years;
         d.   Personal financial statement of principal owner(s).
      3.   Evidence of organizational capacity:
         a.   Brief history of the entity;
         b.   Organizational chart of the entity;
         c.   Business plans for the entity and proposed project (shall include
pro forma cash flow analysis);
         d.   Organizational mission statement.
      4.   The project participation agreement and any other pertinent
information will be forwarded to the Governing Body for final consideration at
a public meeting. (Ord. 343 § 6, 2007)
4.04.071: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SMALL BUSINESSES 1 :
   A.   Any "qualifying entity" meeting the definition set forth in section
 4.04.050 of this chapter may propose an economic development project to the
Village. Meeting the definition of a "qualifying entity" does not create any
obligation on the part of the Village of Hatch.
   B.   Applications shall contain the following information:
      1.   Identification information:
         a.   Complete name and address of entity.
      2.   Evidence of financial solvency may include:
         a.   Personal financial statement of principal owner(s).
         b.   Three (3) years tax returns.
         c.   Projected income statement for at least three (3) years.
         d.   Business plan for the entity.
      3.   The project participation agreement and any other pertinent
information will be forwarded to the Governing Body for final consideration at
a public meeting. (Ord. 403, 2019)
 
Notes
1 1. Dona Ana Community College will assist new businesses prepare projected
  financial statements at no fee.
4.04.080: APPLICABLE REVIEW CRITERIA:
   A.   Applications for economic development projects requesting economic
assistance from the Village of Hatch which meet the policies and objectives of
the economic development plan shall receive priority.
   B.   All applications for economic development projects requesting economic
assistance from the Village of Hatch shall submit a cost-benefit analysis,
preparation of which is the responsibility of the applicant. The enabling
organization retains the right to specify a format and methodology for the
cost-benefit analysis and shall review and approve the methodology used. The
source and rationale for any multiplier effects shall be identified. The cost-
benefit analysis shall show that the Village will recoup the value of its
donation within a period of ten (10) years. The analysis shall address the
following:
      1.   The number and type of jobs to be created, both temporary
construction jobs and permanent jobs (by New Mexico DOL job category);
      2.   Pay scale of jobs;
      3.   Determination of which jobs are expected to be filled locally.
Note: The Mesilla Valley Economic Development Agency (MVEDA) and the Village of
Hatch Chamber of Commerce can assist with developing these estimates once
project parameters are known.
   C.   All applicants for economic development projects requesting assistance
from the Village of Hatch shall clearly demonstrate how the qualifying entity
is making a substantive contribution. The contribution shall be of value and
may be paid in money, in- kind services, jobs, expanded tax base, property or
other thing or service of value for the expansion or improvement of the
economy. (Ord. 343 § 7, 2007)
4.04.090: PUBLIC SAFEGUARDS:
   A.   All economic development projects receiving assistance from the Village
shall be subject to an annual performance review conducted by the enabling
organization. This review shall evaluate whether the project is attaining the
goals and objectives set forth in the project participation agreement. This
review shall be presented to the Governing Body for their consideration. The
Governing Body at a public hearing may terminate assistance to the economic
development project by provisions set forth in the agreement, which terminates
the agreement and specifies the disposition of all assets and obligations of
the project.
   B.   The Village shall retain a security interest, which shall be specific
in the project participation agreement. The type security given shall depend
upon the nature of the economic development project and assistance provided by
the Village. Types of security may include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Letter of credit in the Village's name;
      2.   Performance bond equal to the Village's contribution;
      3.   A mortgage or lien on the property or equipment; and
      4.   Other security agreeable to both parties.
   C.   Should a qualifying entity move, sell, lease or transfer a majority
interest in the economic development project before the expiration of the
project participation agreement, the Village retains the right to deny any and
all assignments, sales, leases or transfers of any interests in the economic
development project until adequate assurances are made that the transferee,
assignee or lessee is a qualifying entity and that the terms of the agreement
will be satisfied by the transferee, assignee or lessee. (Ord. 343 § 8, 2007)
4.04.100: PROJECT PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT:
   A.   The qualifying entity shall prepare with the Village a project
participation agreement. This agreement is the formal document, which states
the contribution and obligation of all parties in the economic development
project. The agreement must state the following items:
      1.   The economic development goals of the project;
      2.   The contribution of the Village and the qualifying entity;
      3.   The specific measurable objectives upon which the performance review
will be read;
      4.   A schedule for project development and goal attainment;
      5.   The security being offered for the Village's investment; and
      6.   The time period for which the Village shall retain an interest in
the project.
   B.   Each project participation agreement shall be subject to review and
approval by the Governing Body at a public hearing. (Ord. 343 § 9, 2007)
4.04.110: PROJECT MONIES:
All project monies shall be kept in a separate account by the entity and the
Village, with such account clearly identified. These accounts shall be subject
to an annual independent audit. (Ord. 343 § 10, 2007)
4.04.120: TERMINATION:
The Governing Body may terminate this chapter and the Village's economic
development plan and any or all project participation agreements undertaken
under its authority. Termination shall be by ordinance at a public hearing or
in accordance with the terms of the project participation agreement. If an
ordinance or a project participation agreement is terminated, all contract
provisions of the project participation agreement regarding termination shall
be satisfied. Upon termination of the ordinance or any project participation
agreement, any Village monies remaining in the Village project accounts shall
be transferred to the Village's General Fund. (Ord. 343 § 11, 2007)
4.04.130: JOINT REGIONAL PROJECTS:
The Village may engage in economic development projects involving one or more
other government entities for projects, which encompass more than one
municipality or county. In such instances, the relevant Governing Bodies shall
adopt a joint powers agreement. This agreement will establish the application
criteria and the terms of all project participation agreements. Criteria
established under a joint powers agreement shall be consistent with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 343 § 12, 2007)
CHAPTER 4.08
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
SECTION:
4.08.010: Short Title
4.08.020: Economic Development Plan Authority
4.08.030: Purpose
4.08.040: Project Monies
4.08.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the HATCH VALLEY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
(HVEDC). (Ord. 397, 2019)
4.08.020: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN AUTHORITY:
The Economic Development Plan Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the statutory
authority conferred upon municipalities to allow support of economic
development. This chapter is adopted as part of the Village's economic
development plan. (Ord. 397, 2019)
4.08.030: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the Hatch Valley Economic
Development Council to be the implementing organization of the recently passed
LEDA as described in the following paragraph, and, is officially recognized by
the Village of Hatch as the authority in all of the community's economic
development efforts and designated to meet and negotiate with prospects. Local
governments are allowed to provide direct or indirect assistance to qualifying
businesses for furthering or implementing economic development plans and
projects. Furthermore local and regional governments have the authority to
contribute assets to development projects; however, the imposition of a tax
must be approved by the voters in referendum. (Ord. 397, 2019)
4.08.040: PROJECT MONIES:
All project monies shall be kept in a separate account by the entity and the
Village, with such account clearly identified. These accounts shall be subject
to an annual independent audit. The HVEDC will make recommendations on the use
of the Revolving Fund to the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 397, 2019)
TITLE 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Business Registration Fee   5.04
Business License Fees   5.08
Public Activity Permits   5.12
Solicitors   5.16
Marijuana Business Licenses   5.17
CHAPTER 5.04
BUSINESS REGISTRATION FEE
SECTION:
5.04.010: Imposition Of Fee
5.04.020: Exemption
5.04.030: Application To Do Business
5.04.040: Renewal
5.04.050: Application Information
5.04.060: Violation; Penalty
5.04.010: IMPOSITION OF FEE:
There is imposed on each place of business conducted in this municipality a
business registration fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00). The fee is imposed
pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, section 3-38-3 as it now exists
or is amended and shall be known as the "business registration fee". The
business registration fee may not be prorated for businesses conducted for a
portion of the year. (Ord. 228 § 1, 1989)
5.04.020: EXEMPTION:
No business registration fee shall be imposed on any business which is licensed
under chapter 5.08 of this title pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated
1978, section 3-38-1. (Ord. 228 § 2, 1989)
5.04.030: APPLICATION TO DO BUSINESS:
Any person proposing to engage in business within the municipal limits of the
village shall apply for and pay a business registration fee for each outlet,
branch or location within the municipal limits of the village prior to engaging
in business, unless such person is required to obtain a business license fee
under chapter 5.08 of this title. (Ord. 228 § 3, 1989)
5.04.040: RENEWAL:
Prior to March 16 of each year, any person with a place of business in the
village and subject to this chapter shall apply for renewal of business
registration with the municipal clerk. (Ord. 228 § 4, 1989)
5.04.050: APPLICATION INFORMATION:
Any person filing an application for issuance or renewal of any business
registration shall include in the application his current revenue division
taxpayer identification number or evidence of application for a current revenue
division taxpayer identification number. (Ord. 228 § 5, 1989)
5.04.060: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall be subject to a penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) per year.
(Ord. 228 § 6, 1989)
CHAPTER 5.08
BUSINESS LICENSE FEES
SECTION:
5.08.010: License Fees Designated
5.08.020: Refusal To Issue License; Hearing
5.08.030: Refusal To Issue License; Violations
5.08.040: Application Procedure
5.08.050: Engaging In Business Without A License; Liability
5.08.060: Violation; Penalty
5.08.010: LICENSE FEES DESIGNATED:
For the purpose of licensing and regulating the pursuits, vocations, trades and
callings specifically enumerated in this section, all persons, before engaging
in any of said enumerated businesses in the village, shall obtain from the
village clerk a license therefor, the fees payable for such licenses being set
forth following the name of such business and the amount shown being the annual
license fee, except where otherwise specified:
Advertising signs, not enumerated in this section             $ 1.00 per day
Amusement tables and instruments other than billiard, pool,   5.00
marble and pinball tables
Amusement parks                                               100.00 per day
Amusement shows                                               100.00 per day
Amusement ticket brokers                                      15.00
Amusements                                                    100.00 per day
Auctioneers                                                   15.00 per day or
                                                              35.00 per year
Auto camps                                                    15.00
Automatic selling machines or devices, not conducted for      15.00
charitable purposes
Ball alleys                                                   15.00
Balls                                                         100.00 per day
Barbershops                                                   15.00
Bathhouses                                                    15.00
Billboards                                                    15.00
Billiard and pool hall parlors                                5.00
Billiard tables                                               5.00
Billposters smaller than two feet by four feet (2' x 4')      0.30 each
Billposting companies                                         15.00
Boarding houses                                               15.00
Campgrounds                                                   15.00
Carnivals                                                     100.00 per day
Cattle shows                                                  5.00 per day
Circuses                                                      100.00 per day
Clairvoyants                                                  300.00 per day
Concerts                                                      100.00 per day
Corn doctors                                                  15.00
Cottage camps                                                 15.00
Dance halls (permanent structures)                            15.00
Dealers in secondhand goods                                   15.00
Dog shows                                                     5.00 per day
Drays, wagons, carts to carry heavy loads                     15.00
Equestrian exhibitions                                        5.00 per day
Fairs and amusements, generally, if not otherwise herein      15.00 per day
provided for
Fortune tellers                                               300.00 per day
Gasoline and oil filling stations                             15.00
Gift enterprises, not forbidden by law                        5.00 each
Hairdressing establishments                                   15.00
Hawkers                                                       15.00 per day or
                                                              35.00 per year
Horse shows                                                   5.00 per day
Hotels                                                        15.00
Hucksters                                                     15.00 per day or
                                                              35.00 per year
Itinerant dentists                                            25.00 per day
Itinerant doctors                                             25.00 per day
Itinerant operatic, theatrical and other public exhibitions   100.00 per day
Itinerant peddlers and vendors
(Itinerant vendors or peddlers making regular trips visiting
retailers and taking orders shall pay a fee of $15.00 for the 25.00 per day
first $10,000.00 of gross business and $1.00 for each
$1,000.00 in excess thereof.)
Junk dealers                                                  15.00
Keepers of street stands                                      15.00 per day or
                                                              35.00 per year
Labor camps                                                   15.00 per year
Lettuce cooling plants                                        15.00 per year
Loan agents and agencies                                      15.00
Marble tables                                                 5.00
Masseurs                                                      15.00
Menageries, traveling                                         100.00 per day
Museums, traveling                                            100.00 per day
Omnibuses                                                     15.00
Palmists and phrenologists                                    300.00 per day
Parades                                                       100.00 per day
Pavilions                                                     100.00 per day
Pawnbrokers                                                   15.00
Peddlers, including magazine peddlers                         15.00 per day or
                                                              35.00 per year
Pin alleys                                                    15.00
Pinball tables                                                5.00
Pool tables                                                   5.00
Private detectives and agencies                               15.00
Private hospitals of all kinds                                25.00
Public dances                                                 5.00 per day
Public lecturers                                              5.00 per day
Public scales                                                 15.00
Shooting galleries                                            10.00 per day
Skating rinks                                                 15.00
Slot machines                                                 5.00 each
Sparring exhibitions                                          5.00 per day
Taxi companies                                                15.00
Taxi stands                                                   15.00
Taxis (each vehicle)                                          15.00
Theatrical agencies                                           50.00
Tourist camps                                                 15.00
Transfer companies                                            15.00
Traveling shows                                               100.00 per day
Trucks, canvassing, house to house                            15.00 per day or
                                                              35.00 per year
Vehicles used for hire                                        15.00
Wrestling exhibitions and contests                            5.00 per day
All occupations, professions, trades, pursuits and other
institutions and establishments, articles, utilities not      30.00
specifically enumerated in this section, of whatever kind and
character
 
(Ord. 133, 1967: Ord. 93, 1955: Ord. 92, 1954: Ord. 82 § 1, 1949)
5.08.020: REFUSAL TO ISSUE LICENSE; HEARING:
The board of trustees may, for the purpose of regulation, refuse to issue
licenses when it may deem it for the best interest of the public; provided,
however, that no license shall be refused without first giving the person, firm
or corporation so applying therefor an opportunity to be heard. If, upon such
hearing before the board of trustees a majority of the board present at such
meeting are of the opinion that it is in the best interest of the public, such
license may be refused. (Ord. 82 § 2, 1949)
5.08.030: REFUSAL TO ISSUE LICENSE; VIOLATIONS:
In case, where, by any provision of this chapter a person, firm or corporation
is required to obtain a license for any pursuit, vocation, trade or calling,
and has been adjudged guilty of violating this or any other ordinance in
relation thereto, or whenever in the judgment of the board the public welfare
shall require, such license, as aforesaid granted, may be refused. (Ord. 82 §
3, 1949)
5.08.040: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
All persons, firms or business entities now engaged in a business coming within
the provisions of section
5.08.010 of this chapter shall make application for annual license to continue
such business on or before January 15 of each year. The fee provided by section
5.08.010 of this chapter shall accompany each application made pursuant to this
chapter. The license fee shall cover the remainder of the calendar year in
which the application is made and license issued. (Ord. 82 § 4, 1949)
5.08.050: ENGAGING IN BUSINESS WITHOUT A LICENSE; LIABILITY:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall engage in business without having
procured the license when said license is required, or paid the occupation tax
as provided for in this chapter, shall be liable in a civil action to the
village for the amount of the license fee, together with a penalty of twenty
five percent (25%) of the amount of the fee, and shall also be liable for
reasonable fees to be paid to the attorney of the village for his services in
such civil action, and for costs of suit, all to be taxed by the court hearing
said case, and included within the judgment rendered by the court. (Ord. 82 §
5, 1949)
5.08.060: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof the offender shall be fined not less than five
dollars ($5.00) nor more than seventy five dollars ($75.00) and costs of the
action. The court hearing the case shall also tax as costs in the action a
reasonable sum to be paid to the attorney for the village acting in such case.
(Ord. 82 § 6, 1949)
CHAPTER 5.12
PUBLIC ACTIVITY PERMITS
SECTION:
5.12.010: Hatch Chile Festival Grounds
5.12.020: Public Activity Permit Checklist
5.12.030: Security Guards
5.12.040: Information Provided To Chief Of Police
5.12.050: Chief Of Police To Submit Information To Village Clerk
5.12.060: Insurance
5.12.065: Fees
5.12.066: Waiver
5.12.070: Issuance Of Permit
5.12.080: Posting Of Permit
5.12.090: Violation; Penalty
5.12.010: HATCH CHILE FESTIVAL GROUNDS:
No public activity will be held at the Hatch Chile Festival grounds unless the
party wishing to hold the public activity meets with the Village Clerk and
obtains an activity permit checklist, which must also be signed by the Clerk.
(Ord. 315, 2003: Ord. 221 § 1, 1998)
5.12.020: PUBLIC ACTIVITY PERMIT CHECKLIST:
The public activity permit checklist must then be presented to the Chief of
Police, no less than seven (7) days prior to the scheduled public activity.
(Ord. 221 § 2, 1988)
5.12.030: SECURITY GUARDS:
The Chief of Police will determine the number of security guards required, the
qualifications and will approve the hiring or appointment of said security
guards prior to the issuance of a public activity permit by the Village Clerk.
To accomplish this, the party wishing to hold the public activity will provide
the Chief of Police with a list of the names of the prospective security guards
or the name of the security company they wish to hire. (Ord. 221 § 3, 1988)
5.12.040: INFORMATION PROVIDED TO CHIEF OF POLICE:
In addition, the party wishing to hold the public activity will provide the
Chief of Police with the following information concerning the public activity:
the date, location, time it starts and ends and the name of the person who will
be in charge of the public activity. (Ord. 221 § 4, 1988)
5.12.050: CHIEF OF POLICE TO SUBMIT INFORMATION TO VILLAGE CLERK:
When the above requirements of this chapter have been met, the Chief of Police
will submit the information, along with his approval for the security
arrangements, to the Village Clerk. (Ord. 221 § 5, 1988)
5.12.060: INSURANCE:
The party wishing to hold the public activity will be required to furnish a
copy of an insurance binder naming the Village of Hatch as an additional named
insured for the duration of the public activity being planned. (Ord. 315, 2003:
Ord. 221 § 6, 1988)
5.12.065: FEES:
The following fees will be collected prior to the permit being issued:
 
A private event with no admission or parking charge:
 Usage fee                                                 $500.00 per day
 Cleanup deposit (to be returned if area is cleaned within 500.00
  24 hours)
An advertised public event with an admission and/or parking charge:
 Usage fee                                                 $1,000.00 per day
 Police fee                                                500.00 per day
 Cleanup deposit (to be returned if area is cleaned within 1,000.00
  24 hours)
 
(Ord. 399, 2019)
5.12.066: WAIVER:
Events held in connection with the Hatch Chamber of Commerce and/or the Hatch
Chile Festival will have all fees waived. (Ord. 315, 2003)
5.12.070: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
When the village clerk has received the proper information from the chief of
police and proof of proper insurance coverage from the party wishing to hold
the public activity, the village clerk will issue a public activity permit when
all requirements are met. (Ord. 315, 2003: Ord. 221 § 7, 1988)
5.12.080: POSTING OF PERMIT:
The party to whom the public activity permit has been issued is responsible for
ensuring that the permit is posted, in a prominent place, at the location of
the public activity for the duration of the public activity. (Ord. 221 § 8,
1988)
5.12.090: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person(s) convicted of violating any provision(s) of this chapter will be
punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment of not less than one day nor more
than ninety (90) days, or both. (Ord. 221 § 9, 1988)
CHAPTER 5.16
SOLICITORS
SECTION:
5.16.010: Short Title
5.16.020: Definitions
5.16.030: Purpose
5.16.040: Determination Of Commercial And Noncommercial Activity
5.16.050: No Soliciting Signs
5.16.060: Commercial Soliciting Of Residences
5.16.070: Commercial Solicitor's License And Registration
5.16.080: Drummer's Bond
5.16.090: Noncommercial Soliciting
5.16.100: Use Of Registration And License Information
5.16.110: Complaints From The Public
5.16.120: Soliciting On Streets, Sidewalks And Public Grounds
5.16.130: Fresh Meats, Produce And Wood
5.16.140: Violation; Penalty
5.16.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the MUNICIPAL PUBLIC SOLICITING ORDINANCE. (Ord.
205 § 1, 1985)
5.16.020: DEFINITIONS:
CHIEF: The municipal police chief or his designee, or the chief law enforcement
officer authorized to enforce municipal ordinances pursuant to a joint power
agreement or his designee.
CLERK: The municipal clerk.
COMMERCIAL: Soliciting for a business purpose which is intended to be for
profit and which is not noncommercial.
DRUMMER: A person soliciting commercial orders for goods or services which are
to be provided or shipped to the consumer at a later date.
ITINERANT: A person who is a solicitor, and who has no regular place of doing
business or soliciting in the municipality, but does not include persons who
regularly deliver or provide services or goods over an established route
through the municipality.
JUDGE: The municipal judge.
MAYOR: The mayor of the municipality or the mayor's designee.
MUNICIPALITY: The village of Hatch.
NONCOMMERCIAL: Soliciting for any purpose which is intended to be charitable,
religious, not for profit, or political.
PEDDLER: A person soliciting commercial orders for goods or services which are
to be provided from stocks of goods carried with the peddler or which are
services provided by the peddler at the time the order is made.
PERSON: Any person, partnership, corporation or other association or
organization.
SOLICITING: All activities of peddlers and drummers attempting to obtain
business. Soliciting shall also mean the activities of any person who attempts
to obtain a contribution, sales or goods or services, donation of property, or
attendance at any meeting or service, for a noncommercial purpose. Such
activities for both commercial and noncommercial purposes include, but are not
limited to, distribution of handbills or leaflets to the public directly or by
placing them in a mailbox, on a doorknob, or otherwise on any property; coming
personally onto any property for the purposes set forth in this definition; and
calling the occupants of any property by telephone for the purposes set forth
in this definition. (Ord. 205 § 2, 1985)
5.16.030: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to require identification of solicitors to
prevent fraud on the public and reduce the likelihood of burglars posing as
solicitors; to prohibit uninvited soliciting of residences by commercial
solicitors to prevent annoying intrusions of people's privacy; to regulate and
prohibit certain soliciting on sidewalks, streets and public grounds to avoid
traffic, safety and congestion problems; and to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the public. (Ord. 205 § 3, 1985)
5.16.040: DETERMINATION OF COMMERCIAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL ACTIVITY:
No municipal official or employee shall have the power to determine whether
soliciting is commercial or noncommercial. Each person soliciting shall comply
with this chapter according to that person's own determination of whether their
soliciting is for commercial or noncommercial purposes. To contest such a
determination by a person, the municipality shall seek an appropriate
injunction from the district court, and shall permit the person to continue
soliciting until such district court order is issued, so long as that person
has otherwise complied with this chapter. (Ord. 205 § 4, 1985)
5.16.050: NO SOLICITING SIGNS:
Any person may place upon the entrance to any property a "No Soliciting" sign
which shall prohibit any person from soliciting the occupants of such property
for commercial or noncommercial purposes by any means except for telephone
solicitation. Each time a person violates this section by soliciting where a
"No Soliciting" sign has been placed shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
205 § 5, 1985)
5.16.060: COMMERCIAL SOLICITING OF RESIDENCES:
No person engaging in commercial solicitation shall solicit any residence
without having been first invited to do so by the owner or occupant of such
residence. This prohibition shall not apply to telephone solicitations or to
the distribution of handbills, advertisements or leaflets so long as no direct
communication with the owner or occupants of the residence is attempted. (Ord.
205 § 6, 1985)
5.16.070: COMMERCIAL SOLICITOR'S LICENSE AND REGISTRATION:
   A.   Each itinerant person engaging in commercial solicitation within the
municipality shall register with the clerk. The itinerant commercial solicitor
shall provide his or her name, the business represented, the nature and purpose
of the solicitation, the methods of solicitation to be used, the make, model
and license number of any automobile to be used in soliciting, and the dates
during which soliciting will occur. Upon registration the clerk shall issue a
numbered registration certificate to each itinerant solicitor and each
itinerant solicitor shall display that registration certificate to the person
solicited prior to soliciting any person.
   B.   The provisions of subsection A shall not apply to telephone solicitors.
All telephone solicitors shall be required to register with the clerk and may
do so by telephone or in person. Such registration shall include the name of
the telephone solicitor, the business the solicitor represents, the nature and
purpose of the solicitation, and the dates during which solicitation by
telephone will occur in the municipality. Upon registering the municipal clerk
shall inform the solicitor of the solicitor's registration number. No person
shall solicit by telephone unless first reciting that they have complied with
this chapter and reciting their registration number to the person being
solicited.
   C.   All itinerant commercial solicitors, except those engaging in
interstate commerce, shall be required to pay a twenty five dollar ($25.00)
license fee to the municipality for the privilege of soliciting within the
municipality. The fee shall be collected by the municipal clerk who shall issue
the license to the commercial solicitor upon payment of the fee. Such a license
shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) days from its date of issuance.
Notwithstanding the holding of a valid license, a solicitor shall register each
time the solicitor begins a new set of solicitations in the municipality.
   D.   The burden shall be upon each commercial solicitor, who desires to be
exempt from the license fee due to engaging in interstate commerce, to provide
sufficient data to the municipal clerk to prove that they are engaged in
interstate commerce. In the event that the municipal clerk refuses to issue an
exemption to a commercial solicitor, then the commercial solicitor shall be
entitled to a hearing before the municipal judge within forty eight (48) hours,
not including weekends or legal holidays, on the question of whether or not the
commercial solicitor is engaged in interstate commerce. In the event that such
a hearing is not held within such time limit, then the solicitor shall be
exempted from the license fee.
   E.   All nonitinerant solicitors shall carry proof of identification and
present such proof at the time of soliciting, but shall not be required to
register or obtain a license under this chapter. This chapter shall not affect
the authority of the municipality to require the nonitinerant solicitor to
register or obtain a license pursuant to any other municipal ordinance. (Ord.
205 § 7, 1985)
5.16.080: DRUMMER'S BOND:
All itinerant drummers shall post a five hundred dollar ($500.00) cash or
surety bond acceptable to the municipal clerk to secure their good faith
performance. Such bond shall be returned to the itinerant drummer upon proof
that the merchandise or service has been delivered or provided as promised and
so long as no person has lodged a good faith complaint against the drummer for
nonperformance or faulty performance. (Ord. 205 § 8, 1985)
5.16.090: NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITING:
All persons soliciting for noncommercial purposes, including by telephone,
shall be required to give to the clerk their name, the organization for which
they are soliciting, and the make, color, and license number of any automobile
that they are using, if any. There is no requirement that such noncommercial
solicitors come personally to the clerk. It shall be sufficient to provide this
information by telephone. Each noncommercial solicitor shall indicate to each
person solicited that they have complied with this chapter prior to soliciting.
In the event that a noncommercial solicitor fails to comply with this chapter,
that person shall be required to physically appear before the clerk and present
proof of identification and authorization to solicit on behalf of whatever
organization the person is claiming to solicit for, or if soliciting by
telephone, to provide such information by telephone. Such information shall be
referred to the chief who shall verify it within twenty four (24) hours, not
including weekends and legal holidays. In the event verification cannot be
obtained within such time limits, then the solicitor shall be allowed to
solicit until such time as it is shown that the solicitor is not who they claim
to be or is not authorized to solicit on behalf of the organization the
solicitor claims to be soliciting for. In the event a solicitor is not who he
or she claims to be or solicits on behalf of an organization for which they
have no authority to solicit, that person shall be guilty of violating this
chapter. Each time a person is solicited under false pretenses shall constitute
a separate offense. (Ord. 205 § 9, 1985)
5.16.100: USE OF REGISTRATION AND LICENSE INFORMATION:
The clerk shall forward copies of all registration and license information to
the chief to aid the chief in investigating criminal complaints. (Ord. 205 §
10, 1985)
5.16.110: COMPLAINTS FROM THE PUBLIC:
Any member of the public who has reason to believe that this chapter is not
being complied with may contact the clerk, the mayor or the chief and set forth
such grounds. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the clerk and the mayor shall
forward the information to the chief who shall investigate the complaint and
take appropriate action pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 205 § 11, 1985)
5.16.120: SOLICITING ON STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS:
No person shall solicit on or along any street, sidewalk or public grounds for
commercial or noncommercial purposes in such a manner as would cause a traffic
hazard or unusual congestion creating significant risk or harm to the public.
No person shall solicit from a vehicle which is parked or stopped within twenty
feet (20') parallel to any street or highway or within fifty feet (50') of any
intersection of streets or highways. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to limit the right of a blind person to sell at a vending stand pursuant to New
Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, sections 28-9-1 through 28-9-6. (Ord. 205 § 12,
1985)
5.16.130: FRESH MEATS, PRODUCE AND WOOD:
   A.   No resident of this state selling wood, fruits, farm and garden produce
of his own raising exclusively, or fresh meats butchered from animals of his
own raising only, shall be required to pay a license fee pursuant to this
chapter. However, when beef, veal or mutton is offered for sale, the person
offering such beef, veal or mutton for sale shall have in his immediate
possession at the time and place of offering such meat for sale, the hide or
pelt of the slaughtered animal, the meat of which is being offered for sale, in
order to be exempt from such license fee.
   B.   Any person engaging in the business of peddling fresh meats which are
not butchered from animals of his own raising only, shall be allowed to peddle
such meats only upon holding a valid license issued pursuant to New Mexico
Statutes Annotated 1978, sections 25-4-1 and 25-4-2. Upon holding such a
license, the person shall be exempt from any license fee required under this
chapter. (Ord. 205 § 13, 1985)
5.16.140: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00), nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or a jail
term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. (Ord. 205 § 15, 1985)
CHAPTER 5.17
MARIJUANA BUSINESS LICENSES
SECTION:
5.17.010: Purpose
5.17.020: Definitions
5.17.030: General Requirements
5.17.040: Establishing A Village Marijuana Business License
5.17.050: Requirements Of The Village Marijuana Business License
5.17.060: General Licensing Requirements
5.17.070: Personal Requirements Regarding The Premises
5.17.080: Specific Requirements Regarding The Premises
5.17.090: Changes To License
5.17.100: Cultivation And Growing For Personal Use
5.17.110: Revocation Of License
5.17.120: Penalties Provision
5.17.010: PURPOSE:
This chapter adopts local regulations, in addition to those in the Village's
Zoning Regulations, regarding the sale, production, distribution, manufacture,
cultivation and use of recreational marijuana within the Village of Hatch.
(Ord. 415, 12-14-2021)
5.17.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply throughout this chapter and supplement the
definitions provided in the New Mexico Cannabis Regulation Act, as amended:
               All areas that the licensee has an exclusive right to possess by virtue of his
               ownership or lease, which are outside the enclosed licensed premises, but
ADJACENT       adjacent and contiguous to the licensed premises, including but not limited to
GROUNDS:       porches, patios, decks, entryways, lawns, parking lots, and similar areas and
               all fixed and portable things in those areas, including but not limited to
               lights, signs, speakers, and security devices.
APPROVE A      To find that the requirements for a license have been met, but does not give the
BUSINESS       applicant the right to operate a marijuana establishment in the Village until
LICENSE:       the license is issued. This standard applies even where the applicant has
               already obtained a State of New Mexico marijuana license.
               Includes all aspects of a person's character and record, including but not
               limited to moral character, criminal record, serious traffic offenses, record of
CHARACTER AND  previous sanctions against liquor licenses, gambling licenses, or marijuana
RECORD:        licenses, which the person owned, in whole or in part, or in which the person
               served as a principal, manager, or employee; education, training, experience,
               civil judgments, truthfulness, honesty, and financial responsibility.
COMPLAINT:     A document filed with the Village seeking sanctions against a marijuana business
               license.
               Located within the same building as the marijuana establishment, located in a
               separate building on the same parcel of land as the marijuana establishment, or
CONTIGUOUS:    located in a separate building on a separate parcel of land that is adjacent to
               and shares at least fifty percent (50%) of a common lot line with the lot on
               which the marijuana establishment is located.
EMPLOYEE:      The licensee's or proposed licensee's employees.
               Any matter that adversely affects the health, safety, or welfare of any person
               or group of persons within the Village or any adjacent community, including but
HARM or        not limited to matters related to crime, lighting, security, traffic, graffiti,
HARMFUL TO     litter, parking, and noise. A showing of actual harm shall not be required and a
PUBLIC HEALTH, showing of potential or threatened harm shall be sufficient. Any violation of
SAFETY OR      any criminal statute or ordinance is per se substantially harmful to public
WELFARE:       health, safety, and welfare, without any showing of actual or threatened harm.
               The mere possession, advertising, sale, cultivation, processing, smoking, or
               ingestion of marijuana or marijuana infused products, when performed lawfully,
               shall not in itself be considered harmful to public health, safety, and welfare.
               Any area that the public may generally enter, including any business open to the
               public. The term includes the licensed premises and the adjacent grounds if the
IN PUBLIC:     marijuana establishment has not also obtained a consumption license from the
               State of New Mexico. The term includes persons in motor vehicles located in a
               public place. It also includes property owned or leased by the village, state or
               Federal government.
               To finalize the Village's local license after a previous approval of the
ISSUE A        license, and may or may not occur after approval of the license, depending on
BUSINESS       any completions, inspections, approvals, or conditions that the Village may
LICENSE:       require to be satisfied before issuance. Issuance gives the licensee the ability
               to operate a marijuana facility, provided that the licensee also obtains a valid
               State of New Mexico license.
               Under this chapter means a local business license issued by the Village of Hatch
LICENSE:       for the sale, production, manufacturing, cultivation, or distribution of
               marijuana or marijuana infused products.
LICENSEE:      The person or entity holding a local Village marijuana business license under
               this chapter.
LICENSED       The area inside a building in which the cultivation, manufacture, processing,
PREMISES:      infusion, possession, weighing, display, packaging, sale, and exchange of
               marijuana and marijuana infused products is licensed under this chapter.
               Except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, means growing marijuana
MARIJUANA:     plants, harvested marijuana in any state, and marijuana infused products of all
               kinds, including for medical use. For the purpose of this chapter, the term
               marijuana and medical marijuana are interchangeable.
               An entity licensed by the Village pursuant to this chapter and may include any
               of the following:
               A.   A single retail location where the licensee may sell marijuana and
               marijuana infused products to consumers, including edibles. It includes both
               recreational and medical marijuana.
               B.   An offsite manufacturing and production facility at which the licensee may
               manufacture and produce marijuana and marijuana infused products, which are not
               sold on location but are sold or transferred to consumers at other locations. It
               includes both recreational and medical marijuana.
               C.   A cultivation facility at which the licensee may grow or cultivate
MARIJUANA      marijuana and marijuana infused products, which are not sold on location but are
ESTABLISHMENT: sold or transferred to consumers at other locations. It includes both
               recreational and medical marijuana.
               D.   A combined retail, production, and manufacturing location where the
               licensee may produce and manufacture marijuana and marijuana infused products,
               including edibles, and also sell these products to consumers at the same
               location. It includes both recreational and medical marijuana.
               E.   A combined retail, production, manufacturing and cultivation/growing
               location, where the licensee may cultivate and grow marijuana, produce and
               manufacture marijuana, including marijuana infused products and edibles, and
               also sell these products to consumers at the same location. It includes both
               recreational and medical marijuana.
MARIJUANA      Any of the licenses described in this chapter, as amended.
LICENSE:
OPERATE or     The matters described in this chapter, as amended.
OPERATION:
PERSON:        Any natural person and any entity.
               A.   In the case of any entity, including any general or limited partnership,
               corporation, limited liability company, or other entity: any person who has a
               five percent (5%) or greater interest in the ownership of the entity, and any
               person who has the day-to-day authority to or actually does manage the entity's
               finances.
               B.   In the case of a corporation: the persons described as a representative or
PRINCIPAL:     applicant for any entity and the president, vice president, secretary, chief
               executive officer, chief financial officer, and any person who holds five
               percent (5%) or more of the capital stock of the corporation.
               C.   In the case of a limited liability company: the persons described as a
               representative or applicant for any entity and any member of the limited
               liability company.
               D.   In the case of a sole proprietorship, the individual owner.
PUBLIC         Property that is occupied, owned, controlled or operated by the Federal, state,
PROPERTY:      or village government. (Ord. 415, 12-14-2021)
 
5.17.030: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to use, sell, manufacture, cultivate, produce or
distribute marijuana on public property within the Village of Hatch.
   B.   Marijuana establishments shall not allow a person to consume marijuana
on site, or on adjacent grounds, except as where authorized by the New Mexico
Cannabis Regulation Act, as amended, including obtaining a consumption license.
   C.   Marijuana establishments shall provide for proper and secure disposal
of all marijuana products and byproducts, and shall abide by the Village's
regulations regarding rubbish and discharges into the municipal wastewater
system.
   D.   Marijuana establishments shall not emit fumes, dust, odors or vapors
into the environment or disturb adjacent uses.
   E.   Marijuana establishments shall not display or keep visible from outside
the licensed establishment any marijuana products or paraphernalia. (Ord. 415,
12-14-2021)
5.17.040: ESTABLISHING A VILLAGE MARIJUANA BUSINESS LICENSE:
This chapter establishes a local village marijuana business license and
distinct rules for the licensing of recreational marijuana and marijuana
infused products within the Village of Hatch. These local rules and regulations
are in addition to licensing requirements established by the State of New
Mexico and are necessary for the village to initiate “time, place and manner”
restrictions as authorized by the New Mexico Cannabis Regulation Act, as
amended.
This chapter Establishes the village's local marijuana business license for the
sale, production, distribution, cultivation of marijuana and marijuana infused
products, within the village's jurisdictional limits. The village shall have
the authority to grant or deny a local village marijuana business license as
set forth herein. (Ord. 415, 12-14-2021)
5.17.050: REQUIREMENTS OF THE VILLAGE MARIJUANA BUSINESS LICENSE:
   A.   The Village of Hatch, as the local marijuana business licensing
authority, shall have the following powers and authority:
      1.   To issue, deny, or revoke a Village marijuana business license and
renewals of the same, and where necessary, to conduct public hearings related
thereto.
      2.   To impose any sanctions on a Village marijuana business license,
including revocation, upon its own authority and initiation, or in response to
a complaint by any person for any violation by the licensee after investigation
and a public hearing, at which the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to
be heard. Such hearings will allow for the presentation of evidence by the
applicant and Village staff and will be followed by the adoption of formal
findings and conclusions.
      3.   To adopt application forms, fees, and submission requirements for a
Village marijuana business license.
   B.   No person or corporate entity may operate a marijuana establishment
within the Village without first obtaining a Village marijuana business
license.
   C.   All licenses will be administered and approved by the Village provided
that the applicant has met all conditions and requirements established herein,
and paid the licensing fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   D.   It is illegal to operate a marijuana establishment in the Village
without first obtaining a local Village marijuana business license.
   E.   Upon issuance, the Village's marijuana business license shall be
displayed within the premises and be visible to public view. (Ord. 415, 12-14-
2021)
5.17.060: GENERAL LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
In order to obtain a Village marijuana business license under this chapter, the
applicant must demonstrate the following:
   A.   The proposed licensed premises and adjacent grounds meet all
requirements for issuance of a State of New Mexico marijuana license and all
applicable laws and regulations.
   B.   The applicant shows proof of a valid State of New Mexico marijuana
license.
   C.   The applicant has met all requirements, including payment of any
applicable taxes and fees, both state and local.
   D.   The applicant has obtained a separate Village business license for any
other business activity that will also be operated on the licensed premises and
paid all applicable license fees.
   E.   The premises and adjacent grounds are not licensed or operated as an
establishment for the sale or service of alcohol beverages, or as a massage
parlor, a dance hall, adult business, or an amusement facility.
   F.   The applicant has submitted an application for a Village marijuana
business license, on the established forms, that the Village Clerk has
determined is complete.
   G.   In the case of a retail marijuana establishment, the applicant has
demonstrated that the proposed licensed premises is located on or within
property zoned or used as (M-1) Manufacturing or (C-1) Commercial. A combined
retail and production, manufacturing or growing establishment is not allowed in
a Commercial zone, or as otherwise specified in the Village's land use and
zoning regulations.
   H.   In the case of a marijuana establishment that is manufacturing,
producing, or cultivating for commercial use (non-personal use), and even where
combined with a retail marijuana establishment, the applicant has demonstrated
that the proposed licensed premises is located on or within property zoned or
used as (M-1) Manufacturing, or as otherwise specified in the Village's land
use and zoning regulations, including those uses subject to a special use
permit.
   I.   In the case of a marijuana establishment that is manufacturing,
producing, or cultivating, and even where combined with a retail marijuana
establishment, the applicant shows adequate water resources and applicable
permits, as approved by the Village, or as required under the laws of the State
of New Mexico.
   J.   The applicant must demonstrate that the location of the proposed
licensed premises is no less than five hundred (500) feet from any other
licensed marijuana establishment. Measurements shall be made from any wall of
the two (2) proposed or existing licensed premises.
   K.   The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed licensed premises are
not located within three hundred (300) feet of any public or private school or
other childcare facility. The distances referred to in this paragraph are to be
computed by direct measurement from the nearest property line of the land used
for a school or campus, to the nearest portion of the lot that is the situs of
the building that is proposed for a licensed premises.
   L.   The applicant agrees to operating hours not earlier than nine o’clock
(9:00) A.M., nor later than nine o’clock (9:00) P.M.
   M.   All proposed licensed premises, adjacent grounds, and related parking
facilities which are located on Federal land within the village are required to
abide by applicable Federal law.
   N.   The application for a Village marijuana business license must specify
the type of marijuana establishment involved, whether retail, manufacturing,
production, cultivation, or a combination of these. (Ord. 415, 12-14-2021)
5.17.070: PERSONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE VILLAGE MARIJUANA BUSINESS LICENSEE:
   A.   The applicant for a village marijuana business license, principals,
registered manager, and employees must meet all requirements under New Mexico
State law.
   B.   The applicant, principals, registered manager, and employees must be at
least twenty-one (21) years of age.
   C.   The applicant, principals, registered manager, and employees all hold
valid occupational licenses and registrations as required by the State of New
Mexico, including all applicable marijuana licenses. (Ord. 415, 12-14-2021)
5.17.080: SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS REGARDING THE PREMISES:
   A.   The proposed licensed premises are located in a fixed, permanent, non-
portable building and are not located in a movable or mobile structure or in a
vehicle, nor is it operated as a home occupation under Village regulations.
   B.   The size of the premises is compatible and compliant with the
applicable zoning district limitations regarding square footage.
   C.   The applicant must have sole legal control of the proposed licensed
premises at the time the application is submitted, under a lease that is
presently in effect or through present ownership of the proposed licensed
premises as shown by a deed or other instrument of record. The applicant must
show proof that the lessor has agreed to use of the premises as a marijuana
establishment.
   D.   All storage, dispensing, manufacture, production, and cultivation
activities shall be conducted indoors in a building meeting the requirements of
division A.
   E.   Plants, products, accessories, and associated paraphernalia shall not
be visible from a public sidewalk or right-of-way.
   F.   The proposed licensed premises have a suitable limited access area
where the cultivation, display, storage, processing, weighing, handling, and
packaging of marijuana and marijuana infused products occurs, which is posted
“employees only,” and is separated from the areas accessible to the public by a
wall, counter, or some other substantial barrier designed to keep the public
from entering the area.
   G.   The applicant has submitted a security plan for the proposed licensed
premises, which has been inspected and approved by the Village's Police
Department or Building Official, and showing at least the following minimum-
security measures:
      1.   All doors, windows and other points of entry have secure and
functioning locks;
      2.   A locking safe or enclosed secured storage located inside the
proposed licensed premises in which any marijuana and marijuana infused
products will be secured when the licensed premises are not open to the public;
      3.   If the licensed premises are connected by any passage or entryway to
any other premises, there is a door between the two (2) premises that can be
locked from the licensee side and cannot be opened from the other side;
      4.   A professionally monitored burglar alarm system that detects
unauthorized entry of all doors, windows and other points of entry to the
proposed licensed premises; and
      5.   Windows facing the adjacent grounds and lighting of the adjacent
grounds sufficient to ensure that customers entering and leaving the licensed
premises, entering and exiting parked cars on the adjacent grounds, and walking
across the adjacent grounds can be observed by employees from inside the
licensed premises.
      6.   All licensing requirements established by the State of New Mexico.
   H.   The proposed licensed premises and adjacent grounds comply with all
zoning, health, building, plumbing, mechanical, fire, and other codes,
statutes, and ordinances, as shown by completed inspections and approvals from
the Village's Building Official.
   I.   There is sufficient parking available on the proposed adjacent grounds
given the size of the licensed premises and the number of employees and
customers that can reasonably be expected to be present at any given time,
pursuant to applicable provisions of the Village of Hatch.
   J.   The proposed licensed premises and adjacent grounds of the licensed
premises will be operated in a manner that does not cause any substantial harm
to public health, safety and welfare.
   K.   The proposed licensed premises are equipped with a ventilation system
with carbon filters sufficient in type and capacity to eliminate marijuana
odors emanating from the interior to the exterior discernible by a reasonable
person, including to any public property or right-of-way within the Village.
The ventilation system must be inspected and approved by the Village Building
Official.
   L.   The proposed licensed premises are located in a building that does not
share any doors, windows, air passages, vents, ducts or any heating,
ventilation, air conditioning, or air handling equipment or structures with any
other building or premises whatsoever.
   M.   Walls, barriers, locks, signs and other means are in place to prevent
the public from entering the area of the proposed licensed premises utilized
for cultivation or production and manufacturing.
   N.   No portion of the building in which the proposed licensed premises are
located is utilized as a residence.
   O.   The proposed licensed premises must ensure that the ventilation system,
air filtration, building screening requirements, necessary security apparatus
and lighting are all compatible with neighboring businesses and adjacent uses.
   P.   Every licensee and its principals, registered manager, and employees
have a continuing duty to ensure that the requirements of this Section continue
to be met after the license is issued and at all times that the license remains
in effect.
   Q.   The licensee abides by all Village ordinances regarding signage, land
use and zoning, water service, and wastewater discharge. (Ord. 415, 12-14-2021)
5.17.090: CHANGES TO LICENSE:
No licensee shall make any of the following major changes without first
obtaining the written approval of the Village:
   A.   Any transfer of the license or any ownership interest in the licensee
entity or license.
   B.   Any change in location of the licensed premises.
   C.   Any change in the licensee's principals.
   D.   Any change in the structure, walls, doors, windows, ventilation,
plumbing, electrical supply, floor plan, footprint, elevation, operation,
operational plan, patios, decks, safe or vault, locks, surveillance system,
doors, window coverings, or security system at the licensed premises.
   E.   Any material changes to the adjacent grounds, including but not limited
to lighting, parking, and traffic flow. (Ord. 415, 12-14-2021)
5.17.100: CULTIVATION AND GROWING FOR PERSONAL USE:
Individuals may possess, cultivate, and grow marijuana in their residence,
including in a residential zoning district, but only for their personal use and
subject to the following limitations as established under the New Mexico
Cannabis Regulation Act, as amended:
   A.   An individual must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age.
   B.   It is unlawful to grow, cultivate, or process more than the designated
number of marijuana plants per person, and per residence set forth in the New
Mexico Cannabis Regulation Act, as amended, and any other applicable laws of
the State of New Mexico.
   C.   A residence shall not emit marijuana odors of any kind.
   D.   Any growing or cultivation of marijuana products for personal use shall
not be visible to the public.
   E.   Any growing, cultivation or production of marijuana or marijuana
infused products for personal use shall not be sold or transferred to third
parties for future sale.
   F.   No marijuana sale, production, distribution, manufacturing or
cultivation shall be allowed in a residential zone district, except for
personal use and as specifically set forth herein. (Ord. 415, 12-14-2021)
5.17.110: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Any person in violation of a local Village marijuana license as set
forth herein is subject to revocation for violations of this chapter, other
Village ordinances, or New Mexico State or Federal laws.
   B.   If the Village finds that there is probable cause that a violation has
occurred, it shall immediately investigate the alleged violation.
   C.   Upon evidence of a violation, the Village shall notify the licensee in
writing of the specific allegations and the date of hearing scheduled for the
Village Council to consider the revocation or any other appropriate action
involving the license.
   D.   During the license revocation hearing, the Village Council will hear
evidence from Village staff and the licensee. Each party will be given an
opportunity to be heard, to present witnesses, to cross examine witnesses, and
to present evidence and exhibits in support of his or her case. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the Village Council will make formal findings as to
the reasons for revoking the license or allowing it to remain in place with
conditions.
   E.   If a marijuana license issued under this chapter is revoked, the
licensee must cease doing business immediately, or as prescribed by the
Village. (Ord. 415, 12-14-2021)
5.17.120: PENALTIES PROVISION:
To the extent permitted by law, any violation of this chapter will result in a
citation with penalties of up to three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
separate violation, and with cumulative penalties for each day a violation
continues. (Ord. 415, 12-14-2021)
TITLE 6
ANIMALS
Animal Care And Control   6.04
CHAPTER 6.04
ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL
SECTION:
6.04.010: Definitions
6.04.020: Animal Control Officer
6.04.030: Authority To Enter Premises
6.04.040: Authority To Enter Unenclosed Lots
6.04.050: Impounding Strays
6.04.060: Notice And Surrender Of Estray Animals
6.04.070: Rabid Animals
6.04.080: Vicious Animals
6.04.090: Resisting Officers
6.04.100: Cruelty To Animals Prohibited
6.04.110: Animal Nuisances Prohibited
6.04.120: Dogs Trained To Assist The Blind Allowed In Public Places
6.04.130: Female Animals To Be Penned
6.04.140: Wild Animals; Owner Has Duty To Register; Regulations
6.04.150: Abandonment Of Animals
6.04.160: Restraint Of Animals
6.04.170: Animals On Unenclosed Premises
6.04.180: Vaccinations And Rabid Animals
6.04.190: Keeping Of Diseased Or Painfully Crippled Animals Prohibited
6.04.200: Violation; Penalty
6.04.210: Copy Of Ordinance; On File
6.04.220: Copy Of Ordinance; Purchase
6.04.230: Animal Projects Kept Within Village Limits
6.04.240: Memorandum Of Understanding
6.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
As pertains to this chapter, words, terms, phrases and their derivations shall
have the following meanings:
ANIMAL: Any animal, poultry, bird, reptile, fish or any other living creature
normally kept as a farm or ranch animal, but shall not be construed to include
human beings or household pets.
ESTRAY: Any animal which shall be off and away from its home unattended and
running at large within the village.
IMMEDIATE CONTROL: An animal is in immediate control of a competent person if
animal, dog or cat, is on a leash not over eight feet (8') long, and other
animals are so controlled that they cannot run or get loose at will.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which shall bite or in any manner attack or attempt
to attack any person within the village. However, no animal which bites,
attacks or attempts to attack any person upon its owner's or keeper's premises,
or which is provoked to attack, shall be deemed a vicious animal.
VILLAGE OF HATCH OR VILLAGE: Includes the land areas within the village of
Hatch, including privately owned land, state owned, or federal land. (Ord. 334,
2006: Ord. 1-83 § 1, 1983)
6.04.020: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
   A.   The village trustees shall appoint a competent and humane person to the
position of animal control officer to protect the citizens of the village and
their property.
   B.   He shall be concerned with the health and safety of the citizens of the
village as affected by animals and to protect the citizens of the village and
their property. Detailed duties of the animal control officer shall be as
determined by the village trustees. The village board of trustees shall have
the authority to appoint such deputies as may be necessary, especially for
assignment to specific areas.
   C.   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer and his duly
appointed deputies to enforce all sections of this chapter as applicable.
   D.   The animal control officer shall be authorized to use such methods,
means and equipment as are reasonably necessary to bring strays and other
animals under control and to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1-83
§ 2, 1983)
6.04.030: AUTHORITY TO ENTER PREMISES:
   A.   For the purpose of discharging their duties imposed by this chapter,
the animal control officer and his duly appointed deputies are authorized and
directed to enter upon any premises after having received a complaint for the
purpose of inspecting to ascertain if any provisions of this chapter or any
laws of the state relating to the care, treatment, control and prevention of
cruelty to animals are being violated. The officers may enter upon the premises
without a complaint having been received only if the officer personally views
the "violation".
   B.   If, however, the owner or occupant of any dwelling objects to
inspection, as above stated, a warrant will be obtained from a court of
competent jurisdiction prior to inspection. (Ord. 1-83 § 3, 1983)
6.04.040: AUTHORITY TO ENTER UNENCLOSED LOTS:
For the purposes of discharging their duties imposed by this chapter, the
animal control officer and duly appointed deputies are authorized, and it is
declared to be their duty, to go upon unenclosed lots or lands for the purpose
of taking up and into their custody for impounding any animal found running at
large, staked, herded, or grazed therein, contrary to the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1-83 § 4, 1983)
6.04.050: IMPOUNDING STRAYS:
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer and his duly appointed
deputies to take up and impound or cause to be impounded any estray animals
found in the village. The owner, if known, will be notified. If the animal is
not picked up or claimed within four (4) days, it will be disposed of humanely.
The animal control officer shall comply with state laws relating to impounding
and disposition of estray animals. (Ord. 1-83 § 5, 1983)
6.04.060: NOTICE AND SURRENDER OF ESTRAY ANIMALS:
Any person finding any estray animal shall notify the animal control officer as
soon as possible and shall surrender the estray to the animal control officer
upon demand therefor. (Ord. 1-83 § 6, 1983)
6.04.070: RABID ANIMALS:
Dogs, cats or any other animal that has rabies or shows symptoms of having
rabies shall be reported to the animal control officer. Instances of a rabid
animal biting a human or other animal shall also be reported immediately to the
animal control officer for his information and necessary action. It shall be
unlawful for any person to interfere with the animal control officer or his
designated deputies in the execution of the provisions of this section. (Ord.
1-83 § 7, 1983)
6.04.080: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Keeping Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or
having custody or control of any animal known to be vicious and dangerous to
other people or animals to permit such animal to run at large, or permit it to
run loose within the owner's premises in such manner as to endanger the life or
limb of persons lawfully entering upon such premises.
   B.   Destruction: The animal control officer may request the owner or keeper
of a vicious animal to destroy it humanely or turn such animal over to the
animal control officer or his deputies for destruction. Should the owner or
keeper of such alleged vicious animal refuse to destroy or turn it over to the
animal control officer or his deputies, the animal control officer shall cause
a complaint to be brought against such owner or keeper for failure to destroy
the alleged vicious animal. The viciousness of a dog must be ascertained by a
competent party prior to disposal.
   C.   Authorization For Destruction: The animal control officer or his
deputies are authorized to destroy any estray vicious animals within the
village. This includes apparently wild dogs running in packs but providing
there is no reasonable doubt the dogs are obviously wild and vicious and are
potentially dangerous to humans and/or other animals. (Ord. 1-83 § 8, 1983)
6.04.090: RESISTING OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, resist, or oppose the animal
control officer or his duly appointed deputies in the performance of their
duties or to secrete any animal from them that requires attention. (Ord. 1-83 §
9, 1983)
6.04.100: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously kill;
maim; disfigure; torture; beat with a stick, chain, club or other object;
mutilate; burn or scald with any substance; over drive; or otherwise cruelly
set upon any animal except that reasonable force may be employed to drive off
vicious or trespassing animals. It shall be unlawful to poison dogs, cats or
other animals.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or work any animal cruelly
when such animal is unfit for labor.
   C.   The slaughtering of animals for food or the killing of wild animals, as
authorized by law, shall not be a violation of this section.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, refuse, or neglect to
provide any animal in his custody as owner or otherwise, with proper food,
drink, shade, shelter, or to carry any animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel
or inhumane manner, or to keep any animal under unsanitary or unhealthful
conditions of inhumane treatment of dumb animals.
   E.   It shall be unlawful to fire any BB guns or firearms in the vicinity of
domesticated animals. (Ord. 1-83 § 10, 1983)
6.04.110: ANIMAL NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Any animal(s) habitually or continuously barking, howling or otherwise
disturbing the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of the village, or which is
kept or maintained in such a manner or in such numbers as to disturb by noxious
or offensive odors or otherwise endanger the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the village, is declared to be an animal nuisance.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, or maintain an
animal nuisance as defined in this section within the village.
   C.   All complaints filed pursuant to this section shall be in writing,
signed by the complainant, stating name and address of complainant and giving
name and address of person(s) permitting the nuisance to occur and to continue.
(Ord. 1-83 § 11, 1983)
6.04.120: DOGS TRAINED TO ASSIST THE BLIND ALLOWED IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or maintaining any place or public
accommodation, public entertainment, or amusement, a restaurant, or who
operates a public transportation facility, to exclude therefrom any dog which
has been trained to assist the blind, provided that such dog is in the company
of the blind person it was trained to assist. (Ord. 1-83 § 12, 1983)
6.04.130: FEMALE ANIMALS TO BE PENNED:
The owner of a female animal shall cause such animal, when in season, to be
penned or enclosed, but not tied, in a manner that will preclude occurrence of
a public nuisance. (Ord. 1-83 § 13, 1983)
6.04.140: WILD ANIMALS; OWNER HAS DUTY TO REGISTER; REGULATIONS:
No person shall keep or maintain any poisonous reptiles or dangerous
carnivorous wild animals whether they are trained or not, without having first
registered such reptiles or animals with the animal control officer. (Ord. 1-83
§ 14, 1983)
6.04.150: ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS:
It is unlawful to abandon any animal in the confines of the village. Any person
found guilty of abandoning any animal will be fined one hundred dollars
($100.00) or be imprisoned for ninety (90) days in jail, or be punished by both
such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1-83 § 15, 1983)
6.04.160: RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS:
   A.   All persons owning or having charge, custody, care, or control of any
animal shall keep such animal properly and securely penned in their own
premises.
   B.   When dogs are out of their secured enclosure, they will be on a leash
not over eight feet (8') long. When walking them they will not be allowed to
create a nuisance on someone else's property such as lawns, driveways, place of
recreation or amusement parks. This section also includes cats. The term
"nuisance" shall mean defecation or urination.
   C.   Any animal trespassing upon private or public premises shall be deemed
prima facie not to be under the immediate control of a competent person and
shall be reported for impounding to the animal control officer. (Ord. 1-83 §
17, 1983)
6.04.170: ANIMALS ON UNENCLOSED PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to stake out, graze, or herd any animal
upon any unenclosed private lot or parcel of land in a manner that such animal
may be or go beyond the boundary of such lot or land. (Ord. 1-83 § 18, 1983)
6.04.180: VACCINATIONS AND RABID ANIMALS:
All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated as required by state law. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to comply. In this state, dogs and cats over the
age of three (3) months must be vaccinated against rabies, and so tagged by a
licensed veterinarian. Upon demand by the animal control officer, the owner
must present evidence or certificate of vaccination for dog(s) or cat(s)
involved. (Ord. 1-83 § 19, 1983)
6.04.190: KEEPING OF DISEASED OR PAINFULLY CRIPPLED ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, or harbor any animal
which is known or believed to be infected with a dangerous or communicable
disease or is painfully crippled or injured. All such animals will be reported
to the animal control officer who will advise and/or make proper disposition of
the case.
   B.   This section shall not be construed to include veterinary hospitals in
which animals are being treated. (Ord. 1-83 § 20, 1983)
6.04.200: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both. (Ord. 1-83 § 21, 1983)
6.04.210: COPY OF ORDINANCE; ON FILE:
A copy of the animal care and control ordinance is available for inspection
during the municipal clerk's normal and regular business hours at the village
clerk's office. (Ord. 1-83, 1983)
6.04.220: COPY OF ORDINANCE; PURCHASE:
A copy of the village animal care and control ordinance may be purchased from
the municipal clerk at the cost of twenty five cents ($0.25) a page. (Ord. 1-
83, 1983)
6.04.230: ANIMAL PROJECTS KEPT WITHIN VILLAGE LIMITS:
   A.   Animals shall not be kept within the village limits unless allowed
under subsection B, C or D of this section.
   B.   It shall be permissible for Hatch Valley High School's Future Farmers
of America and Dona Ana County 4-H members, while members of said
organizations, residing within the village limits, to keep animal projects
within the village limits with the following restrictions: The pens and/or
cages must be kept clean and odor free at all times. The animals shall be
removed within ninety (90) days following the completion of the project.
   C.   The Hatch Valley High School's agriculture instructor and the Dona Ana
County 4-H supervisor shall be responsible for each project.
   D.   This section shall not affect persons residing in areas of the village
of Hatch that are zoned "agriculture holding". (Ord. 334, 2006)
6.04.240: MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING:
Animal Control within the Village of Hatch will refer to the Memorandum of
Understanding Between Dona Ana County and the Village of Hatch for Animal
Control Services. (Ord. 413, 4-13-2021)
TITLE 7
RESERVED
TITLE 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Solid Waste Collection And Disposal   8.04
Fire Prevention Regulations   8.08
Petroleum Tanks   8.12
Nuisances   8.16
Hazardous Materials Regulations   8.20
Clean Indoor Air   8.24
Erosion Control Regulations   8.28
CHAPTER 8.04
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
SECTION:
8.04.010: Sanitation System Created
8.04.020: Definitions
8.04.030: Equipment And Area Provided; Contract Authorized
8.04.040: Compulsory Collection And Service Fees
8.04.050: Accumulation Of Solid Waste
8.04.060: Container Required; Maintenance Required
8.04.070: Bulky Solid Waste
8.04.080: Time Limit
8.04.090: Unoccupied Premises
8.04.100: Unsanitary Premises
8.04.110: Burning Of Solid Waste Prohibited
8.04.120: Disturbing Of Containers
8.04.130: Unauthorized Use Of Containers
8.04.140: Exclusive Right Of Village
8.04.150: Frequency Of Collection
8.04.160: Collection And Disposal Service Fees
8.04.170: Payment Of Fees
8.04.180: Discontinuance Of Water Service For Nonpayment Of Charges
8.04.190: Charges Constitute A Lien
8.04.200: Violation; Penalty
8.04.010: SANITATION SYSTEM CREATED:
Under the authority as expressed in chapter 300 of the laws of 1965, New Mexico
Statutes Annotated 1978, section 3-48-1 through section 3-48-7, it is declared
that the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the village
require the creation, establishment, maintenance and enforcement of a general
system of sanitation in regard to the collection of solid waste within and for
the village and the disposal thereof. (Ord. 242, 1990)
8.04.020: DEFINITIONS:
COLLECTION: The process of collecting solid waste for transportation.
COMMERCIAL USER: Any person generating solid waste from other than a single-
family residence.
COMMERCIALLY GENERATED SOLID WASTE: All solid waste except that generated by
single-family residences.
CONTRACTOR: Any person engaged by agreement with the village for the collection
of refuse and solid waste from residential, commercial, and other users; the
transport of solid waste generated in the village to a sanitary landfill; and/
or the operation of a solid waste transfer station.
DISPOSAL FACILITY: A sanitary landfill, transfer station, or other acceptable
method.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPROVEMENT DIVISION (EID): The environmental improvement
division of the health and environment department of the state of New Mexico.
PERSON: Means and includes any person, firm, partnership, public or private
corporation, association, trust, estate, or company, and any officer or agent
thereof.
PREMISES: Business houses, apartment houses, offices, theaters, hotels,
residences, cafes, eating houses, tourist camps, mobile home courts,
settlements, clinics, rooming houses, schools, vacant lots and all other places
within the limits of the village where "solid waste", as defined herein,
accumulates.
REFUSE: Solid waste.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A facility employing an engineered method of disposal of
solid waste on land that minimizes environmental hazards and meets the design
and operational requirements of the environmental improvement division.
SOLID WASTE: Means and includes, but is not limited to, any garbage, rejected
or waste food, offal, swill, carrion, ashes, dirt, slop, waste water, trash,
rubbish, waste or unwholesome material of any kind except sewage but including
residential, commercial, institutional, industrial, and recreational waste; the
words "solid waste" mean the same as "refuse".
TRANSFER STATION: Any facility constructed and managed for storage and/or
processing and placement of solid waste in large containers or vehicles for
movement to another waste facility. (Ord. 242, 1990)
8.04.030: EQUIPMENT AND AREA PROVIDED; CONTRACT AUTHORIZED:
The village shall cause to be provided and maintained suitable equipment
sufficient to collect and dispose of solid waste generated within the village.
To achieve the purposes set forth above, the board of trustees shall:
   A.   Provide for the collection and disposal of solid waste by the village;
or
   B.   Provide for the collection and disposal of solid waste by contract, by
any other manner deemed suitable by the municipality, or by special agreements
if the service cannot otherwise be provided. (Ord. 242, 1990)
8.04.040: COMPULSORY COLLECTION AND SERVICE FEES:
Every person owning or controlling real property within the village shall
subscribe to the municipal solid waste collection and disposal service and
shall pay the solid waste collection or disposal service fees established by
the board of trustees and provided for by this chapter. The fee shall only be
charged against real property which is occupied. (Ord. 242, 1990)
8.04.050: ACCUMULATION OF SOLID WASTE:
   A.   No person shall allow any solid waste to accumulate upon premises
owned, leased or occupied by him during intervals between collections thereof
except in the manner provided by this chapter.
   B.   It is unlawful to deposit any solid waste in or upon the streets,
alleys, sidewalks, gutters, storm sewers, or parkways within the village except
in the receptacles or containers as hereinafter specified. (Ord. 242, 1990)
8.04.060: CONTAINER REQUIRED; MAINTENANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Every person owning or controlling real property within the village and
who subscribes to the municipal solid waste collection and disposal service
shall be provided, as part of said service, one or more of the following types
of container(s) for use upon said real property:
      1.   Commercial: Each commercial user account will be provided with one
or more adequately sized carts or dumpster containers. The size of container
and number of pickups per week shall be negotiated between the village or its
contractor and the commercial user; the fee for commercial service shall be in
accordance with the appropriate category for commercial users provided in
section
8.04.160 of this chapter.
      2.   Residential: Each residential account will be provided with one cart
at the base fee provided in section
8.04.160 of this chapter. Additional carts shall be available from the village
according to the fee schedule provided in section
 8.04.160.
   B.   The village or its contractor(s) shall replace or repair damaged
containers. Each commercial or residential user shall be responsible for
maintaining containers in a clean and sanitary manner and shall be financially
responsible for the replacement or repair of any container intentionally
damaged or destroyed by the user.
   C.   All solid waste subject to containerization shall be stored in
containers provided hereunder until disposal pursuant to this chapter. (Ord.
242, 1990)
8.04.070: BULKY SOLID WASTE:
   A.   Solid waste such as boxes, cartons, cases, barrels and other such
shipping packages, discarded furniture, trees, tree and shrubbery trimmings too
long or bulky to be placed in the containers provided under this chapter, may
be, at the option of the person in charge of the premises where such solid
waste accumulates, prepared for collection as follows:
      1.   Collapse such bulky solid waste as flat as practicable; break or cut
into shorter lengths, as the need may be, and securely tie in bundles not
exceeding four feet (4') in length and fifty (50) pounds in weight;
      2.   Nest boxes, cartons, cases and so on, together with the smaller
boxes inside of the larger boxes, the maximum overall dimensions of the nested
solid waste not to exceed four feet (4') in length and not to exceed fifty (50)
pounds in weight. Such bundled or nested solid waste may be placed adjacent to
the containers for collection.
   B.   Debris resulting from the construction, reconstruction or repairs of
premises shall not be placed with other trash for collection, but shall be
disposed of directly by the person or persons owning, occupying or leasing the
premises wherein such debris accumulated.
   C.   The lids or covers of containers shall be at all times kept secure, so
that flies and other insects may not have access to the contents thereof, and
lids or covers shall only be removed while the containers and receptacles are
being filled, emptied or cleaned. Receptacles or containers shall be placed in
a convenient place for collection. (Ord. 242, 1990)
8.04.080: TIME LIMIT:
It is unlawful for any person owning or controlling real property within the
village to permit the presence of solid waste upon any street, alley or public
place and adjacent to the premises or property of said person for a period
longer than twenty four (24) hours unless said solid waste is stored in a
manner by this chapter and is intended for collection and disposal by the
village or its duly authorized contractor(s). (Ord. 242, 1990)
8.04.090: UNOCCUPIED PREMISES:
It is unlawful for any person to sweep, place, or throw solid waste or any
waste materials upon any sidewalk, alley, unoccupied premises or vacant lot.
(Ord. 242, 1990)
8.04.100: UNSANITARY PREMISES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person owning or controlling real property
within the village to permit or cause to remain in or about his premises any
solid waste, weeds, automobiles not in operating condition, waste water or any
conglomeration or residue thereof, which emits odors or serves as a feeding or
breeding place for flies, insects or rodents, and which in the opinion of the
chief of police is unsanitary, or injurious to public health. The accumulation
of building materials, pipes, lumber or boxes may be maintained on said
premises if said accumulation is evenly piled and stacked for a reasonable
length of time to be determined by the board of trustees.
   B.   If in the opinion of the chief of police, unsanitary premises are being
maintained, written notice of this fact shall be mailed or delivered to that
person owning or controlling the premises where said condition occurs. If
within ten (10) days after the mailing or delivery of such written notice, the
premises are not being maintained in a sanitary manner, the person owning or
controlling the premises shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject
to the penalties provided in section
8.04.190 of this chapter. (Ord. 242, 1990)
8.04.110: BURNING OF SOLID WASTE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste on private or public
property, except that open burning shall be allowed if in compliance with
environmental improvement division or other applicable regulations. (Ord. 242,
1990)
8.04.120: DISTURBING OF CONTAINERS:
It is unlawful for any person to disturb or scatter the solid waste or contents
of the solid waste receptacles. (Ord. 242, 1990)
8.04.130: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF CONTAINERS:
It is unlawful for any person who collects or transports solid waste for hire
to place or deposit solid waste in any container or transfer station owned by
the village or its contractor(s) without the approval of the board of trustees.
(Ord. 242, 1990)
8.04.140: EXCLUSIVE RIGHT OF VILLAGE:
The village, its duly authorized agents or employees shall have the exclusive
right to collect solid waste produced or generated from residences within the
village or to contract for said collection pursuant to section
8.04.030 of this chapter, and it is unlawful for any other person, firm or
corporation to collect such residentially generated solid waste within the
village. The village, its duly authorized agent or employees, shall have the
exclusive right to collect commercially generated solid waste within the
Village or to contract for said collection pursuant to section
8.04.030 of this chapter; provided, however, that a person as defined in this
chapter is authorized to use his own employees to dispose of his own
commercially generated solid waste. Such materials so collected shall be
collected, hauled and transported in a sanitary manner and in a manner which
prohibits the spilling or blowing of said materials onto alleys, streets, lots
or adjacent areas and shall be disposed of at an environmental improvement
division approved transfer station or sanitary landfill. (Ord. 242, 1990)
8.04.150: FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION:
Frequency of collection of solid waste, whether residential or commercial,
shall hereinafter be as agreed upon by the Village's contractor(s) and each
residential or commercial user and approved by the Board of Trustees. (Ord.
242, 1990)
8.04.160: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE FEES:
The fee schedule for collection and disposal of residential and commercial
solid waste by residents, or nonresidents utilizing the Municipal service,
shall be:
   A.   Fee Schedule 1 :
   RESIDENTIAL SERVICE
 
Pickups Per Week                                             Cost
1 weekly                         1R   96 gallon cart         $21.18
1 weekly                         1RAC 1 each additional cart $19.73
2 weekly                         2R   96 gallon cart         $39.12
2 weekly with additional cart    2RAC Each additional cart   $54.61
1 weekly with additional 2 carts 3RAC Each additional cart   $54.19
 
   COMMERCIAL SERVICE
Pickups Per Week Cost
Pickups Per Week                                                      Cost
1 weekly                      1C 96G   96 gallon cart                 $30.34
1 weekly with additional cart 1CAC 96G Each additional 96 gallon cart $59.63
1 weekly - 2 yard             1C 2Y    2 cubic yard container         $79.97
1 weekly - 3 yard             1C 3Y    3 cubic yard container         $100.76
1 weekly - 4 yard             1C 4Y    4 cubic yard container         $129.09
1 weekly - 6 yard             1C 6Y    6 cubic yard container         $160.99
1 weekly - 8 yard             1C 8Y    8 cubic yard container         $211.41
1 weekly                      1C 4 96G 4 96-gallon carts              $115.36
1 weekly                      1C 3 96G 3 96-gallon carts              $87.02
1 weekly                      1C 2YC   Contractors                    $79.97
1 weekly 4 - 8 yard           1C 4-8Y  Valle Verde Apartments         $760.67
2 weekly                      2C 96G   1 96-gallon cart               $59.53
2 weekly with additional cart 2CAC 96G Each additional cart           $58.68
2 weekly - 2 yard             2C 2Y    2 cubic yard container         $157.95
2 weekly - 3 yard             2C 3Y    3 cubic yard container         $192.92
2 weekly - 4 yard             2C 4Y    4 cubic yard container         $231.83
2 weekly - 6 yard             2C 6Y    6 cubic yard container         $289.77
2 weekly - 8 yard             2C 8Y    8 cubic yard container         $382.45
1 weekly 2 - 8 yard           1C 2-8Y  2 - 8 cubic yard containers    $418.60
2 weekly 2 - 8 yard           2C 2-8Y  2 - 8 cubic yard containers    $779.22
 
   ROLL-OFF SERVICE
 
Sewer plant (has to be disposed of at El Camino Real landfill on $323.37
a manifest)
Hatch Valley School                                              $206.28
Maintenance yard                                                 No charge
Landfill rate                                                    $30.70 per ton
(Tax will be added to all prices)
 
   B.   Abnormal Service And Special Conditions: For abnormal and special
collection and disposal services to residents and commercial and industrial
concerns for the removal of solid waste not covered by this chapter, the fee
for such services shall be determined by the Board of Trustees, and will depend
upon the equipment and personnel required to perform the services.
   C.   Shared Containers: If containers are used to serve two (2) or more
commercial users, the fee shall be prorated between or among the users
according to the recommendation of the contractor.
   D.   Changes To The Fee Schedule: Changes in the fee schedule for solid
waste collection and disposal shall be hereafter as determined and adopted by
resolution of the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 388, 2017; Ord. 351, 2008; Ord. 344,
2007; Ord. 342, 2006; Ord. 326, 2004; Ord. 322, 2003; Ord. 320, 2003; Ord. 310,
2002; Ord. 306, 2001; Ord. 301, 2000; Ord. 295, 1999; Ord. 292, 1998; Ord. 287,
1997; Ord. 277, 1996; Ord. 271, 1995; Ord. 259, 1993; Ord. 242, 1990; Ord. 416,
2-8-2022)
 
Notes
1    Amended service fees shall be implemented with the November 2017 billing.
8.04.170: PAYMENT OF FEES 1 :
For the purpose of convenience, the billing and collecting of the charges
levied for the service of this chapter shall be done by the Village and all
such charges shall be payable at the office and in the same manner as other
utility services are billed and collected by the Village. (Ord. 242, 1990)
 
Notes
  1. See sections
1 13.04.070 and
  13.04.075 of this Code.
8.04.180: DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE FOR NONPAYMENT OF CHARGES:
The Village shall have the right, in accordance with New Mexico Statutes
Annotated 1978, section 3-23-1(B), to discontinue Municipal water service to
any residential or commercial user if payment of any fee for solid waste
collection and disposal service by that user is not made within the time limit
specified in section
13.04.070 of this Code. Water service may remain discontinued and may not be
supplied to the person liable for the payment until the arrears have been fully
paid. (Ord. 308 § 1, 2001: Ord. 242, 1990)
8.04.190: CHARGES CONSTITUTE A LIEN:
Pursuant to the laws of New Mexico, and in particular, the article dealing with
municipal liens as set forth in New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, section 3-
36-1 et seq., as it exists or may be amended, all charges shall constitute a
perpetual lien on and against the property served, and such liens shall be
forthwith foreclosed in the manner provided by law, to enforce such lien as to
each piece or parcel of property which shall be delinquent as set forth
hereunder. The lien procedure shall be in addition to any other remedy provided
in this chapter for the enforcement and collection of any charge. (Ord. 242,
1990)
8.04.200: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the preceding sections of this Code shall
upon conviction be punished as provided in section
1.08.010 of this Code. (Ord. 308 § 2, 2001: Ord. 242, 1990)
CHAPTER 8.08
FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8.08.010: Bonfires
8.08.015: Portable Open Flame Roaster
8.08.020: Trash
8.08.030: Storage Of Combustible Material
8.08.040: Explosives
8.08.050: Removal Of Hazards
8.08.060: Violation; Penalty
8.08.010: BONFIRES:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to burn trash, lumber, leaves,
straw or other combustible material in any street, alley or vacant lot, except
by special permission of the chief of the fire department, when such burning
shall be done in screened metallic receptacles approved by him and under such
proper safeguards as he may direct as to time and weather; provided, that the
chief of the fire department shall issue a general permit, by publication,
during certain seasons of the year, for the burning of leaves and other
material where conducted during daylight and with an adult in constant
attendance. (Ord. 47 § 14, 1935)
8.08.015: PORTABLE OPEN FLAME ROASTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a portable open flame roaster
which does not comply with the following regulations:
   A.   A portable open flame roaster shall be:
      1.   Approved by the New Mexico construction industries department;
      2.   Located a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from any structure,
building, pedestrian walkway or street;
      3.   Fueled by a storage tank approved by the New Mexico construction
industries department;
      4.   Connected, stabilized and located not less than ten feet (10') from
the source of fuel by a steel pipe buried or placed flat on a hard,
nonflammable surface which is equipped with no more than two (2) 12-inch risers
and a quick action shutoff valve;
      5.   Equipped with a factory set regulator at the fuel source;
      6.   Kept free of any flammable material and any nonmetal connectors
shall not come in contact with the ground;
      7.   Equipped with an approved fire extinguisher on site;
      8.   Supervised by an adult at all times while in operation;
      9.   Located in an area kept clean of trash or other flammable materials.
(Ord. 339, 2006)
8.08.020: TRASH:
   A.   No person or persons shall allow to remain longer than thirty six (36)
hours, or overnight, in any alley, or on any sidewalk or premises, within
thirty feet (30') of any building, empty boxes, barrels, trash, wastepaper,
excelsior or other like combustible material.
   B.   No person or persons shall be allowed to place ashes within any
building in any box, barrel, or other wooden vessel or upon any wooden vessel
or floor.
   C.   No person shall keep or cause to be kept on the premises any oily waste
or oily rags, unless at all times when not actually in use such oily waste and
oily rags are kept in a metal can with self-closing cover and riveted joints,
standing on metal legs which raise the bottom of the container at least five
inches (5") above the floor.
   D.   No ashes shall be kept or deposited in any part of the village unless
the same shall be kept in a secure incombustible container and every owner of
property where ashes are kept in a secure incombustible container shall erect
upon his premises such container or an ash pit for that purpose, so located as
not to endanger walls, fences and other combustible material. (Ord. 47 § 15,
1935)
8.08.030: STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL:
No hay, straw, lumber or other combustible material shall be piled or stored
within the fire limits unless completely enclosed within the building built in
conformity with the village ordinances and such material shall not be piled or
stored outside the fire limits except by special permission of the chief of the
fire department. (Ord. 47 § 16, 1935)
8.08.040: EXPLOSIVES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to store or keep any dynamite, nitroglycerin,
giant powder or other explosives other than gunpowder in any storeroom,
warehouse, building or on any premises within the village limits.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to store or keep any explosives in excess of one
pound in any storeroom, wareroom, building or on any premises within the
village; provided that not more than five (5) pounds of gunpowder may be kept
in closed metal canisters in a storeroom, wareroom or building away from
artificial heat or light; and provided further, that no more than fifty (50)
pounds of gunpowder may be kept if in a magazine made of fireproof material or
of wood covered with sheet iron and mounted on wheels and kept securely locked
except when necessarily opened for use by authorized persons, and not more than
one thousand (1,000) blasting caps in a similar, but separate, magazine. The
magazines shall be conspicuously labeled in high red letters at least four
inches (4") high "EXPLOSIVES" and located within the building on the floor
nearest the street and within ten feet (10') of the street entrance.
   C.   Any person, firm or corporation who shall sell or store gunpowder shall
obtain a permit from the chief of the fire department, who shall inspect the
place where same is kept, and the dealer shall fully disclose to said chief
where same is kept both in the day and night time. (Ord. 47 § 17, 1935)
8.08.050: REMOVAL OF HAZARDS:
The chief of the fire department may, at his discretion, remove or have removed
at the owner's expense all stocks of fireworks, or other combustibles exposed
for sale or held in stock which may constitute a fire hazard, endanger public
safety or be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 47 § 18, 1935)
8.08.060: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation, except members of the fire department
in the performance of their duties as such and others acting under orders of
the chief of the fire department, violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than five dollars
($5.00) and not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense.
Members of the fire department, when acting as such, violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be dealt with in accordance with the bylaws of
the fire department.
   B.   The application of the penalty provided in subsection A of this section
shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions and
the imposition of one penalty for any violation of this chapter shall not
excuse the violation, or permit it to continue; and all persons convicted
thereof shall be required to correct or remedy such violation or defective
conditions and each violation shall be construed to be a separate offense.
(Ord. 47 § 19, 1935)
CHAPTER 8.12
PETROLEUM TANKS
SECTION:
8.12.010: Installation; Permit Required
8.12.020: Exceptions For Temporary Buildings
8.12.030: Temporary Building Defined
8.12.040: Violation; Penalty
8.12.010: INSTALLATION; PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install within the
village limits any type of petroleum tank or bottle (which includes gasoline,
kerosene, fuel or stove oil, butane-propane gas tanks) for any use or nature
without first securing a permit from the village. (Ord. 178 § 1, 1976: Ord. 102
§ 1, 1959)
8.12.020: EXCEPTIONS FOR TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
Any temporary building that shall be located within the village limits for a
period of time not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days shall be exempt from
this chapter as it pertains to fuel or stove oil tanks or butane-propane
bottles which are used for domestic cooking or heating purposes only. (Ord. 178
§ 4, 1976)
8.12.030: TEMPORARY BUILDING DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter "temporary building" means any mobile home,
house trailer, camper, bus or portable building used as an office or dwelling
place. (Ord. 178 § 5, 1976)
8.12.040: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by
imprisonment for not exceeding thirty (30) days. (Ord. 178 § 2, 1976: Ord. 102
§ 2, 1959)
CHAPTER 8.16
NUISANCES
SECTION:
8.16.010: Public Nuisance Prohibited
8.16.020: Nuisances Designated
8.16.030: Notice To Property Owner
8.16.040: Complaints
8.16.050: Removal By Village
8.16.060: Injunctions
8.16.070: Violation; Penalty
8.16.080: International Property Maintenance Code
8.16.010: PUBLIC NUISANCE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to commit public nuisance. Public nuisance consists of knowingly
creating, performing or maintaining anything affecting any number of citizens
without lawful authority which is either injurious to public health, safety,
morals or welfare, or interferes with the exercise and enjoyment of public
rights including the right to use public property. (Ord. 185 § 6-1-1, 1980)
8.16.020: NUISANCES DESIGNATED:
In the interest of the inhabitants of the Municipality, it is necessary to
prohibit the accumulation of junk, trash and refuse on property within the
corporate limits of the Municipality by declaring such accumulation a nuisance.
The following are declared to be a public nuisance:
   A.   Unoccupied Premises: It shall be unlawful for any reason for any person
to sweep, place or throw solid waste or other waste materials in or upon any
sidewalk, street, alley or unoccupied premises.
   B.   Unsanitary Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or
cause to remain in or about his premises any solid waste, weeds, motor vehicles
not in operating condition, wastewater or any conglomeration of residue
thereof, which emits odors or serves as a feeding or breeding place for flies,
insects or rodents; and which in the opinion of the Sanitation Officer is
unsanitary, or injurious to public health. The accumulation of building
materials, pipes, lumber or boxes may be maintained on the premises if the
accumulation is evenly piled and stacked for a reasonable length of time to be
determined by the Sanitation Officer.
   C.   Hazardous Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit in or
about his premises weeds, briars, brush or any other solid waste to become in
any way hazardous or injurious to public health or to obstruct pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.
It shall be unlawful for a person to permit a condition or thing to be or
exist, which act, omission, condition or thing unlawfully interferes with,
obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or
private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage.
   D.   Accumulation Of Solid Waste: It shall be unlawful for any person to
allow any solid waste to accumulate upon premises owned, leased, rented or
occupied by him during intervals between collection thereof, except in the
manner provided in this chapter.
It shall be unlawful to deposit any solid waste in or upon the streets, alleys,
sidewalks, gutters, curbing, storm sewers, parkways or vacant lots within the
Municipality, except in the manner and in the receptacles or container as
provided in subsection E of this section.
   E.   Solid Waste Receptacles: All solid waste receptacles shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the owner or person using the
receptacle and such receptacles shall be located only in such places as shall
be readily accessible for removing and emptying the same, but shall not be
placed in such place or position as may constitute a nuisance or obstruction to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   F.   Outdoor Vehicle Storage; Prohibited Acts; Exceptions:
      1.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
store on, place on, or permit to be stored or placed on, or allowed to remain
on any occupied or unoccupied land within the Municipal limits, a dismantled,
partially dismantled or inoperative motor vehicle, or any parts of a motor
vehicle, except in areas where such activity is within the contemplated
purposes of duly licensed businesses and are kept in a wholly enclosed garage
or structure.
      2.   Exceptions: Any person, being owner or tenant, may store, permit to
be stored or allow to remain upon his premises, any dismantled, partially
dismantled or inoperative motor vehicle, or parts thereof, for a period not to
exceed one week if such motor vehicle is registered in his name; and provided
further, that any such owner or tenant may, in the event of hardship, secure
permission from the Municipality to extend such period of time.
      3.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
   DISMANTLED OR PARTIALLY DISMANTLED VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which
some part or parts which are ordinarily a component thereof have been removed
or are missing.
   INOPERATIVE OR INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle which by reason
of dismantling, disrepair or other case is incapable of being propelled under
its own power.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Any wheeled vehicle which is self-propelled or intended to be
self-propelled.
      4.   Provisions Are Additional: This section shall be construed as being
supplementary to any sections of this chapter relating to rubbish, litter, and
refuse, and shall not be construed to permit the parking or placing of
dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicles on any public
street. (Ord. 294, 1998: Ord. 185 § 6-1-2, 1980)
8.16.030: NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNER:
Any Municipal police officer, upon observing any violation of this chapter,
shall issue a notice directed to the owner of record of the property on which
the nuisance occurs, or to the occupant or tenant of the property, or both. The
notice shall describe the violation and shall establish a reasonable time limit
for abatement thereof by the owner or occupant or tenants, which limit shall be
not less than two (2) days or more than thirty (30) days after service of the
notice. The notice may be served either personally or by registered mail at the
owner's or occupant's last known address. (Ord. 185 § 6-1-3, 1980)
8.16.040: COMPLAINTS:
In the event the owner or occupant of the property where the nuisance violation
of this chapter exists has failed, within the prescribed time, to abate the
nuisance, then any Municipal police officer shall file a complaint charging
violation of this chapter with the Municipal Court demanding that the owner of
the property, or the occupant thereof, or both, be held to answer to the court
for the violation of this chapter. (Ord. 185 § 6-1-4, 1980)
8.16.050: REMOVAL BY VILLAGE:
In the event a person, owner, or occupant in charge of property fails to remove
the nuisance and upon a judicial determination by the Municipal Judge, the City
may enforce this section in any manner consistent with the law including, but
not limited to, removal of the nuisance and collection of reasonable costs of
labor, equipment and materials. Failure to pay these costs shall result in a
lien against the subject property for these costs, which may be enforced as
provided in New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978 3-36-1 et seq. The lien may
include an interest charge of eight percent (8%) per annum. (Ord. 394, 2018)
8.16.060: INJUNCTIONS:
The Chief of Police, when a nuisance exists as set forth in this chapter, may
maintain a complaint in the name of the Municipality, perpetually, to enjoin
all persons from maintaining or permitting the nuisance and to abate the same.
(Ord. 185 § 6-1-6, 1980)
8.16.070: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. 294, 1998)
8.16.080: INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
   A.   Adoption: That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on
file in the Office of the Clerk of the Village of Hatch, being marked and
designated as "The International Property Maintenance Code 2012 Edition", as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Property Maintenance Code of the Village of Hatch, Dona Ana County, New Mexico;
for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
the structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and
the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the Village of Hatch are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this section with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Amendments: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: Village Of Hatch
Section 112.4 Insert: Any person who shall violate a provision of this code
shall be punished as provided in section
1.08.010 of the Hatch Municipal Code (Ord. 308&2, 2001: Ord. 242, 1990)
Section 104 of Chapter 1 is amended to include Chapter 17.08.030 - Duties of
the Codes enforcement Officer.
Section 103 of Chapter 1 is not adopted
Section 105 of Chapter 1 is not adopted
Section 111 of Chapter 1 is not adopted
Appendix A is not adopted
Section 302.4 Insert: 8 Inches
Section 304.14 Insert: July 1, to September 30
Section 602.3 Insert: October 1, to April 30
Section 602.4 Insert: October 1, to April 30
(Ord. 393, 2018)
CHAPTER 8.20
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8.20.010: Applicability; Information Availability
8.20.020: Declaration Of Possession Required
8.20.030: Business Registration; Inventory Required
8.20.040: Business Registration; Shall Indicate Methods Of Disposal
8.20.050: Business Registration; Filing Fee
8.20.060: Site Inspection
8.20.070: Misstatement On Declaration; Violation; Penalty
8.20.080: NFPA Rule 704 Adopted
8.20.090: Certificate Of Compliance
8.20.100: Violation; Misdemeanor
8.20.010: APPLICABILITY; INFORMATION AVAILABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to hazardous materials and chemicals that shall have
been defined as such by the environmental protection agency or the state of New
Mexico environmental improvement division or both. The chief of civil
preparedness for Dona Ana County, or his successor or designee, shall be
responsible on or before December 1 of every year to acquire from the New
Mexico department of public safety and the environmental improvement division
information of chemicals and products defined by them as being hazardous, and
shall make such information available, without charge, to all citizens of the
village of Hatch, and to all persons or entities doing business within the
Hatch village limits. Such information shall be recorded with the village clerk
on or before December 10 of each year, and the list shall be in effect for the
following year, but no list shall become obsolete until its successor is
recorded. For the first year that this chapter shall be in effect, the list
shall be recorded within fifteen (15) days of the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 236 § 2, 1990)
8.20.020: DECLARATION OF POSSESSION REQUIRED:
All persons, businesses or other entities possessing any of the products on the
above referenced list must declare their inventory with the chief of civil
preparedness of such chemicals or products on or before March 15 of each year,
commencing in 1990. An updated report of new or additional chemicals added to
inventory within the year must be reported to the chief of civil preparedness
within fifteen (15) days of chemical acquisition. (Ord. 236 § 3, 1990)
8.20.030: BUSINESS REGISTRATION; INVENTORY REQUIRED:
Any person filing for business registration shall complete the inventory at
that time, such list to be filed with the chief of civil preparedness on a form
to be approved by the chief of civil preparedness. All other persons,
organizations or entities must submit a list to the chief of civil preparedness
by the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 236 § 4,
1990)
8.20.040: BUSINESS REGISTRATION; SHALL INDICATE METHODS OF DISPOSAL:
Any person or entity so filing shall also indicate the method by which such
hazardous waste or chemicals, or any hazardous waste or chemicals generated on
site therefrom, are to be disposed of. (Ord. 236 § 5, 1990)
8.20.050: BUSINESS REGISTRATION; FILING FEE:
There shall be no filing fee for the filing of such declarations. (Ord. 236 §
6, 1990)
8.20.060: SITE INSPECTION:
Inspection of each site on which materials are stored or disposed of shall be
made at least annually by the chief of civil preparedness or his designee. The
board of trustees, by ordinance, may adopt regulations establishing
classification of materials, by the nature of the material, the quantity
stored, the area in which stored, and the potential for contamination of ground
water or any other significant factor which would increase the frequency of
inspection according to the characteristics detailed in the regulations. (Ord.
236 § 7, 1990)
8.20.070: MISSTATEMENT ON DECLARATION; VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Knowing or reckless misstatement on the declaration is declared to be a
violation of this chapter and is punishable to the maximum extent permitted
under laws of the state. Each separate occurrence shall be a separate
violation. Provided that such violation is not knowing, intentional or
reckless, the maximum punishment for a violation for the first year after the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be a fine equal
to the costs, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per occurrence, to
the village of the enforcement action in question. (Ord. 236 § 8, 1990)
8.20.080: NFPA RULE 704 ADOPTED:
   A.   The standards of the NFPA Rule 704 are specifically adopted and
incorporated herein by reference. Amendments, revisions or other updates of
this rule may be adopted by resolution by the board of trustees.
   B.   The standards adopted herein, and such amendments, updates or revisions
thereof as may be adopted by resolution of the board of trustees shall be
enforced by the chief of civil preparedness.
   C.   The standards shall be applicable to all facilities, as follows:
      1.   Those facilities which commence storage, manufacture or use of
hazardous materials after November 28, 1989, must comply with the standards
upon the effective date hereof.
      2.   Those facilities which expand their physical plant for storage,
manufacture or use of hazardous materials after November 28, 1989, or which add
additional hazardous materials, or increase their inventory or output of
hazardous materials by at least fifteen percent (15%) after November 28, 1989,
must comply with the standards upon the date of such expansion, addition or
increase.
      3.   Those facilities which, before November 28, 1989, were of the type
covered by the standards adopted herein but which do not come under subsection
C2 of this section, must comply with the standards adopted herein within ninety
(90) days of the effective date hereof. (Ord. 236 §§ 9, 10, 11, 1990)
8.20.090: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
It is the responsibility of all facilities subject to this chapter to file a
certification of compliance with this chapter with the chief of civil
preparedness on or before March 15 for each calendar year, or within thirty
(30) days of the commencement of activities bringing the facility under this
chapter. Such certification shall be on a form acceptable to the responsible
official, and such forms shall be made available as provided by this chapter.
There shall be no charge for the filing of this certification, which shall be
filed with the responsible official. (Ord. 236 § 12, 1990)
8.20.100: VIOLATION; MISDEMEANOR:
Violations of this chapter as it pertains to NFPA rule 704 standards, or to any
certifications or filings required under this chapter, shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 236 § 13, 1990)
CHAPTER 8.24
CLEAN INDOOR AIR
SECTION:
8.24.010: Short Title
8.24.020: Purpose
8.24.030: Definitions
8.24.040: Smoking Prohibited
8.24.050: Smoking Permitted Areas
8.24.060: Prohibition Of Smoking Near Entrances, Windows And Ventilation
Systems
8.24.070: Responsibilities Of Employers
8.24.080: Posted Smoke Free And Smoking Permitted Areas
8.24.090: Enforcement
8.24.100: Violations
8.24.110: Penalties
8.24.120: Nonretaliation; Nonwaiver
8.24.130: Severability
8.24.140: Effective Date
8.24.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the VILLAGE OF HATCH CLEAN INDOOR AIR ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 346, 2007)
8.24.020: PURPOSE:
Whereas one of the duties of government is to protect the public health, safety
and welfare of its citizens, the village of Hatch governing body recognizes
environmental tobacco smoke as detrimental to the public health and declares as
the purpose of this chapter to protect the public health and safety by
prohibiting smoking in indoor public places and indoor workplaces. (Ord. 346,
2007)
8.24.030: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the selling or serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises and in which the serving
of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including
taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges and cabarets.
CIGAR BAR: An establishment that:
   A.   Is a "bar" as defined in this section; and
   B.   Is engaged in the business of selling cigars for consumption by patrons
on the premises and generates ten percent (10%) or more of its total annual
gross revenue or at least ten thousand dollars ($10,000) in annual sales from
the sale of cigars, not including any sales from vending machines. A cigar bar
that fails to generate at least ten percent (10%) of its total annual sales
from the sale of cigars in the calendar year after December 31, 2006, not
including sales from vending machines, shall not be defined as a cigar bar and
shall not thereafter be known as such regardless of sales figures. A cigar bar
shall agree to provide adequate information to demonstrate to the village's
satisfaction compliance with this definition.
DEPARTMENT: The department of health.
DESIGNATED OUTDOOR SMOKING AREA: An area where smoking may be permitted,
designated by an employer or manger, outside an indoor workplace or indoor
public place; provided that the following conditions are maintained:
   A.   Smoking shall not be permitted near any building entrance, including a
door, window or ventilation system of any facility where smoking is prohibited
under the provisions of this chapter, so as to prevent secondhand smoke from
entering the indoor workplace or indoor public place; and
   B.   Employees or members of the general public are not required to walk
through the smoking area to gain entrance to the indoor workplace or indoor
public place.
EMPLOYER: An individual, a partnership, a corporation or the state that employs
the services of one or more individuals and includes the village of Hatch.
ENCLOSED: Any interior space predominantly or totally bounded on all sides and
above by physical barriers, regardless of whether such barriers consist of or
include uncovered openings, screened or otherwise partially covered openings or
open or closed windows.
INDOOR PUBLIC PLACE: The enclosed area within any governmental or
nongovernmental place to which the public is invited or in which the public is
permitted regardless of whether work or public business, meetings or hearings
occur at any given time.
INDOOR WORKPLACE: Any enclosed place where one or more persons engage in work,
including lobbies, reception areas, offices, conference and meeting rooms,
employee cafeterias and lunchrooms, break rooms and employee lounges,
classrooms, auditoriums, hallways, stairways, waiting areas, elevators and
restrooms and includes all indoor workplaces and enclosed parts regardless of
whether work occurs at any given time.
PRIVATE CLUB: An organization, whether incorporated or not, that is the owner,
lessee or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for the
organization's purposes at all times, that is operated solely for recreational,
fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic purposes, but
not for pecuniary gain, and that only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to
its operation. The organization shall have bylaws or a constitution to govern
its activities and shall have been granted an exemption as a club under the
provisions of section 501 of the internal revenue code of 1986, as amended.
RESTAURANT: A coffee shop, cafeteria, private or public school cafeteria or
eating establishment and any other eating establishment that gives or offers
for sale food to the public, patrons or employees, including kitchens and
catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving
elsewhere or a bar area within or attached to the premises.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail store used primarily for the sale of tobacco
products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental, including smoke shops, cigar shops or hookah lounges, and does not
include establishments that offer for sale alcoholic beverages for consumption
by patrons on the premises.
SECONDHAND SMOKE: Smoke emitted from lighted, smoldering or burning tobacco
when the smoker is not inhaling, smoke emitted at the mouthpiece during puff
drawing and smoke exhaled by the smoker.
SMOKE FREE AREA: Any building or other enclosed space where smoking is
prohibited.
SMOKING: Inhaling, exhaling, burning, carrying or holding any lighted tobacco
product, including all types of cigarettes, cigars and pipes and other lighted
tobacco products.
SMOKING PERMITTED AREA: Any building or other enclosed space where smoking may
be permitted; provided that secondhand smoke does not infiltrate any area where
smoking is prohibited pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 346, 2007)
8.24.040: SMOKING PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for a person to smoke in any indoor workplace or indoor
public place or in buses, taxicabs or other means of public transit not
specifically exempted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 346, 2007)
8.24.050: SMOKING PERMITTED AREAS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking permitted areas
include the following:
   A.   A private residence, except during hours of business operation while it
is being used commercially to provide childcare, adult care or healthcare or
any combination of those activities;
   B.   A retail tobacco store;
   C.   A cigar bar;
   D.   The facilities of a tobacco manufacturing company licensed by the
United States to manufacture tobacco products that are operated by the company
in its own name and that are used exclusively by the company in its business of
manufacturing, marketing of distributing its tobacco products; provided that
smoke does not infiltrate other indoor workplaces or other indoor public places
where smoking is otherwise prohibited under this chapter;
   E.   A state licensed gaming facility, casino or bingo parlor;
   F.   An indoor workplace to the extent that tobacco smoking is an integral
part of a smoking cessation program that is approved by the department or of
medical or scientific research that is conducted in the indoor workplace and in
which each room of the indoor workplace in which tobacco smoking is permitted
complies with signage requirements;
   G.   Designated outdoor smoking areas;
   H.   Private clubs;
   I.   A limousine under private hire;
   J.   Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as
smoking permitted rooms; provided that not more than twenty five percent (25%)
of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated;
   K.   Enclosed areas within restaurants, bars, hotel and motel conference or
meeting rooms while these places are being used for private functions; provided
that none of these areas are open to the general public while the private
functions are occurring and provided that smoke does not infiltrate other
indoor workplaces or indoor public places where smoking is otherwise prohibited
under this chapter;
   L.   A site that is being used in connection with the practice of cultural
or ceremonial activities by Native Americans and that is in accordance with the
federal American Indian religious freedom act, 42 USC 1996 and 1996a;
   M.   A business of a sole proprietor or a business with fewer than two
employees that is not commonly accessible to the public; provided that:
      1.   The business is not a restaurant or bar;
      2.   The employer or manager of such business shall provide a smoke free
work environment for each employee requesting a smoke free work environment;
and
      3.   Cigarette smoke does not infiltrate other smoke free work
environments as provided for in this chapter; and
   N.   A theatrical stage or a motion picture or television production set
when it is necessary for performers to smoke as part of the production. (Ord.
346, 2007)
8.24.060: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING NEAR ENTRANCES, WINDOWS AND VENTILATION
SYSTEMS:
Smoking is prohibited near entrances, windows and ventilation systems of all
workplaces and public places where smoking is prohibited by this chapter. An
individual who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any
premises subject to the provisions of this chapter shall establish a smoke free
area that extends a reasonable distance from any entrances, windows and
ventilation systems to any enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited. The
reasonable distance shall be a distance sufficient to ensure that persons
entering or leaving the building or facility shall not be subjected to
breathing tobacco smoke and to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter the
building or facility through entrances, windows, ventilation systems or any
other means. (Ord. 346, 2007)
8.24.070: RESPONSIBILITIES OF EMPLOYERS:
   A.   Employers shall provide that their places of employment meet the
requirements of this chapter.
   B.   An employer shall adopt, implement, post and maintain a written smoking
policy pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 346, 2007)
8.24.080: POSTED SMOKE FREE AND SMOKING PERMITTED AREAS:
   A.   To advise persons of the existence of smoke free areas or smoking
permitted areas, signs shall be posted as follows:
      1.   For each indoor workplace or indoor public place where smoking is
prohibited pursuant to this chapter, a "NO SMOKING" sign shall be posted where
it is clear, conspicuous and easily legible at each public entrance. Posting of
"NO SMOKING" signs is the responsibility of the owner, operator, manager or
other person having control of the indoor workplace or indoor public place; and
      2.   For each indoor workplace or indoor public place where smoking is
permitted pursuant to this chapter, a "SMOKING PERMITTED" sign shall be posted
where it is clear, conspicuous and easily legible at each public entrance,
unless an owner, operator or manager chooses to prohibit smoking in all or part
of an indoor workplace or indoor public place where smoking is otherwise
permitted.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to require the posting
of signs at a residence, except during the hours of business operation while it
is being used commercially to provide childcare, adult care or healthcare or
any combination of those activities. (Ord. 346, 2007)
8.24.090: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement of this chapter shall be by citation from the fire
department and police department and codes enforcement officer.
   B.   A person may register a complaint regarding an alleged violation
pursuant to this chapter to initiate enforcement with the fire or police
department.
   C.   The designated enforcement agencies may inspect an establishment for
compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 346, 2007)
8.24.100: VIOLATIONS:
It is unlawful for a person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls
the use of premises subject to regulation under this chapter to violate its
provisions. The owner, manager or operator of premises subject to regulation
shall not be subject to a penalty if a person on the premises is in violation
of this chapter as long as the owner, manager or operator has posted signs,
implemented the appropriate policy and informed the person that the person is
in violation. (Ord. 346, 2007)
8.24.110: PENALTIES:
A person eighteen (18) years of age or older who violates a provision of this
chapter is subject to:
   A.   A fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
violation;
   B.   A fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second
violation within any consecutive twelve (12) month period of the first
violation; and
   C.   A fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third and
each subsequent violation within any consecutive twelve (12) month period of a
previous violation. (Ord. 346, 2007)
8.24.120: NONRETALIATION; NONWAIVER:
   A.   A person or employer shall not discharge, refuse to hire or in any
manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment or patron
because that employee, applicant or patron exercises any rights afforded by
this chapter or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this chapter.
   B.   An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking
does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee may have
against the employer or any other party. (Ord. 346, 2007)
8.24.130: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, phrase or other portion of this chapter
shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever by a court of competent
jurisdiction, then such decision shall not affect the validity or
enforceability of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 346, 2007)
8.24.140: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effective five (5) days after its
adoption, approval and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 346, 2007)
CHAPTER 8.28
EROSION CONTROL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8.28.010: Authority And Purpose
8.28.020: Applicability
8.28.030: Interpretation And Conflict
8.28.040: Severability
8.28.050: Appeal
8.28.060: New Development
8.28.070: Existing Conditions
8.28.080: Exempt Activities
8.28.090: Definitions
8.28.100: Erosion Control Plan (ECP) Requirements For Development
8.28.110: Documentation
8.28.120: Control Plan Review And Approval
8.28.130: Erosion Control Measures (ECMs)
8.28.140: General Guidelines
8.28.150: Active Operations In Construction Areas And Other Land Disturbances
8.28.160: Specific Construction Guidelines
8.28.170: Ground Cover Removal Prohibited
8.28.180: Weed Eradication And Dust Suppression
8.28.190: Storage Of Materials And Material Transport
8.28.200: Existing Human Created Vulnerable Conditions
8.28.210: Determination
8.28.220: Plan Submission Requirement
8.28.230: Review Of EMP
8.28.240: Enforcement Provisions
8.28.010: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
The board of trustees of the village of Hatch is authorized by statute, in
particular New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, section 4-37-4, to enact
ordinances to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of
the residents of the village of Hatch. The purpose of this chapter is to
protect and maintain the natural environment and to reduce the negative health
effects caused by the creation of fugitive dust, more specifically "PM10",
which refers to a size of particulate matter within dust that has been
identified by the scientific and medical communities and by the federal
environmental protection agency ("EPA") as a significant health risk in high
concentrations in the air. This chapter is enacted consistent with the goals
and policies of the comprehensive plans for the village of Hatch, and as a part
of New Mexico environment department's natural events action plan (NEAP) for
the village of Hatch and the state of New Mexico. This chapter shall accomplish
the requirements of these documents by preventing, limiting, or mitigating the
effects of activities which create fugitive dust (which includes PM10s), or
have a tendency to make land more vulnerable to natural erosion forces that
create fugitive dust. The objective of this chapter is to ensure that all
surface disturbance activities use erosion control measures to mitigate visible
fugitive dust on an ongoing basis for the protection of the health and safety
of the residents of the village of Hatch. This chapter also attempts to ensure
that when natural events do occur, such as fugitive dust creation through high
winds, the contribution of human generated dust is limited in its negative
health and safety impacts. Emissions that are regulated by federal or state law
to require filtering or similar treatment prior to release into the air are not
considered "fugitive", and are not regulated by this chapter. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.020: APPLICABILITY:
Under the conditions outlined below, the provisions of this chapter shall apply
to any human activity, operation and/or practices, or any condition caused by
human activity, which generates dust, causes water erosion, or makes the land
more vulnerable to erosion by natural erosion forces. In the development of
village land for public purposes, village policies shall be consistent with the
purposes of this chapter, and shall be conducted so as to minimize the creation
or aggravation of erosive forces. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.030: INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT:
Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions than those imposed by other
rules, regulations, agreements, or village ordinances or resolutions, the
provisions of this chapter shall be prevailing and controlling. Where two (2)
or more provisions of this code are conflicting, the most restrictive shall
apply. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.040: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph, sentence, phrase or part hereof is declared
unconstitutional or invalid, the remaining portions shall apply. (Ord. 352,
2009)
8.28.050: APPEAL:
A determination that a property requires an erosion control plan (ECP) or
erosion mitigation plan (EMP), or that a proposed ECP or EMP is insufficient,
or both, shall be subject to administrative appeal to the village planning and
zoning commission, and then to the village board of trustees. A property owner
wishing to appeal a determination shall request an appeal in writing, directed
to the village planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.060: NEW DEVELOPMENT:
Any development that requires a permit under any village ordinance, other than
for construction of a single-family dwelling unit (multiple applications within
a subdivision shall not apply), shall require an erosion control plan to be
submitted consistent with section
8.28.100 of this chapter. Grading for all construction, including single-family
dwelling units shall be limited to the building pad site, pond and driveway
plus an additional five feet (5') in all directions of these areas. (Ord. 352,
2009)
8.28.070: EXISTING CONDITIONS:
The owner of any property that is determined to be in a condition vulnerable to
erosion by natural forces due to human development of the property may be
required to submit an erosion mitigation plan (EMP) if the condition of the
property is determined to pose a significant health threat due to the nature or
extent of the vulnerable condition of the property, or its location near
concentrations of vulnerable populations, such as school children, or ill or
elderly persons. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.080: EXEMPT ACTIVITIES:
Although the village of Hatch encourages the use of reasonable erosion control
measures in all activities, the following activities are exempt from the
regulations and restrictions of this chapter:
   A.   Regular agricultural operations covered by the right to farm act, New
Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, sections 47-9-1 through 47-9-7 (1991),
including cultivating, tilling, growing, and harvesting crops, and the raising
of farm animals or fowl.
   B.   Governmental activities during life threatening situations or other
emergencies or in connection with any officially declared disaster or state of
emergency.
   C.   Operations conducted by essential service utilities to provide
electricity, natural gas, oil and gas transmission lines, telephone, water and
sewage during, or to avoid, service outages and emergency disruptions.
   D.   Temporary use of unpaved roads and parking lots that generate less than
twenty (20) vehicle trips per day for less than three (3) successive calendar
days. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.090: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ACTIVE OPERATIONS: Any human activity that is capable of generating, or
generates visible fugitive dust, including bulk material storage, handling and
processing; earthmoving; construction/renovation/demolition activities; and the
movement of motorized vehicles on any unpaved roadways and parking areas.
BULK MATERIAL: Sand, gravel, soil, aggregate and any other inorganic or organic
solid matter capable of releasing visible fugitive dust.
CHEMICAL SOIL STABILIZATION/SUPPRESSION: A method of dust control implemented
by any person to mitigate PM10 emissions by applying asphaltic emulsions,
acrylics, adhesives, or any other approved material that are not prohibited for
use by the New Mexico environment department, the environmental protection
agency, or any other law, rule, or regulation.
DISTURBED AREA: Any area in which the soil will be altered by grading,
leveling, scraping, cut and fill activities, excavation, brush and timber
clearing, grubbing, and unpaved soils on which vehicle operations and/or
movement will or has occurred.
DUST GENERATING OPERATION: Any activity capable of generating fugitive dust,
including, but not limited to, activities associated with creating a disturbed
area, construction and demolition activities, and the movement of vehicles on
unpaved roadways or parking areas.
DUST SUPPRESSANT: Water, hygroscopic materials, or nontoxic chemical
stabilizers used as a treatment to reduce visible fugitive dust emissions. Dust
suppressants shall be used as recommended by the manufacturer and in
concentrations and application frequencies sufficient to prevent violation of
this chapter.
EROSION CONTROL MEASURES (ECM): Techniques used to limit the emission and/or
airborne transport of fugitive dust from its original site to accomplish
satisfactory results for temporary and/or extended suppression of dust and PM10
emission(s).
EROSION CONTROL PLAN (ECP): A written description of all reasonably available
control measures (RACMs) to be implemented at a work site and/or in transit to
and from a work site for any earthmoving, construction, or potential dust
generating operation. Such written description may be incorporated into
building and construction plans or be a separate document submitted with said
plans.
FUGITIVE DUST: Any particulate matter entrained in the ambient air that is
caused from manmade and natural activities without first passing through a
stack or duct designed to control flow, including, but not limited to,
emissions caused by movement of soil, vehicles, equipment, and windblown dust.
Excluded particulate matter includes matter emitted directly from the exhaust
of motor vehicles, or from other combustion devices, portable brazing,
soldering or welding equipment, and pile drivers.
HIGH WIND CONDITIONS: On site hourly average wind speed greater than fifteen
(15) miles per hour, gusts of twenty (20) miles per hour or an active wind
advisory issued by the national weather service for the village of Hatch.
NATIVE PLANTS: Plants that are indigenous to the state from other places that
have become established in wildlands without cultivation.
NATURAL COVER: Any vegetation that exists on the property, prior to any
construction activity or achieved through vegetation restoration back to a
natural state, including the placement of sod.
PM10: Particulate matter, both filterable and condensable, with an aerodynamic
diameter less than or equal to a nominal ten (10) micrometers.
PALLIATIVE: Any agent used to lessen or reduce dust emissions.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Any material emitted or entrained into the air as liquid or
solid particulate, with the exception of uncombined water.
REASONABLY AVAILABLE CONTROL MEASURE (RACM): Any device, system, process
modification, apparatus, technique, or control measure, or combination thereof,
which results in the lowest emissions rate possible taking into consideration
the RACM's technological and economical feasibility as determined by approval
of the erosion control plan.
STABILIZED OR STABILIZATION: The ongoing process necessary to reduce the
fugitive dust generating capability of a surface by paving, dust suppression,
watering, compacting or revegetating the disturbed surface sufficient to
prevent a violation of this chapter.
TRACK-OUT: Visible bulk material deposited upon a paved public or private
roadway and capable of going airborne due to mechanical actions. (Ord. 352,
2009)
8.28.100: EROSION CONTROL PLAN (ECP) REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT:
Other than for a single-family dwelling unit, any grading, construction,
demolition, or other development requiring a permit or other form of approval
under any village ordinance shall have an approved erosion control plan (ECP)
in place prior to receiving a permit. The ECP may be separate documents or
incorporated as part of required building and/or construction plans. (Ord. 352,
2009)
8.28.110: DOCUMENTATION:
The following shall constitute the minimum information required within the ECP
to be submitted as part of an application for building and/or subdivision
construction to describe the erosion control measures (ECMs) proposed for the
project. For all subdivisions, ECMs shall be outlined and approved as part of
the overall review of the subdivision construction drawings through the
engineering and planning departments.
   A.   Name(s), address(es) and phone number(s) of person(s) responsible for
the preparation, submittal and implementation of the ECP, and for the dust
generating operations generally.
   B.   A site plan or plat of survey of the site that describes:
      1.   The total area of land surface to be disturbed and the total area of
the entire project site, in acres or square feet, depending on scale;
      2.   The operation(s) and activities to be carried out on the site;
      3.   All anticipated sources of fugitive dust emissions on the site;
      4.   Temporary drainage and/or ponding facilities to minimize soil
erosion and localized flooding of adjacent properties from water utilized on
site for development or for dust control;
      5.   Delivery, transport and storage areas for the site, including types
of materials to be stored, and proposed maximum sizes of stockpiles for
different types of materials.
   C.   A description of ECMs or combination thereof to be applied during all
periods of dust generating operations to each of the fugitive dust sources
described on the site plan or plat. For each source identified at least one
control measure must be implemented. The same control measure(s) may be used
for more than one dust generating activity. Specific details must include:
      1.   If dust suppressants are to be applied, then the type of
suppressant, method, frequency, and intensity of application, the number and
capacity of application equipment to be used, and any pertinent information on
environmental impacts and/or certifications related to appropriate and safe use
for ground applications;
      2.   The specific surface treatment(s) and/or other ECMs utilized to
control material track-out and sedimentation where unpaved and/or access points
join paved surfaces;
      3.   For each fugitive dust source at least one auxiliary ECM designated
as a contingency measure shall be described in the original control plan.
Should the original ECM in the control plan prove ineffective, immediate and
effective implementation of the contingency measure shall obviate the
requirement of submitting a revised control plan; and
      4.   ECMs to be implemented prior to any period of inactivity of ten (10)
days or more, due to any reason other than extended rainfall.
   D.   A description of ECMs or combination thereof to be used to minimize the
negative effects of water usage on site during the development activities. All
approved measures should be continued until final paving, wall or fence
construction and landscaping are in place.
   E.   The person responsible for implementing the objectives of the ECP shall
keep accurate records and document all activities in carrying out the ECP.
These records shall be made available upon request by the village of Hatch
staff. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.120: CONTROL PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
Review and approval of a proposed ECP shall be the responsibility of the
village public works, planning and zoning commission or designee. Approval may
be conditional upon the implementation of additional measures, actions, or
other activities, in addition to those included in the proposed ECP. Approval
and issuance of the building and/or subdivision construction permit(s) and the
approval of all outlined ECMs contained within the control plan or description
shall constitute a mandate that the approved ECMs be implemented by the
developer, contractor, builder, owner, and/or agents as part of construction
activities. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.130: EROSION CONTROL MEASURES (ECMs):
Erosion control measures included with an erosion control plan required by this
chapter may include, but are not necessarily limited to, any one or more of the
measures in sections
8.28.140 and
8.28.150 of this chapter. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.140: GENERAL GUIDELINES:
   A.   Designing subdivisions or building sites to utilize existing,
predevelopment grades;
   B.   Watering disturbed areas on a regular and minimum basis throughout
daily construction activities;
   C.   Applying palliatives or chemical soil suppressant/stabilizer for idle
construction periods;
   D.   Constructing snow and/or wind fences;
   E.   Reseeding or revegetation of graded or disturbed areas;
   F.   Grading for street and utility placement only as part of subdivision
construction;
   G.   Building some or all interior and perimeter cinder block, rock walls,
and retaining walls as part of the overall construction of all subdivisions and
not part of the individual building permit for each lot;
   H.   Retaining natural vegetation during the construction phase of buildings
excluding the building pad site;
   I.   Utilizing existing or natural vegetation as part of the required
landscaping for the site as elsewhere required within these design standards,
to limit grading activities, to promote water conservation, and to reduce dust
generation;
   J.   Installing vegetation or nonnatural landscaping elements in the latter
part of construction to reduce the amount of disturbed area and the potential
for dust generation; or
   K.   Implementing any other reasonable dust suppressing agent or activity.
(Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.150: ACTIVE OPERATIONS IN CONSTRUCTION AREAS AND OTHER LAND DISTURBANCES:
   A.   Short term control measures may include:
      1.   Regularly scheduled wet suppression;
      2.   Dust suppressants applied in amounts and rates recommended by the
manufacturer and maintained as recommended by the manufacturer;
      3.   Upwind temporary windbreaks, including fabric fences with the bottom
of the fence sufficiently anchored to the ground to prevent material from
blowing underneath the fence;
      4.   Starting construction upwind and stabilizing disturbed areas before
disturbing additional areas; and/or
      5.   Stopping active operations during high wind periods.
   B.   Long term control measures may include:
      1.   Site stabilization using dust suppressants applied in amounts and
rates recommended by the manufacturer and maintained as recommended by the
manufacturer;
      2.   Reseeding using native grasses;
      3.   Xeriscaping;
      4.   Tree planting; and/or
      5.   Permanent perimeter and interior fencing. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.160: SPECIFIC CONSTRUCTION GUIDELINES:
The following additional ECMs may be incorporated in a proposed ECP to mitigate
the effects of the specified activities:
   A.   Unpaved Roadways:
      1.   Paving using asphalt, recycled asphalt, asphaltic concrete,
concrete, or double penetration (consistent with subdivision or zoning
requirements);
      2.   Dust suppressants applied in amounts and rates recommended by the
manufacturer and maintained as recommended by the manufacturer; regularly
scheduled wet suppression; and/or
      3.   The use of traffic controls, including decreased speed limits with
appropriate enforcement; vehicle access restrictions and controls; road
closures and barricades; and off road vehicle access controls and closures.
   B.   Trucks Hauling Bulk Materials On Public Roadways:
      1.   Properly secured tarps or cargo covering that covers the entire
surface of the load;
      2.   Dust suppressants applied in amounts and rates recommended by the
manufacturer;
      3.   Maintain six inches (6") of freeboard from the rim of the truck bed.
"Freeboard" means the vertical distance from the highest portion of the load to
the lowest part of the rim of the truck bed; and/or
      4.   Prevent leakage from the truck bed, sideboards, tailgate or bottom
dump gate.
   C.   Bulk Material Handling:
      1.   Spray bars;
      2.   Wetting agents (surfactants) added to bulk material;
      3.   Wet suppression through manual application;
      4.   Dust suppressants added to bulk materials in amounts and rates
recommended by the manufacturer and maintained as recommended by the
manufacturer;
      5.   Stop bulk material handling during high wind conditions;
      6.   Reduce process speeds; and/or
      7.   Reduce drop heights.
   D.   Industrial Sites:
      1.   Pave roadways and parking areas with asphalt, recycled asphalt,
asphaltic concrete, and concrete;
      2.   Regularly scheduled vacuum street cleaning;
      3.   Regularly scheduled wet suppression of unpaved areas;
      4.   Dust suppression applied in amounts and rates recommended by the
manufacturer and maintained as recommended by the manufacturer;
      5.   Wind breaks;
      6.   Enclosures;
      7.   Increase wet suppression applications during high wind conditions;
      8.   Slow active operations during high wind conditions; and/or
      9.   Stop active operations during high wind conditions.
   E.   Demolition And Renovation Activities When Asbestos Containing Materials
Are Or Are Not Present: If asbestos containing material may be present, all
demolition or renovation activity shall be performed in accordance with the
federal standards referenced in 20 NMAC administrative code 11.64, emission
standards for hazardous air pollutants for stationary sources. In other
instances, the following ECMs may be utilized:
      1.   Constant wet suppression on the debris piles during demolition;
      2.   Dust suppression applied on the debris piles in amounts and rates
recommended by the manufacturer;
      3.   Enclosures;
      4.   Curtains or shrouds;
      5.   Negative pressure dust collectors; and/or
      6.   Stop demolition during high wind conditions.
   F.   Milling, Grinding Or Cutting Of Paved Or Concrete Surfaces:
      1.   Constant wet suppression;
      2.   Ongoing cleanup of milled, ground or cut material;
      3.   Dust suppression applied in amounts and rates recommended by the
manufacturer and maintained as recommended by the manufacturer;
      4.   Enclosures;
      5.   Negative pressure dust collectors; and/or
      6.   Curtains or shrouds.
   G.   Pressure Blasting Operations:
      1.   Use of nonfriable abrasive material;
      2.   Curtains or shrouds;
      3.   Negative pressure dust collectors;
      4.   Constant wet suppression; and/or
      5.   Ongoing cleanup of abrasive material. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.170: GROUND COVER REMOVAL PROHIBITED:
No person shall disturb the topsoil or remove ground cover on any real property
within the village of Hatch unless reasonable actions are taken to prevent
generation of dust caused by the disturbed condition. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.180: WEED ERADICATION AND DUST SUPPRESSION:
   A.   Weed eradication is limited to removal of specific weeds; clearing of
the entire lot is prohibited.
   B.   Once weeds are removed or mowed, dust suppression can be achieved
through watering, chemical suppressant application, or the expansion of natural
vegetation areas on the site. Expansion of natural vegetation areas is
encouraged. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.190: STORAGE OF MATERIALS AND MATERIAL TRANSPORT:
Actions shall be taken to ensure that such areas or uses with the potential of
becoming or generating fugitive dust and particulate matter, shall be covered,
moistened, compacted, or otherwise treated to prevent fugitive dust creation.
(Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.200: EXISTING HUMAN CREATED VULNERABLE CONDITIONS:
If the condition of a property is determined to pose a significant health
threat, due to the nature or extent of existing development that makes the
property vulnerable to natural erosion forces, or due to its location near
concentrations of vulnerable populations, such as school children, or ill or
elderly persons, an erosion mitigation plan (EMP) shall be required. (Ord. 352,
2009)
8.28.210: DETERMINATION:
The initial determination that a property is in such a condition may be made by
any law enforcement or codes enforcement, or other village of Hatch agent
authorized to make such a determination, subject to review by the planning and
zoning commission. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.220: PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENT:
Once the determination has been made in writing, the property owner shall be
required to submit within thirty (30) working days a proposed erosion
mitigation plan, which may include any of the erosion control measures (ECMs)
presented in this chapter, or other reasonable plans for eliminating or
mitigating the vulnerable condition of the property. The plan may include a
proposed time line for implementation. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.230: REVIEW OF EMP:
Upon receipt of a proposed EMP by the village of Hatch representative making
the determination that a plan is required, the EMP shall be submitted for
review to the village public works and planning and zoning commission. The
determination of whether the EMP is sufficient shall be made by the village of
Hatch planning and zoning commission or other authorized village staff member.
If the plan is determined to be insufficient, that determination and the
reasons therefor shall be provided to the applicant in writing, and the
applicant shall be given ten (10) working days to revise the EMP to address the
insufficiencies. (Ord. 352, 2009)
8.28.240: ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, including any failure to
implement any ECM of an approved ECP or EMP, may be subject to any penalties or
remedies allowed by law, including, but not limited to, a fine of up to three
hundred dollars ($300.00), up to ninety (90) days in jail, or both, for each
violation, as allowed by New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, section 4-37-3, or
as allowed consistent with any subsequent legislation providing for penalties
for violations of the village of Hatch ordinances. The village may also pursue
injunctive relief or any other remedies available under the law. (Ord. 352,
2009)
TITLE 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
General Provisions   9.04
Public Order And Safety   9.08
Offenses Pertaining To Property   9.12
Offenses Against Public Decency   9.16
Offenses By Or Against Minors   9.20
CHAPTER 9.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9.04.010: Title
9.04.020: Definitions
9.04.030: Violation; Penalty
9.04.040: Copies On File
9.04.050: Purchase Of Copies
9.04.010: TITLE:
This title is called and may be cited as the CRIMINAL CODE ORDINANCE ON GENERAL
OFFENSES for the municipality of Hatch. (Ord. 185 § 1-1-1, 1980)
9.04.020: DEFINITIONS:
In the construction of this title, the following definitions and rules of
construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided
in any section of this title, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent
of this title:
ACCUSED: Any person charged with the violation of any ordinance of the
municipality that imposes a penalty.
ANOTHER AND OTHER: Any other human being or legal entity, whether incorporated
or unincorporated, including the United States, the state of New Mexico or any
subdivision thereof.
ANYTHING OF VALUE: Any conceivable thing of the slightest value, tangible or
intangible, movable or immovable, corporeal or incorporeal, public or private.
The term is not necessarily synonymous with the traditional legal term
"property".
BATTERY: The unlawful, intentional touching or application of force to the
person of another, when done in a rude, insolent or angry manner.
BET: A bargain in which the parties agree that, dependent upon chance, even
though accompanied by some skill, one stands to win or lose anything of value
specified in the agreement. A bet does not include:
   A.   Bona fide business transactions which are valid under the laws of
contracts, including, without limitation:
      1.   Contracts for the purchase or sale, at a future date, of securities
or other commodities; and
      2.   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance,
including, without limitation, contracts for indemnity or guarantee and life
and health and accident insurance;
   B.   Offers of purses, prizes or premiums to the actual contestants in any
bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength or endurance
or to the bona fide owners of animals or vehicles entered in such contest;
   C.   A lottery which is defined as an enterprise wherein, for a
consideration, the participants are given an opportunity to win a prize, the
award of which is determined by chance, even though accompanied by some skill.
As used in this subsection, "consideration" means anything of pecuniary value
required to be paid to the promoter in order to participate in such enterprise;
or
   D.   Betting otherwise permitted by law.
CARRYING A DEADLY WEAPON: Being armed with a deadly weapon by having it on the
person, or in close proximity thereto, so that the weapon is readily accessible
for use.
DEFENDANT: Any person accused of a violation of any ordinance of the
municipality that imposes a penalty.
DISORDERLY CONDUCT: Engaging in violent, abusive, indecent, profane,
boisterous, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct which tends to
disturb the peace, or maliciously disturbing, threatening or, in an insolent
manner, intentionally touching any house occupied by any person.
GOVERNING BODY: The city council or city commission of a city, the board of
trustees of a town or village.
HE OR HIM OR SHE OR HER: Shall not be construed to be mandatory distinctions of
gender if not expressly stipulated.
LAWFUL CUSTODY OR CONFINEMENT: The holding of any person pursuant to lawful
authority, including, without limitation, actual or constructive custody or
prisoners temporarily outside a penal institution, reformatory, jail, prison
farm or ranch.
MAYOR: The chief executive officer of municipalities having the mayor-council
form of government.
MINOR: Any unmarried person who has not reached his or her eighteenth birthday,
except that under application of the alcohol beverage control act, or any
alcohol related division of this title, "minor" means any person under twenty
one (21) years of age.
MUNICIPALITY: Any incorporated city, town or village, whether incorporated
under general act, special act or special charter.
OFFICIAL PROCEEDING: A proceeding heard before any legislative, judicial,
administrative or other governmental agency or official authorized to hear
evidence under oath, including any referee, hearing examiner, commissioner,
notary or other person taking testimony or depositions in any proceeding.
PERSON: Any human being or legal entity, whether incorporated or
unincorporated.
POLICE OFFICER, LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, PEACE OFFICER OR OFFICER: Any public
official or public officer vested by law with a duty to maintain public order
or to make arrests for crimes, whether that duty extends to all crimes or is
limited to specific crimes.
PROSTITUTION: Knowingly engaging in or offering to engage in sexual intercourse
for hire.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE: Any person receiving remuneration for regular services
rendered to the state or any of its political subdivisions.
PUBLIC GROUND: Any real property owned or leased by a municipality.
PUBLIC OFFICER: Any elected or appointed officer of the state or any of its
political subdivisions, serving with or without remuneration for his services.
SHALL; MAY: "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
STREET: Any thoroughfare that can accommodate pedestrian or vehicular traffic,
is open to the public and is under the control of the municipality. (Ord. 185 §
1-1-2, 1980)
9.04.030: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this title shall
be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for a
period of not more than ninety (90) days, or be punished by both such fine and
imprisonment, and each day this title is violated shall constitute a separate
offense; provided, however, that if a specific penalty is provided therefor in
any particular and individual section of this title, then the specific penalty
shall prevail. (Ord. 242, 1991; Ord. 185 § 1-1-4, 1980)
9.04.040: COPIES ON FILE:
A copy of this title is available for inspection during the municipal clerk's
normal and regular business hours at the village clerk's office. (Ord. 185 § 1,
1980)
9.04.050: PURCHASE OF COPIES:
A copy of this title may be purchased from the municipal clerk at the cost of
twenty cents ($0.20) a page. (Ord. 185 § 2, 1980)
CHAPTER 9.08
PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY
SECTION:
9.08.010: Assault
9.08.020: Battery
9.08.030: Trespass
9.08.040: Prowling
9.08.050: Disturbing The Peace
9.08.060: Unreasonable Noise
9.08.070: Disorderly Conduct
9.08.080: Unlawful Assembly
9.08.090: Vagrancy
9.08.100: Obstructing Movement
9.08.110: Removal Of Barricades
9.08.120: Deadly Weapons
9.08.130: Failure To Report Treatment Of Wounds
9.08.140: Propelling Of Missiles
9.08.150: Possession Of Burglary Tools
9.08.160: Possession Of Fireworks
9.08.170: False Alarms
9.08.180: False Reports
9.08.190: Interference With Officers
9.08.200: Impersonating An Officer
9.08.210: Assault Upon Peace Officer
9.08.220: Unauthorized Use Of Certain Words And Insignia
9.08.230: Escape Of Prisoners
9.08.010: ASSAULT:
It is unlawful for any person to commit a battery upon the person of another,
nor shall any person, by any unlawful act, threat or menacing conduct, cause
another person to believe he is in danger of receiving an immediate battery,
nor shall any person, by the use of insulting language toward another, impugn
his honor, delicacy or reputation. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-1, 1980)
9.08.020: BATTERY:
It is unlawful for any person to beat, strike, wound, inflict violence or apply
force to the person of another, nor shall a person intentionally touch or apply
force to the person of another in a rude, insolent, angry or hostile manner
except in connection with an exhibition duly authorized and licensed under law,
or in lawful self-defense, or in the line of duty as a duly authorized police
officer as circumstances warrant. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-2, 1980)
9.08.030: TRESPASS:
It is unlawful to enter or remain, with malicious intent, on the property of
another that consent to enter or remain has been denied or withdrawn by the
owner or occupant thereof. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-4, 1980)
9.08.040: PROWLING:
It is unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl in a place, at a time, or in a
manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant
alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the
circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is
warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon appearance of a peace
officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal
himself or any object. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstance makes
it impracticable, a peace officer shall prior to any arrest for an offense
under this section afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which
would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and explain
his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this
section if the peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if
it appears at trial that the explanation given by the actor was true and, if
believed by the peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
(Ord. 185 § 2-1-5, 1980)
9.08.050: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It is unlawful for any person to disturb or aid in disturbing the peace of
others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, and no person
shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any property owned by him or under his
control or supervision. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-6, 1980)
9.08.060: UNREASONABLE NOISE:
It is unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made, any loud
or unusual noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others. Unlawful noises include,
but shall not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Noise limited area and time is established as follows:
      1.   Areas where residences, schools, hospitals, or churches exist twenty
four (24) hours per day and in nonresidential areas between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.: Unreasonable noise shall be
noise limited to those sources listed which are plainly audible at the property
boundary of the source; or is plainly audible at one hundred feet (100') or
more from such device when operated from a vehicle parked or traveling in a
public right of way; or plainly audible through partitions common to occupants
of separate dwelling units in the same building.
   B.   A less stringent noise limited area and time is established as follows:
      1.   Nonresidential areas between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.: Unreasonable noise shall be noise limited to
those sources listed which are plainly audible one hundred feet (100') or more
from the property boundary of the source; or plainly audible at three hundred
feet (300') or more from such device when operating from a vehicle traveling or
parked in a public right of way; or plainly audible through partitions common
to occupants of separate dwelling units in the same building.
   C.   Only the following listed noise sources can be considered unreasonable
noise:
      1.   The unnecessary sounding of any horn or other signal device on any
automobile, truck, bus or motorcycle.
      2.   The exhaust discharge of any internal combustion engine, except
through a muffler in good working order designed and constructed so as to
prevent noise which would otherwise violate this section.
      3.   The use of engine retarder ("jake brakes") inside the village
limits.
      4.   The sound of any radio, television, electronic device, phonograph or
any musical instrument.
      5.   The use of any automobile, truck, bus or motorcycle so out of
repair, or so loaded, or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
      6.   Burglar alarms and other alarms which provide a false or unnecessary
signal more than once a month.
      7.   The use of any loudspeaker, drum, whistle, bell or other instrument
or device for the purpose of attracting attention, by the creation of sound, to
any event, performance, parade, show, sale, display of merchandise or political
candidate, party or platform without first obtaining a written permit from the
village clerk.
      8.   Duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes of howls, barks, squawks,
human voices or other sounds from people, pets, livestock, birds, or other
animals.
   D.   Whoever commits unreasonable noise is guilty of violating this section.
   E.   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense and two hundred dollars
($200.00) for the second offense within one year of the first. A third
conviction within two (2) years shall result in initiation of confiscation and
seizure proceedings against all the equipment used to produce the unreasonable
noise. (Ord. 311, 2002: Ord. 185 § 2-1-7, 1980)
9.08.070: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
Disorderly conduct is unlawful. A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if he
or she:
   A.   Creates a disturbance of the public order by an act of violence or by
any act likely to produce violence; or
   B.   Engages in fighting, or in violent, threatening or tumultuous behavior;
or
   C.   Makes any unreasonably loud noise; or
   D.   Addresses abusive language or threats to any person present which
creates a clear and present danger of violence; or
   E.   Causes likelihood of harm or serious inconvenience by failing to obey a
lawful order of dispersal by a police officer, where three (3) or more persons
are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity; or
   F.   Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or property of another so
as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition; or
   G.   Commits a trespass on residential property or on public property.
"Trespass", for the purpose of this title, means:
      1.   Entering upon, or refusing to leave, any residential property of
another, either where such property has been posted with "No Trespassing"
signs, or where immediately prior to such entry, or subsequent thereto, notice
is given by the owner or occupant, orally or in writing, that such entry, or
continued presence, is prohibited,
      2.   Entering upon, or refusing to leave, any public property in
violation of regulations promulgated by the official charged with the security,
care or maintenance of the property and approved by the governing body of the
public agency owning property, where such regulations have been conspicuously
posted or where immediately prior to such entry, or subsequent thereto, such
regulations are made known by the official charged with the security, care or
maintenance of the property, his agent or a police officer; or
   H.   Makes a telephone call with intent to annoy another, whether or not
conversation ensues; or
   I.   Assembles together with two or more persons with intent to do any
unlawful act with force or violence against the person or property of another,
and who makes any overt act to carry out such unlawful purpose; or
   J.   Disturbs, threatens, or in any insolent manner intentionally touches
any house or vehicle occupied by any person. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-8, 1980)
9.08.080: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY:
It is unlawful for three (3) or more persons to assemble with intent to do any
unlawful act by force or violence against the person or property of another and
to make any overt act to carry out such unlawful purpose. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-9,
1980)
9.08.090: VAGRANCY:
The following acts comprise the crime of vagrancy and their commission is
unlawful:
   A.   Waiting or remaining within a public, private or parochial school
building or upon school grounds, not having any reason or relationship
involving custody of or responsibility for a student, without the written
permission of a school official, or in violation of pasted rules or
regulations;
   B.   Occupying, lodging or sleeping in any vacant or unoccupied barn, house,
car, shed, shop or other building or structure or in any automobile, truck,
railroad car or other vehicle without owning the same or without the permission
of the owner or person entitled to possession thereof or sleeping in any vacant
lot;
   C.   Begging from door to door to private houses or commercial business
establishments or placing oneself in or upon any public way or public place to
beg. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-10, 1980)
9.08.100: OBSTRUCTING MOVEMENT:
It is unlawful to hinder, annoy or molest persons passing along any street,
sidewalk, crosswalk or other public way, or to lie, sit or stand around the
entrance of any church, theater, public building, or other place of public
assemblage in any manner so as to unreasonably obstruct such entrance or to
place or erect upon any public way an obstruction of any type except temporary
barriers or warning signs placed for the purpose of safeguarding the public
against any hazard. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-11, 1980)
9.08.110: REMOVAL OF BARRICADES:
It is unlawful to remove, destroy or interfere with any barrier, guard or light
placed before or in any dangerous place near the streets, sidewalks or other
public ways of the city for the purpose of warning or protecting travelers from
injury or danger, provided that removal after the danger has ceased and
temporary removal to allow the passage of a vehicle with immediate subsequent
replacement shall not be considered unlawful. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-12, 1980)
9.08.120: DEADLY WEAPONS:
   A.   Carrying Of Deadly Weapons: It is unlawful to carry within the
municipality a concealed, loaded firearm or other weapon capable of producing
death or great bodily harm including, but not restricted to, any types of
daggers, brass knuckles, switchblade knives, bowie knives, poniards, butcher
knives, dirk knives, chains, can openers, ice picks and all such weapons with
which dangerous cuts or punctures can be inflicted, including sword canes and
any kind of sharp pointed canes, also slingshots, bludgeons or any other weapon
with which dangerous wounds can be inflicted, except in a person's residence or
on real property belonging to him as owner, lessee, tenant or licensee or in a
private automobile or other private means of conveyance for lawful protection
of one's person or property while traveling or for other lawful purposes.
   B.   Discharge Of Firearms: It is unlawful to discharge within the
municipality limits any pistol, revolver, rifle or shotgun which may be used
for the explosion of cartridges, or any gas operated gun or any device used for
propelling missiles, or any slingshot or missile propelling device, or any bow
made for the purpose of throwing or projecting missiles of any kind by any
means whatsoever, whether any instrument is called by any name set forth above
or by any other name; provided, that this subsection has no application in
cases involving the discharge of a firearm for lawful purposes.
   C.   Air And BB Guns: It is unlawful for anyone to shoot within the
municipality any air rifle, air gun or BB gun. Parents who permit the violation
of this section shall be deemed guilty of a violation of section
9.20.070 of this title.
   D.   Exception For Peace Officers: The provisions set forth above shall not
be construed to forbid police officers from carrying, wearing or discharging
such weapons as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of their duties.
   E.   Exposing Others To Danger: It is unlawful to endanger the safety of
another or his property by using a firearm or other deadly weapon in a
negligent manner or to carry a firearm while under the influence of any
intoxicant or narcotic, or to sell, loan or furnish any deadly weapon to
persons under the influence of any intoxicant or narcotic or to any incompetent
person.
   F.   Prohibited Weapons: It is unlawful to manufacture, cause to be
manufactured, possess, display, offer, sell, or lend any knife which has a
blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or
other device or any knife having a blade which opens, falls or is ejected into
position by the force of gravity or by any outward or centrifugal thrust or
movement.
   G.   Sales To Minors: It is unlawful to give, sell, trade, barter or
exchange for anything of value any deadly weapon, air rifle, air gun or BB gun,
or ammunition for any firearm to any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years; provided, that this section shall not be construed to prevent any parent
or legal guardian from purchasing firearms or ammunition for his child or ward.
   H.   Disposition Of Seized Weapons: Every police officer upon making an
arrest and taking a weapon used in the violation of any section of this title
shall deliver the same to the chief of police to be held by him until judgment
is entered for the offense and upon the finding of guilt the weapon shall be
disposed of as provided in New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, section 3-55-2.
(Ord. 185 § 2-1-13, 1980)
9.08.130: FAILURE TO REPORT TREATMENT OF WOUNDS:
It is unlawful for any physician, surgeon or other practitioner of the healing
arts licensed by the state to fail to immediately report to the municipal
police department his treatment of any person in the municipality for a wound
inflicted by a deadly weapon of any kind. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-14, 1980)
9.08.140: PROPELLING OF MISSILES:
It is unlawful for any person to shoot, sling or throw any stone, rock or other
propellant, missile or substance in any manner as to be reasonably likely to
cause injury to any person or property. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-15, 1980)
9.08.150: POSSESSION OF BURGLARY TOOLS:
It is unlawful to possess any lock pick, skeleton key or key to be used with a
bit or bits, jimmy, sledgehammer, pry bar, cold chisel, dynamite,
nitroglycerine, blasting caps, or any other burglary instrument or instruments
commonly used by burglars unless such possession is for a lawful purpose. (Ord.
185 § 2-1-16, 1980)
9.08.160: POSSESSION OF FIREWORKS:
   A.   Title: This section shall be cited as the VILLAGE OF HATCH FIREWORKS
ORDINANCE.
   B.   Purpose: To provide authorized local enforcement the New Mexico
fireworks licensing and safety act and to assist in protecting the public
health, welfare and safety of the residents of the village.
   C.   Definitions:
AERIAL SPINNER: A tube containing no more than twenty grams (20 g) of chemical
composition with a propeller or blade attached that spins rapidly as it rises
into the air with a visible or audible effect sometimes produced at or near the
height of flight.
APPLICANT: The person issued a permit and the person responsible to the village
of Hatch as provided by this section.
CHASER: A paper or cardboard tube venting out the fuse end of the tube that
contains no more than twenty grams (20 g) of chemical combustion and travels
along the ground, often producing a whistling effect or other noise; an
explosive composition not to exceed fifty milligrams (50 mg) may be included to
produce a report.
CHEMICAL COMPOSITION: Includes all pyrotechnic and explosive composition
contained in a fireworks device, but does not include inert materials such as
clay used for plugs or organic material such as rice hulls used for density
control.
CLERK: The municipal clerk of the village of Hatch.
CONE FOUNTAIN: A cardboard or heavy paper cone containing no more than fifty
grams (50 g) of pyrotechnic composition that has the same effect as a
cylindrical fountain; and when more than one cone is mounted on a common base,
total pyrotechnic composition shall not exceed two hundred grams (200 g).
COUNCIL: The village of Hatch board of trustees.
CRACKLING DEVICE: A sphere or paper tube that contains no more than twenty
grams (20 g) of pyrotechnic composition that produces a flash of light and a
mild, audible crackling effect upon ignition, which effect is not considered to
be an explosion; crackling devices are not subject to the fifty milligram (50
mg) limit of firecrackers.
CYLINDRICAL FOUNTAIN: A cylindrical tube containing not more than seventy five
grams (75 g) of pyrotechnic composition that produces a shower of colored
sparks and sometimes a whistling effect or smoke; the device may be provided
with a spike for insertion into the ground or a wood or plastic base for
placing on the ground or a wood or cardboard handle to be hand held; and when
more than one tube is mounted on a common base, total pyrotechnic composition
shall not exceed two hundred grams (200 g).
DISPLAY DISTRIBUTOR: Any person, firm or corporation selling display fireworks.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS: Devices primarily intended for commercial displays that are
designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or
detonation, including salutes containing more than one hundred thirty
milligrams (130 mg) of explosive composition; aerial shells containing more
than forty grams (40 g) of chemical composition exclusive of lift charge; and
other exhibition display items that exceed the limits for permissible
fireworks.
EXPLOSIVE COMPOSITION: Any chemical compound or mixture, the primary purpose of
which is to function by explosion, producing an audible effect in a fireworks
device.
FIRE CHIEF: The village of Hatch fire chief or his designated representative.
FIRECRACKER: A small, paper wrapped or cardboard tube containing no more than
fifty milligrams (50 mg) of explosive composition that produces noise and a
flash of light; provided that firecrackers used in aerial devices may contain
up to one hundred thirty milligrams (130 mg) of explosive composition per
report.
FIREWORKS: Devices intended to produce a visible or audible effect by
combustion, deflagration or detonation and are categorized as "permissible
fireworks", "prohibited fireworks" or "display fireworks".
FLITTER SPARKLER: A narrow paper tube attached to a stick or wire and filled
with no more than five grams (5 g) of pyrotechnic composition that produces
color and sparks upon ignition and the paper at one end of the tube is ignited
to make the device function.
GROUND SPINNER: A small, rapidly spinning device containing no more than twenty
grams (20 g) of pyrotechnic composition venting out an orifice usually on the
side of the tube that when ignited produces a shower of sparks and color:
"ground spinner" is similar in operation to wheel, but is intended to be placed
flat on the ground and ignited.
HELICOPTER: A tube containing no more than twenty grams (20 g) of chemical
composition with a propeller or blade attached that spins rapidly as it rises
into the air with a visible or audible effect sometimes produced at or near the
height of flight.
ILLUMINATING TORCH: A cylindrical tube containing no more than one hundred
grams (100 g) of pyrotechnic composition that produces a colored flame upon
ignition and may be spiked, based or hand held; and when more than one tube is
mounted on a common base, total pyrotechnic composition shall not exceed two
hundred grams (200 g).
MINE: A heavy cardboard or paper tube usually attached to a wooden or plastic
base and containing no more than forty grams (40 g) of chemical composition
plus not more than twenty grams (20 g) of lift charge per tube that
individually expels pellets of pressed pyrotechnic composition that burn with
bright color in a star effect, or other devices propelled into the air, and
that contains components producing reports containing a maximum one hundred
thirty milligrams (130 mg) of explosive composition per report; a mine may
contain more than one tube, but the tubes must fire in sequence upon ignition
of one external fuse and the total chemical composition, including lift
charges, of a multiple tube device shall not exceed two hundred grams (200 g).
MISSILE TYPE ROCKET: A device similar to a stick type rocket in size,
composition and effect that uses fins rather than a stick for guidance and
stability and that contains not more than twenty grams (20 g) of chemical
composition.
PERMISSIBLE FIREWORKS: Fireworks legal for sale to and use in New Mexico by the
general public.
PORTABLE BUILDINGS: Any structure, tent, trailer or vehicle which is of
temporary nature or design which is used separate or together for the retail
sale of fireworks to the general public. Any tent intended for use as a sales
location shall comply with rules adopted by the state fire marshal.
PROHIBITED FIREWORKS: Fireworks which are not legal for sale or possession
within the municipality.
PYROTECHNIC COMPOSITION: A chemical mixture that on burning and without
explosion produces visible or brilliant displays or bright lights or whistles
or motion.
ROMAN CANDLE: A heavy paper or cardboard tube containing no more than twenty
grams (20 g) of chemical composition that individually expels pellets of
pressed pyrotechnic composition that burn with bright color in a star effect.
SHELL: A heavy cardboard or paper tube usually attached to a wooden or plastic
base and containing no more than forty grams (40 g) of chemical composition
plus not more than twenty grams (20 g) of lift charge per tube that
individually expels pellets of pressed pyrotechnic composition that burn with
bright color in a star effect, or other devices propelled into the air, and
that contains components producing reports containing a maximum one hundred
thirty milligrams (130 mg) of explosive composition per report; a shell may
contain more than one tube, but the tubes must fire in sequence upon ignition
of one external fuse and the total chemical composition, including lift
charges, or a multiple tube device shall not exceed two hundred grams (200 g).
STATUTE: Refers to the state of New Mexico fireworks licensing and safety act
beginning at New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, section 60-2C-1.
STICK TYPE ROCKET: A cylindrical tube containing no more than twenty grams (20
g) of chemical composition with a wooden stick attached for guidance and
stability that rises into the air upon ignition and produces a burst of color
or sound at or near the height of flight.
TOY SMOKE DEVICE: A small plastic or paper item containing no more than one
hundred grams (100 g) of pyrotechnic composition that produces white or colored
smoke as the primary effect.
VENDOR: Any person or business engaged in the retail sale of fireworks to the
general public.
WHEEL: A pyrotechnic device that is made to attach to a post or other surface
that revolves, producing a shower of color and sparks and sometimes a whistling
effect, and that may have one or more drivers, each of which contains no more
than sixty grams (60 g) of pyrotechnic composition and the total wheel contains
no more than two hundred grams (200 g) total pyrotechnic composition.
   D.   Application And Permit:
      1.   All vendors of fireworks within the municipality must obtain a local
fireworks retail sales permit from the clerk. Each sales location within the
municipality shall have a separate permit.
      2.   A permit may be issued by the municipality and upon issuance, shall
be valid for one year unless revoked as otherwise provided in this section.
Vendors must present, at the time of application for permit, a copy of a
written agreement for use, rent or lease of land intended for the vendor's
sales location, unless the vendor is located within a permanent structure. Such
written agreements for use, rent or lease of land for use as a fireworks sales
location shall be signed by the owner, property manager or tenant having
authority to execute such documents.
         a.   Applications will be accepted up to the first day of any selling
period. Vendors and/or businesses shall provide the municipality with a copy of
the state issued license or permit for the sale of fireworks with the
application.
         b.   Vendors who sell fireworks shall pay twenty five dollars ($25.00)
permit fee except those retail businesses located at permanent locations that
possess a current municipal business registration or license.
         c.   Vendors are responsible for the applicable municipal gross
receipts taxes.
         d.   Portable buildings must be set back a reasonable distance from
the roadway and shall not obstruct the public right of way.
         e.   No fireworks shall be stored, kept, sold or discharged within
fifty feet (50') of any gasoline pump or gasoline bulk station or any building
in which gasoline or volatile liquids are sold in quantities in excess of one
gallon, except in stores where cleaners, paints and oils are handled in sealed
containers only.
         f.   At all places where fireworks are stored, sold or displayed, the
words "NO SMOKING" shall be posted in letters at least four inches (4") in
height. Smoking, open flames and any ignition sources are prohibited within
twenty five feet (25') of any fireworks stock.
         g.   Original permits must be prominently displayed at each location
at all times.
         h.   All fireworks permit holders and licensees shall keep and
maintain upon the premises a fire extinguisher bearing an Underwriters
Laboratories Incorporated rated capacity of at least five (5) pound ABC per
five hundred (500) square feet of space used for fireworks sales or storage.
   E.   Display Fireworks: Nothing herein shall prohibit the public display of
fireworks, except that any individual association, partnership, corporation,
organization, county or municipality, shall secure a permit from the governing
body of the village where the public display is to be fired. The display
fireworks shall be purchased from a distributor or display distributor licensed
by the state fire marshal and the bureau of alcohol, tobacco and firearms of
the United States department of the treasury.
   F.   Restrictions:
      1.   It is unlawful to offer for sale or to sell any fireworks to
children under the age of sixteen (16) years or to any intoxicated person.
      2.   No fireworks shall be discharged within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of any fireworks retail sales location.
      3.   No person shall ignite any fireworks within a motor vehicle or throw
fireworks from a motor vehicle, nor shall any person place or throw any ignited
article of fireworks into or at a motor vehicle or at or near any person or
group of people.
      4.   In addition to the requirements of this section, vendors will comply
with all applicable requirements imposed under the fireworks licensing and
safety act.
   G.   Inspection: The fire chief may at any reasonable hour enter and inspect
the premises, portable building or any structure temporarily or permanently
located at the site designated for the sale, packaging or handling of
permissible fireworks and may seize nonpermitted fireworks as provided in this
section.
   H.   Permissible Fireworks: The following are permissible fireworks within
the municipality:
      1.   Ground and hand held sparkling and smoke devices:
         a.   Cone fountains;
         b.   Crackling devices;
         c.   Cylindrical fountains;
         d.   Flitter sparklers;
         e.   Ground spinners;
         f.   Illuminating torches;
         g.   Toy smoke devices; and
         h.   Wheels.
      2.   Aerial devices:
         a.   Mines;
         b.   Roman candles; and
         c.   Shells.
   I.   Prohibited Fireworks: It is illegal to possess or to sell or offer to
sell any firework prohibited by this section. The following are prohibited
fireworks within the municipality:
      1.   Aerial devices:
         a.   Aerial spinners;
         b.   Helicopters;
         c.   Missile type rockets;
         d.   Stick type rockets; and
         e.   Stick type rockets having a tube less than a one-fourth inch (1/
4") in diameter.
      2.   Ground audible devices:
         a.   Chasers; and
         b.   Firecrackers.
   J.   Seizure Of Fireworks: The fire chief may inspect the fireworks stands
for conformance to permissible and prohibited fireworks.
      1.   The fire chief shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at
the expense of the permit holder all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for
sale in violation of this section.
      2.   The fire chief shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at
the expense of the person in possession, all fireworks possessed by the person
in violation of this section.
   K.   Penalty:
      1.   Any individual, firm partnership or corporation that violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment for a period of not more than ninety (90) days or both fine and
imprisonment.
      2.   In addition to any other criminal penalties that may be imposed, any
individual, firm, partnership or corporation found guilty by a court of
competent jurisdiction of violating this section or the fireworks licensing and
safety act two (2) or more times within a five (5) year period shall, after
notice and hearing, have its permit revoked for a period of one year. (Ord.
299, 2000)
9.08.170: FALSE ALARMS:
It is unlawful for any person to make, turn in or give a false alarm of fire or
of need for police or ambulance assistance, or to interfere with the proper
functioning of an alarm system, or to aid or abet the commission of such an
act. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-18, 1980)
9.08.180: FALSE REPORTS:
It is unlawful for any person to maliciously make or file with the police
department any false, misleading or unfounded report or statement concerning
the commission or alleged commission of any crime. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-19, 1980)
9.08.190: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS:
It is unlawful to resist, abuse, molest, hinder, obstruct or refuse to obey or
assist when called upon to do so, any police officer, fireman, emergency
medical personnel or judge while in the discharge of his duty. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-
20, 1980)
9.08.200: IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person other than a duly commissioned police officer to
wear or carry the uniform, apparel, badge, identification card or other
insignia of office, the same, similar or a colorable imitation of that adopted
and worm or carried by duly commissioned police officers, unless acting in the
course of regular business and with the permission of the municipality, or,
without authority, to exercise or attempt to exercise the functions of, or
pretend to be, a peace officer or judge. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-21, 1980)
9.08.210: ASSAULT UPON PEACE OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person to commit assault upon a peace officer. Assault
upon a peace officer consists of:
   A.   An attempt to commit a battery upon the person of a peace officer while
he is in the lawful discharge of his duties; or
   B.   Any unlawful act, threat or menacing conduct which causes a peace
officer while he is in the lawful discharge of his duties to reasonably believe
that he is in danger of receiving an immediate battery. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-22,
1980)
9.08.220: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF CERTAIN WORDS AND INSIGNIA:
It is unlawful to display on any vehicle or sign, without authority of the
municipality, the words "police", "police department", "fire department" or
words or insignia of similar import, whose design or form is such that it
appears to be an official vehicle or sign of the fire or police department of
the municipality, provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply
to any state or county vehicle. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-23, 1980)
9.08.230: ESCAPE OF PRISONERS:
   A.   Escape From Jail Or Custody: It is unlawful for any person, while a
prisoner of the municipality or otherwise in the custody of or confined by the
municipality, to escape or attempt to escape or to assist other prisoners to
escape or attempt to escape from such custody or confinement.
   B.   Assisting Escape: It is unlawful for any person to assist, attempt to
assist or offer to assist any person in custody of or confined under the
authority of the municipality to escape from jail, place of confinement or
custody. (Ord. 185 § 2-1-24, 1980)
CHAPTER 9.12
OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
SECTION:
9.12.010: Destroying Or Injuring Property
9.12.020: Library Property
9.12.030: Scattering Trash Or Rubbish
9.12.040: Advertising Matter
9.12.050: Petty Larceny; Embezzlement; Fraud
9.12.060: Receiving Stolen Property
9.12.070: Shoplifting
9.12.080: Issuing Worthless Checks
9.12.090: Falsely Obtaining Services Or Accommodations
9.12.100: Wrongful Use Of Public Property
9.12.110: Removal Of Earth
9.12.010: DESTROYING OR INJURING PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously or wantonly destroy,
injure, remove, tamper with or deface real property or improvements thereto or
personal property, either public or private. (Ord. 185 § 3-1-1, 1980)
9.12.020: LIBRARY PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to carry away without authority, misuse, cut,
write upon, injure, deface, tear or destroy any book, periodical, map,
newspaper or any other property devoted to public library use. (Ord. 185 § 3-1-
2, 1980)
9.12.030: SCATTERING TRASH OR RUBBISH:
It is unlawful for any person to throw or permit to be deposited or scattered
upon any sidewalk, alley, street or public property or upon the private
property of another, any rubbish, waste, trash or other disposed material of
any kind. (Ord. 185 § 3-1-3, 1980)
9.12.040: ADVERTISING MATTER:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to distribute any commercial advertising
such as show cards, posters, brochures, circulars or handbills upon any public
street or way.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to distribute, place or post in or upon
any private property, including utility poles, any show card, poster, handbill
or other announcement or advertisement without the express consent of the owner
or occupant of the property.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to post or affix any poster, handbill or
other form of advertisement upon the surface of any public structure or
building without the express consent of the public official having charge of
said public structure or property. (Ord. 185 § 3-1-4, 1980)
9.12.050: PETTY LARCENY; EMBEZZLEMENT; FRAUD:
It is unlawful for any person to steal, convert, embezzle or acquire by fraud
the property of another including any money, goods, chattels, bank notes,
bonds, promissory notes, bills of exchange, other bills, orders, certificates
or any books of account for or concerning money due or to become due and to be
delivered. If the property stolen, converted, embezzled or acquired by fraud
exceeds the value of one hundred dollars ($100.00), the matter shall be
referred to the district attorney. (Ord. 185 § 3-1-5, 1980)
9.12.060: RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY:
It is unlawful to buy, procure, receive or conceal anything of value knowing
the same to have been stolen, converted, embezzled or acquired by fraud. (Ord.
185 § 3-1-6, 1980)
9.12.070: SHOPLIFTING:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully take possession of or conceal any
merchandise valued at not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) offered for
sale with the intention of converting it without paying for it or to wilfully
alter any label, price tag or marking upon any merchandise, or transfer any
merchandise from one container to another with the intention of depriving the
merchant of all or part of the value of the merchandise. Any person who
wilfully conceals merchandise on his person or on the person of another or
among his belongings or the belongings of another or on or outside the premises
of the store shall be prima facie presumed to have concealed the merchandise
with the intention of converting it without paying for it. If any merchandise
is found to be concealed on any person or among his belongings it shall be
prima facie evidence of wilful concealment. Any offense concerning merchandise
valued at more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be turned over to a
higher authority. (Ord. 185 § 3-1-7, 1980)
9.12.080: ISSUING WORTHLESS CHECKS:
It is unlawful to issue in exchange for anything of value with intent to
defraud any check, draft, or order for the payment of money in the amount of
one dollar to twenty five dollars ($25.00) upon any bank or other depository
knowing at the time of such issue that insufficient funds or credit exists with
the bank or other depository for the payment in full by such check, draft or
order. Any person convicted of issuing worthless checks shall be imprisoned for
not more than thirty (30) days or fined not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) or receive both such imprisonment and fine. Offense of issuance of
fraudulent check in excess of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be turned over
to a higher authority. (Ord. 185 § 3-1-8, 1980)
9.12.090: FALSELY OBTAINING SERVICES OR ACCOMMODATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to falsely obtain services or accommodations, or
for any person to obtain any service, food, entertainment or accommodations
without paying therefor, and with the intent to cheat or defraud the owner or
person supplying such service, food, entertainment or accommodations. Any
offense concerning falsely obtaining services or accommodations when the value
of the service, food, entertainment or accommodations is in excess of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be turned over to a higher authority. (Ord. 185
§ 3-1-9, 1980)
9.12.100: WRONGFUL USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to commit unlawful use of public property by
knowingly entering any public property without permission of the lawful
custodian or his representative when the public property is not open to the
public, or remaining in or occupying any public property after having been
requested to leave by the lawful custodian, or his representative, who has
determined that the public property is being used or occupied contrary to its
intended or customary use or that the public property may be damaged or
destroyed by the use. (Ord. 185 § 3-1-10, 1980)
9.12.110: REMOVAL OF EARTH:
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to move, distribute or take away any
earth, stone or other material from any public street, way, alley, park or
public ground. (Ord. 185 § 3-1-11, 1980)
CHAPTER 9.16
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
SECTION:
9.16.010: Lewd, Immoral Or Obscene Acts
9.16.020: Window Peeping
9.16.030: Gambling
9.16.040: Aiding Illegal Activity
9.16.050: Marijuana Possession Prohibited
9.16.060: Drinking In Public
9.16.010: LEWD, IMMORAL OR OBSCENE ACTS:
The following acts are lewd, immoral or obscene and their commission is
unlawful:
   A.   Being present in any establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold
and engaging in the practice of or for the purpose of soliciting others to
purchase alcoholic beverages, provided that this provision does not apply to
one employed as a bartender, waitress or waiter;
   B.   As the owner or operator of any establishment where alcoholic beverages
are sold, to knowingly permit the presence in such establishment of any person
who violates the provisions of subsection A of this section;
   C.   Prostitution, which means knowingly engaging in or offering to engage
in sexual intercourse for hire;
   D.   Entering or remaining in a house of prostitution with intent to engage
in sexual intercourse with a prostitute;
   E.   Knowingly hiring a prostitute to engage in sexual intercourse;
   F.   Knowingly establishing, owning, maintaining or managing a house of
prostitution or participating in the establishment, ownership, maintenance or
management thereof;
   G.   Knowingly permitting any place to be used as a house of prostitution;
   H.   Procuring a prostitute for a house of prostitution;
   I.   Inducing another to become a prostitute;
   J.   Living wholly or partly upon the earnings of prostitution;
   K.   Knowingly soliciting a patron for a prostitute or for a house of
prostitution;
   L.   Knowingly procuring a prostitute for a patron;
   M.   Knowingly procuring transportation for, paying for the transportation
of, or transporting a person within the municipality with the intention of
aiding that person to engage in prostitution;
   N.   Knowingly being employed by a house of prostitution or to perform any
function which constitutes promoting prostitution;
   O.   Knowingly and intentionally exposing the primary genital area to public
view. "Primary genital area" means the mons pubis, penis, testicles, mons
veneris, vulva or vagina. (Ord. 185 § 4-1-1, 1980)
9.16.020: WINDOW PEEPING:
It is unlawful for any person to enter upon any private property and look,
peer, or peep into or be found around or within the view of any window or other
means of viewing into any occupied building, other than his own residence, with
the intent of observing a person or persons undressed, dressing or undressing
or engaging in sexual acts. (Ord. 185 § 4-1-2, 1980)
9.16.030: GAMBLING:
   A.   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   BET: A bargain in which the parties agree that, dependent upon chance even
though accompanied by some skill, one stands to win or lose anything of value
specified in the agreement. A bet does not include the following:
      1.   Bona fide business transactions which are valued under the law of
contracts, including, without limitation:
         a.   Contracts for purchase or sale, at a future date, of securities
or other commodities; and
         b.   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of the
chance, including, without limitation, contracts for indemnity or guaranty and
life or health and accident insurance;
      2.   Offers of purses, prizes or premiums to the actual contestants in
any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength or
endurance or to the bona fide owners of animals or vehicles entered in such
contest;
      3.   A "lottery" as defined herein; or
      4.   Betting otherwise permitted by law.
   GAMBLING DEVICE: A contrivance which for consideration affords the player an
opportunity to obtain anything of value, the award of which is determined by
chance, even though accompanied by some skill and whether or not the prize is
automatically paid by the device.
   GAMBLING PLACE: Any building or tent, any vehicle whether self-propelled or
not, or any room within any of them, one of whose principal uses is any of the
following: making and settling bets; receiving; holding, recording or
forwarding bets or offers to bet; conducting lotteries; or playing gambling
devices.
   LOTTERY: An enterprise wherein for a consideration the participants are
given an opportunity to win a prize, the award of which is determined by
chance, even though accompanied by some skill. As used in this definition, the
term "consideration" means anything that is a financial advantage to the
promoter or a disadvantage to any participant.
   B.   Excepted Activities: Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prohibit any activity that is specifically authorized by New Mexico Statutes
Annotated 1978.
   C.   Prohibited:
      1.   Gambling consists of:
         a.   Making a bet;
         b.   Entering or remaining in a gambling place with intent to make a
bet, to participate in a lottery or to play a gambling device;
         c.   Conducting a lottery; or
         d.   Possessing facilities with intent to conduct a lottery.
      2.   A person who commits gambling is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   D.   Permitting Premises To Be Used For Gambling:
      1.   Permitting premises to be used for gambling consists of:
         a.   Knowingly permitting any property owned or occupied by such
person or under his/her control to be used as a gambling place; or
         b.   Knowingly permitting a gambling device to be set up for use for
the purpose of gambling in a place under his/her control.
      2.   A person who commits permitting premises to be used for gambling is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   E.   Dealing In Gambling Devices:
      1.   Dealing in gambling devices consists of manufacturing, transferring
commercially or possessing, with intent to transfer commercially, any of the
following:
         a.   Anything which a person knows evidences, purports to evidence or
is designed to evidence participation in gambling; or
         b.   Any device which a person knows is designed exclusively as a
subassembly or essential part of such device. This includes, without
limitation, gambling devices, numbers jars, punchboards and roulette wheels.
      2.   Proof of possession of any device designed exclusively for gambling
purposes which is not in a gambling place and is not set up for use is prima
facie evidence of possession with intent to transfer.
      3.   A person who commits dealing in gambling devices is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   F.   Fraudulently Operating Lottery:
      1.   Fraudulently operating a lottery consists of operating or managing
any lottery which does not provide a fair and equal chance to all participants
or which is conducted in a manner tending to defraud or mislead the public.
      2.   A person who commits fraudulently operating a lottery is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   G.   Evidence Of A Gambling Place: Evidence that a place has a general
reputation as a gambling site or that at or about the time in question was
frequently visited by persons known to be professional gamblers or known as
frequenters of gambling places is admissible on the issue of whether such site
is a gambling place.
   H.   Forfeiture Of Prizes And Equipment: Any gambling device or other
equipment of any type used in gambling shall be seized by the law enforcement
officers discovering such device or equipment, and it shall be the duty of such
officers to retain custody of the property seized until such property is
disposed of by order of the municipal court. Upon proper application by the
village attorney to the judge of the municipal court, the judge of the
municipal court may by proper order direct the destruction of any gambling
device, paraphernalia or equipment of any kind or character seized by law
enforcement officers.
   I.   Bribery Of Participant In Contest:
      1.   The term "participant" as used in this section includes any person
who is selected to or expects to take part in any such contest.
      2.   Bribery of participants in a contest consists of:
         a.   The transferring or promise to transfer anything of value to any
person with intent to influence thereby any participant in a contest to refrain
from exerting his/her full skill, speed, strength or endurance in such contest;
or
         b.   The agreeing or offering by a participant in a contest to refrain
from exerting his/her full skill, speed, strength or endurance in return for
anything of value transferred or promised to him/herself or another.
         c.   A person who commits bribery of a participant in a contest is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   J.   Testimony Of Witnesses To Gambling:
      1.   The municipal judge having jurisdiction over any of the crimes
enumerated in this section or any district attorney inquiring into the alleged
violation of any of the subsections of this section may subpoena persons and
compel their attendance as witnesses and may compel such witnesses to testify
concerning any violation of this section.
      2.   Any person who is subpoenaed and examined shall be immune to
prosecution or conviction for any violation of this section about which he/she
testifies.
      3.   A conviction may be had for any violation of this section upon the
unsupported testimony of any accomplice or participant. (Ord. 309, 2002: Ord.
185 § 4-1-3, 1980)
9.16.040: AIDING ILLEGAL ACTIVITY:
It is unlawful to be found in any place where gambling or prosecution is being
conducted with knowledge of such activity or to give or attempt to give any
signal intended to give warning of the approach of any police officer to any
person in or about any place where any illegal activity is being conducted.
(Ord. 185 § 4-1-1, 1980)
9.16.050: MARIJUANA POSSESSION PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person intentionally to possess marijuana unless
it was obtained pursuant to a valid prescription or order of a practitioner
while acting in the course of his professional practice, or except as otherwise
authorized by law.
   B.   "Marijuana" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether
growing or not, the seeds thereof, and every compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant or its seeds. It does not
include the mature stalks of the plant, hashish, tetrahydrocannabinols
extracted or isolated from marijuana, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or
cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake or
the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.
   C.   "Practitioner" means a physician, dentist, veterinarian or other person
licensed to prescribe and administer drugs which are subject to the controlled
substance act of New Mexico.
   D.   Any person found guilty of violating this section with respect to one
ounce or less of marijuana shall be punished by a fine not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and by
imprisonment for not more than fifteen (15) days.
   E.   Second and subsequent offenses, and possession of more than one ounce
of marijuana shall be turned over to a higher jurisdiction. (Ord. 328, 2004:
Ord. 185 § 4-1-5, 1980)
9.16.060: DRINKING IN PUBLIC:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to consume alcoholic beverages in or on any public
place except those establishments having a license to dispense alcoholic
beverages.
   B.   This shall be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, any person
shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or
by confinement in jail not more than seven (7) months or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 171, 1975)
CHAPTER 9.20
OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
SECTION:
9.20.010: Abandonment Of Children
9.20.020: Cruelty To Children
9.20.030: Enticement Of Child
9.20.035: Remaining Near School Without Reason
9.20.040: Unlawful Assistance To Minors
9.20.050: Unlawful Presence In Liquor Establishments
9.20.060: Offenses By Minors
9.20.070: Failure Of Parental Responsibility
9.20.080: Abandonment Of Dangerous Objects
9.20.090: Sale Or Gift Of Certain Glues Or Cements To Minors
9.20.100: Social Hosts
9.20.010: ABANDONMENT OF CHILDREN:
It is unlawful for the parent, guardian or custodian of a child to
intentionally leave the child or abandon him under the circumstances whereby
the child may suffer from neglect. (Ord. 185 § 5-1-1, 1980)
9.20.020: CRUELTY TO CHILDREN:
It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the care or
custody of any child to cause or permit any child to be placed in a situation
where the life or health of such child will be endangered, or to torture,
cruelly confine or cruelly punish such child or to wilfully or negligently
expose such child to the inclemency of the weather. (Ord. 185 § 5-1-2, 1980)
9.20.030: ENTICEMENT OF CHILD:
It is unlawful to persuade any child under the age of sixteen (16) years to
enter a vehicle, building, room or secluded place with intent to commit an act
which would constitute a crime under article 9 of the criminal code 1  or
having possession of a child under the age of sixteen (16) years to commit such
a crime. (Ord. 185 § 5-1-3, 1980)
 
Notes
1 1. NMSA 1978, §§ 30-9-1 – 36-9-9.
9.20.035: REMAINING NEAR SCHOOL WITHOUT REASON:
It is unlawful to wait or remain on or within three hundred feet (300') of a
public, private or parochial school building or grounds, not having any reason
or relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a student, without
the written permission of a school official, or in violation of posted rules or
regulations. (Ord. 229, 1989)
9.20.040: UNLAWFUL ASSISTANCE TO MINORS:
It is unlawful to assist minors to buy, procure, obtain, or be served any
alcoholic beverages or to induce any person to sell, serve or deliver any
alcoholic beverage to a minor by actual or constructive misrepresentation of
any facts calculated to cause, or by the concealment of any facts which are
calculated to cause the person selling, serving or delivering such alcoholic
beverages to sell to a minor or to any person for ultimate delivery to a minor.
(Ord. 185 § 5-1-4, 1980)
9.20.050: UNLAWFUL PRESENCE IN LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENTS:
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any establishment serving alcoholic
beverages to permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to
attend, work in, frequent or loiter in or about such premises unless such
person is accompanied by his parent or guardian. (Ord. 185 § 5-1-5, 1980)
9.20.060: OFFENSES BY MINORS:
   A.   Curfew: It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets,
highways, alleys, parks, playgrounds, other public places or buildings, or
vacant lots between the hours of ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. and four
o'clock (4:00) A.M.; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to a
minor accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person having the care
and custody of such minor or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or
legitimate business directed by persons having the care or custody of him.
   B.   False Statement Or Identification: It is unlawful for any minor to make
false statements or to furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or false
registration card, identification card or other instrument, or to furnish,
present or exhibit any document issued to another person, for the purpose of
gaining admission to prohibited places or for the purpose of procuring the
sale, gift or delivery of prohibited articles including, but not limited to,
alcoholic beverages.
   C.   Procuring Unlawful Services: It is unlawful for any minor to engage or
authorize the services of any other person to procure for such minor any
article which the minor is prohibited by law to purchase. (Ord. 185 § 5-1-6,
1980)
9.20.070: FAILURE OF PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care
and custody of a minor to knowingly permit such minor to violate the provisions
of subsection
9.08.120G of this title, and section
9.20.040,
9.20.050 or
9.20.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 185 § 5-1-7, 1980)
9.20.080: ABANDONMENT OF DANGEROUS OBJECTS:
   A.   Containers: It is unlawful to abandon, discard or keep in any place
accessible to children any refrigerator, icebox, freezer, airtight container,
cabinet or similar container of a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic
feet or more which is no longer in use without sealing or removing the doors or
other entrances so as to make it impossible for any child to be imprisoned
therein, or being the owner, lessee or operator of any premises to permit such
articles to remain upon such premises in a condition whereby a child may be
imprisoned therein.
   B.   Plastic Bags: It is unlawful for any person to abandon, expose, leave
in any place accessible to children or permit upon premises under his control
any plastic bag without first tearing the same sufficiently to render it no
longer dangerous to a child. (Ord. 185 § 5-1-8, 1980)
9.20.090: SALE OR GIFT OF CERTAIN GLUES OR CEMENTS TO MINORS:
It is unlawful to sell, offer for sale, deliver or give to any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years any glue or cement commonly known as model airplane
glue, plastic cement, household cement, cement or any other similar substance,
if such glue, cement or substance contains one or more of the following
volatile solvents: hexane, benzene, toluol, toluene, xylene, carbon
tetrachloride, chloroform, ethylene dichloride, acetone, cyclohexanone, methyl
ethyl ketone, methylisobutyl ketone, amyl acetate, butyl acetate, ethyl
acetate, tricresyl phosphate, butyl alcohol, ethyl alcohol, isopropyl alcohol,
methyl cellosolve acetate, trichloroethane or ether. (Ord. 185 § 5-1-9, 1980)
9.20.100: SOCIAL HOSTS:
   A.   Definitions: The terms used in this chapter have the meaning expressly
provided herein.
   ADULT: Any person over the age of twenty-one (21) years.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any liquid or solid material intended to be ingested by
a person which contains ethanol, also known as ethyl alcohol, drinking alcohol,
or alcohol, including, but not limited to, intoxicating liquor, malt beverage,
beer, wine, spirits, liqueur, whiskey, rum, vodka, cordials, gin, and brandy,
and any mixture containing one (1) or more alcoholic beverages. Alcoholic
beverage includes a mixture of one or more alcoholic beverages whether found or
ingested separately or as a mixture.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: A drug or substance the possession and use of which is
regulated under the federal controlled substances act. Such term does not
include any drug or substance for which the individual found to have consumed
such substance has a valid prescription issued by a licensed medical
practitioner authorized to issue such a prescription.
   FAMILY GATHERING: A gathering where each underage person present is directly
supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person who is lawfully vested with the power and charged
with the duty of taking care of an underage person.
   PARENT: Any person who is a natural parent, an adoptive parent, a foster
parent, or a step-parent.
   PRIVATE RESIDENCE OR OTHER PRIVATE PROPERTY: A home, yard, apartment,
condominium, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, whether
occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling,
party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with
or without compensation, including contiguous properties, and/or any buildings,
structures or other improvements situated thereon or affixed thereto.
   REASONABLE COSTS: The salaries of the responding Police Officers, Fire
personnel or other Village emergency personnel, at the salary then in effect
for each classification of each individual officer or fireman, for the amount
of time actually spent in responding to or remaining at the party, or
investigating the gathering or event; appropriate overhead; the actual cost of
any medical treatment to injured officers; the cost of repairing any damaged
Village equipment or property, the cost of towed vehicles, the cost of Fire
Department vehicle response, and the cost of court overtime associated directly
with the incident.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person or persons with a right of possession in the
private residence or other private property on which an underage or unruly
gathering is conducted, including, but not limited to:
      a.   The person who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has direct control
of the premises where the underage or unruly gathering occurs;
      b.   A tenant or lessee of the residence or other private property;
      c.   Any other person in charge of the private residence or other private
property; and
      d.   The person who organizes or supervises or conducts the event or any
other person(s) accepting responsibility for such a gathering.
   UNDERAGE PERSON: Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
      a.   An "underage gathering" means a party or gathering of two (2) or
more persons at a private residence or other private property at which
alcoholic beverages are being furnished to, consumed by, or in possession of
any underage person.
      b.   An "unruly gathering" means a party or gathering of two (2) or more
persons at a private residence or other private property where conduct is
occurring that constitutes a substantial disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of
private or public property. Such conduct includes but is not limited to:
         i.   Unlawful consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages;
         ii.   Use of a controlled substance by any person at the gathering;
         iii.   Excessive noise as defined by §
9.08.060;
         iv.   Excessive traffic that is significantly in excess of the normal
amount of pedestrian and vehicle traffic for the zoning district;
         v.   Obstruction of public streets and/or the presence of unruly
crowds that have spilled into public streets;
         vi.   Assaults, batteries, fights, domestic violence, sexual assault,
or other disturbances of the peace;
         vii.   Vandalism;
         viii.   Litter; or
         ix.   Any other conduct which constitutes a threat to the public
health, safety, quiet enjoyment of residential property or the general welfare.
An unruly gathering shall constitute a public nuisance.
   B.   Violations:
      1.   It shall be a petty misdemeanor for any responsible person to
conduct, aid, allow, permit, or condone an underage or unruly gathering, at any
private residence, other private property, public place, or any place open to
the public.
      2.   This section shall not apply to conduct involving the serving of
alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between an underage person and his
or her parent or legal guardian, as permitted by New Mexico state statute, 60-
7B-1, NMSA 1978.
   C.   Mandatory Penalties:
      1.   First violation: two hundred and fifty dollar ($250.00) fine.
      2.   Second offense within twelve (12) months: five hundred dollar
($500.00) fine.
      3.   Third and any subsequent offense within twelve (12) months: five
hundred dollar ($500.00) and/or ninety (90) days jail.
   D.   Recovery Of Response Costs:
      1.    When the police department, fire department and/or other Village
emergency responder responds to a Social Host Ordinance violation with a given
address in the Village, the responsible persons in direct control of those
premises remains responsible for, jointly and severally liable for the
Village's reasonable costs for that response.
      2.   These costs are wholly separate from any other penalties imposed for
a violation of this Section. The Village may pursue to recover these costs
under a separate action as permitted by law.
(Ord. 404, 8-13-2019)
TITLE 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance Adopted   10.04
Golf Carts On Village Streets   10.08
Oversized Vehicle Parking   10.12
Recreational Vehicle Storage   10.14
CHAPTER 10.04
NEW MEXICO UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE ADOPTED
SECTION:
10.04.010: Adoption By Reference
10.04.010: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
The 2010 compilation of the New Mexico uniform traffic ordinance, amending
articles V, VI, VIII and X, and all changes through July 1, 2018, are herewith
adopted by reference, pursuant to section 3-17-6 New Mexico Statutes Annotated
1978.
(Ord. 427, 2025: Ord. 425, 2024: Ord. 405, 2019: Ord. 390, 2018)
CHAPTER 10.08
GOLF CARTS ON VILLAGE STREETS
SECTION:
10.08.010: Definitions
10.08.020: Permit
10.08.030: Insurance; Liability
10.08.040: Mechanical Condition
10.08.050: Occupants
10.08.060: General Operating Provisions
10.08.070: General Equipment
10.08.080: Suspension Or Revocation Of Permits
10.08.090: Penalty
10.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
DRIVER: The person driving and having physical control over the motorized golf
cart and being the permit holder; eighteen (18) years of age or older; and must
possess a valid driver's license.
MOTORIZED GOLF CART: Any passenger conveyance being driven with four (4) low
pressure tires that is limited in engine displacement of less than four hundred
fifty (450) cubic centimeters, a total dry weight less than eight hundred (800)
pounds and it can either be gas or electric. (Ord. 370, 2013)
10.08.020: PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized
golf cart on streets in the Village of Hatch without first obtaining a permit
as provided herein.
   B.   Permit Issuance: Permits shall be issued by the Clerk Treasurer, or
authorized designee, upon compliance with this section.
   C.   Application: Every application for permit, supplied by the Clerk
Treasurer, shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant.
      2.   The make, model name, year and serial number of the motorized golf
cart.
      3.   Date of application and applicant's signature.
      4.   Name of applicant's insurance company, date of expiration.
      5.   The Village of Hatch may require an applicant to submit a
certificate signed by a physician to the effect that the applicant is able to
safely operate a motorized golf cart on the roadways or shoulders under
jurisdiction of the Village of Hatch, or a driver's license.
   D.   Permit Fee: An annual permit fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall
be established, and may be changed from time to time by resolution of the
Village of Hatch Board of Trustees. All veterans may request a permit free of
charge.
   E.   Terms Of Permit: Permits shall be granted for a period of one year.
   F.   Conditions Of Permit: No permit shall be granted or renewed unless the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The applicant must demonstrate that they currently hold a valid
driver's license, or a certificate signed by a physician to the effect that the
applicant is able to safely operate a motorized golf cart on the roadways or
shoulders under jurisdiction of the Village of Hatch.
      2.   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance with
the provisions of New Mexico Statutes concerning insurance coverage for a motor
vehicle.
   G.   Permit Location: Permit must be with motorized golf cart at all times.
(Ord. 392, 2018: Ord. 370, 2013)
10.08.030: INSURANCE; LIABILITY:
   A.   Insurance Required: Before a motorized golf cart permit is issued by
the village of Hatch, and at all times effective during such permit period, the
permit holder shall have and maintain public liability and bodily injury
insurance in the amount established by the state of New Mexico.
   B.   Assumption Of Liability: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
an assumption of liability by the village of Hatch for injuries to persons or
property which may result from the operation of any motorized golf cart by a
permit holder or the failure to revoke a permit. (Ord. 370, 2013)
10.08.040: MECHANICAL CONDITION:
The motorized golf cart must be in good mechanical condition and thoroughly
safe for transportation of passengers. (Ord. 370, 2013)
10.08.050: OCCUPANTS:
The number of occupants in the motorized golf cart may not exceed four (4)
persons. Each person must be in their own seat. (Ord. 370, 2013)
10.08.060: GENERAL OPERATING PROVISIONS:
   A.   Driving, Operating, Or Control Of Motorized Golf Carts: Motorized golf
carts may be driven, operated, or controlled on the roadways or shoulders of
roadways under the jurisdiction of the village of Hatch, except such roadways
prohibited by resolution of the village of Hatch board of trustees and only in
strict compliance with this chapter. Operation of a motorized golf cart is
prohibited on state highways with the exception of crossing such highways.
   B.   Times And Operations: Motorized golf carts may only be operated on
designated roadways from sunrise to sunset. They shall not be operated in
inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or
other conditions, or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly
see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance of five hundred feet
(500').
   C.   Speed: No motorized golf carts may be operated on the village of Hatch
streets at a speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour.
   D.   Traffic Laws: Every person operating a motorized golf cart under permit
on designated roadways has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver
of any other vehicle under the provisions of any ordinance of the village of
Hatch or state of New Mexico, and shall obey all vehicle code requirements of
the state vehicle code.
   E.   Slow Moving Vehicle Emblem: Motorized golf carts shall display the slow
moving vehicle emblem in accordance with New Mexico state statutes when
operated on designated roadways.
      1.   Each slow vehicle moved, operated or driven on a roadway which is
open for vehicular travel shall display a slow moving vehicle emblem or a
flashing amber light. The emblem is a fluorescent yellow-orange triangle
measuring approximately sixteen and one- fourth inches (161/4") horizontally
and fourteen inches (14") vertically, with truncated corners. Part of the area
of the emblem shall be a reflective border, one and three-fourths inches (13/
4") wide. The fluorescent yellow-orange triangle is for daylight
identification.
      2.   The emblem shall be mounted on the center of the rear of each slow
moving vehicle, broad base down, at the height of not less than two feet (2')
and not more than five feet (5') above ground level, and in a plane parallel to
the rear axle. The emblem shall be positioned so as to be entirely visible from
a distance of five hundred feet (500') or more during the day. The emblem shall
be kept clean and free from any material which might obscure visibility.
      3.   Use of the emblem is confined to slow moving vehicles, and its use
on any other type of vehicle or any stationary object is prohibited. This
section does not prohibit the use on slow moving vehicles of red flags or
lawful lighting devices in addition to the slow moving vehicle emblem.
      4.   Any person who violates any provision of this subsection E is guilty
of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 370, 2013)
10.08.070: GENERAL EQUIPMENT:
Motorized golf carts shall be equipped with:
   A.   A rearview mirror to provide the driver with adequate vision from
behind.
   B.   A parking brake. (Ord. 370, 2013)
10.08.080: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
An individual permit may be revoked by the Clerk Treasurer if there is any
material misrepresentation made in the permit application, liability insurance
is no longer in effect, or if there is evidence that the person who obtained
the permit cannot safely operate the motorized golf cart. An individual permit
may also be revoked if the person who obtained the permit no longer has a valid
driver's license. The Clerk Treasurer shall issue a notice of revocation of a
permit in writing and either hand deliver the notice to the permit holder or
send the notice by certified mail to the address on the application. The
revocation shall be in effect immediately after personal service or three (3)
days after the mailing. Once the low speed vehicle permit is issued, any
violation will be subject to citation by law enforcement for adjudication and
subject to regulation by the New Mexico Department of Motor Vehicles. (Ord.
392, 2018: Ord. 370, 2013)
10.08.090: PENALTY:
In addition to the revocation or suspension of the permit, any person violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of violating this Code
and subject to the penalty provisions thereof. (Ord. 370, 2013)
CHAPTER 10.12
OVERSIZED VEHICLE PARKING
SECTION:
10.12.010: Title
10.12.020: Definitions
10.12.030: On Street Parking Prohibited
10.12.040: Exceptions
10.12.050: Violations And Penalties
10.12.010: TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the VILLAGE OF HATCH OVERSIZED VEHICLE PARKING
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 383, 2016)
10.12.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
As used herein, the reference to semitruck, tractor, tractor trailer, trailer
body, mobile home, house trailer, camper trailer, bus or any similar vehicle or
equipment means vehicles or equipment having an overall length in excess of
eighteen feet (18') or a height of more than nine feet (9'). (Ord. 383, 2016)
10.12.030: ON STREET PARKING PROHIBITED:
   A.   There is hereby prohibited the parking of any semitruck, tractor,
tractor trailer, trailer body, mobile home, house trailer, camper trailer, bus
or any similar vehicle or equipment with a gross vehicle weight in excess of
ten thousand (10,000) pounds on any residential street except under the
following conditions:
      1.   During the process of loading or unloading such vehicle.
      2.   During the time such vehicles are used to perform routine or
emergency maintenance to utilities, transportation facilities or private
property.
      3.   During the time such vehicle is used to perform the construction of
utilities, transportation facilities, or private property. (Ord. 383, 2016)
10.12.040: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to any governmental entity or agency. (Ord. 383,
2016)
10.12.050: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). If the violation is of a
continuing nature, each and every day during which it continues will constitute
a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 383, 2016)
CHAPTER 10.14
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE
SECTION
10.14.010: Definitions
10.14.020: Recreational Vehicle Storage Is Allowed On Any Lot In Residential
Use
10.14.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following term shall apply to this chapter as written unless context
indicates or requires a different meaning:
 
                      A motor vehicle or trailer which includes living quarters
                      designed for accommodation. Types of RVs include
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: motorhomes, campervans, coaches, caravans (as known as
                      travel trailers, camper trailers), Fifth-wheel trailers,
                      popup campers and truck campers. (Ord. 418, 5-25-2022)
 
10.14.020: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE IS ALLOWED ON ANY LOT IN RESIDENTIAL
USE:
   A.   Recreational vehicle storage is allowed on any lot in residential use
provided;
      1.   It is not used as additional living quarters for more than sixty
(60) days per year for an occasional guest. The property owner will notify the
planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer when guests will be staying more than
fourteen (14) consecutive days;
      2.   It does not have a permanent connection to utilities;
      3.   Such recreational vehicle shall be stored on private property.
   B.   Any person violating the provision of this subsection shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 418, 5-25-2022)
TITLE 11
RESERVED
TITLE 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Excavations   12.04
Right Of Use Permit   12.05
Airport   12.08
Building Numbering   12.12
Parking On Sidewalks Prohibited   12.14
CHAPTER 12.04
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
12.04.010: Permit Required
12.04.020: Permit Fee
12.04.030: Protection Of Excavation; Liability
12.04.040: Violation; Penalty
12.04.010: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation in or to deposit any
earth or other material in any street, alley or upon any sidewalk, within the
limits of the village, without a permit first had and obtained from the mayor,
which permit shall be in writing and signed by the mayor and attested by the
village clerk. Any person receiving such permit who shall make an excavation,
or who shall deposit in or on any street, alley or sidewalk, earth or other
material for the purpose of laying water drains, sewer or other pipes, for the
construction of sidewalks or buildings, or for other purposes, shall, within
five (5) days after completing the improvement on account of which the
excavation or deposit was made, or within five (5) days after notice from the
mayor to do so, remove all earth or other material and restore the part of the
street, alley or sidewalk excavated to its original condition. Whenever, under
any such permit any excavation or deposit of earth or other material shall be
made, the same shall be marked between the hours of sunrise and sunset by red
flags not less than twelve by twenty inches (12 x 20") in size, placed along
same at three feet (3') above the ground and at a distance of not more than one
hundred feet (100') apart; and between the hours of sunset and sunrise by
lights placed as above described for the flags. (Ord. 16 § 1)
12.04.020: PERMIT FEE:
Applicants for the permission to make excavations or to deposit earth or other
material as described in section
12.04.010 of this chapter shall pay to the village clerk the sum of fifty cents
($0.50) for each permit granted, which sum shall be paid to the village
treasurer for credit to the current expense fund of the village. (Ord. 16 § 2)
12.04.030: PROTECTION OF EXCAVATION; LIABILITY:
Any person receiving a permit as described in this chapter shall suitably guard
and protect any excavations or obstructions, by him made or caused, and defend
and indemnify the village from all actions, suits, costs and damages and
expenses, including attorney fees, which shall or may at any time happen to
come to it, or for or on account of any injury or damage received or sustained
by any person caused by any negligence or from any unfaithful or inadequate
work done under his permit. (Ord. 16 § 3)
12.04.040: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined in a sum not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 16
§ 4)
CHAPTER 12.05
RIGHT OF USE PERMIT
SECTION:
12.05.010: Fees For Use Of Right-Of-Way
12.05.010: FEES FOR USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY:
The following fees will be collected prior to the permit being issued:
Sec 1                                            
Application Fee                                 $200.00
Sec 2                                            
Trenching and uses below ground level:           
   12 inches by 36 inches to 24 inches by 48 $.10/lineal foot
inches
   Greater width and depth                   $.15/lineal foot
Sec 3                                            
Placement of facilities above ground level:      
   First 90 lineal feet                      Minimum of $150.00
   More than 90 lineal feet                  $1.50/lineal foot
Sec 4                                            
Service hook-ups                                 
   No pavement cut necessary                 $50.00
   Pavement cut necessary                    $100.00
Sec 5                                            
Maintenance/repair permit                       $100.00
Excavation to exceed 250 feet                   $200.00, plus usage fee set
                                                forth in Section 2
Sec 6                                            
Reinstatement of suspended permit               $200.00
Sec 7                                            
Appeal from decision of Right-Of- Way           $50.00
Administrator
 
(Ord. 410, 2020)
CHAPTER 12.08
AIRPORT
SECTION:
12.08.010: Applicability Of Other Regulations
12.08.020: Future Ordinances
12.08.010: APPLICABILITY OF OTHER REGULATIONS:
All ordinances previously passed by the village board of trustees are
applicable to the Hatch municipal airport and airport facilities, including
those facilities presently in place and any that may be constructed in the
future. (Ord. 200 § 1, 1984)
12.08.020: FUTURE ORDINANCES:
Unless specifically exempted, all ordinances passed in the future by the
village board of trustees will be applicable to the Hatch municipal airport and
airport facilities. (Ord. 200 § 2, 1984)
CHAPTER 12.12
BUILDING NUMBERING
SECTION:
12.12.010: Required
12.12.020: Rules For Numbering Generally
12.12.030: Designation Of Numbers
12.12.040: Each Block To Start New Hundred Series
12.12.050: Location And Size Of Numbers
12.12.060: Designation By Village Clerk
12.12.070: Compliance With Chapter
12.12.080: Unlawful To Tamper With Numbers
12.12.010: REQUIRED:
All buildings used as residences or places of business within the village shall
be numbered in accordance with the provisions contained in this chapter. It is
the duty of the owner or agent for the owner of each building used as a
residence or place of business in the village to number or cause to be numbered
any and all such buildings used as residences or places of business belonging
to him or under his supervision, and the owner of all buildings to be used as
residences or places of business which may hereafter be constructed or the
owner of all existing buildings which may be renovated for use as a residence
or place of business within the village, shall number or cause to be numbered
all such residences and places of business within ten (10) days from and after
the completion of construction or renovation. The residences and places of
business mentioned in this section shall be taken to mean any and all
residences and places of business which face or shall at any time hereafter
face on any of the streets or avenues within the village, as such corporate
limits now exist or may hereafter be changed, modified or enlarged. (Ord. 207 §
1, 1985)
12.12.020: RULES FOR NUMBERING GENERALLY:
The numbering of buildings used as residences and places of business shall be
in conformity with the following rules:
   A.   Franklin Street shall be the base from which the numbering of all
buildings used as residences and places of business facing on the streets and
avenues running east and west shall begin.
   B.   Hall Street shall be the base from which the numbering of all buildings
used as residences and places of business facing on the streets and avenues
running north and south shall begin.
   C.   Every lot or portion thereof amounting to fifty feet (50') of frontage
on any of the streets or avenues shall be entitled to one whole number, which
shall in all cases be counted in determining the appropriate number or numbers
of any building used as a residence or place of business in the same block,
whether the place shall have any residence or place of business occupying the
same or not.
   D.   Where two (2) or more residences or places of business shall occupy the
same fifty feet (50') frontage space, the number applicable to such space shall
appear upon each residence or place of business, and to designate the same the
letters of the alphabet shall be used following the last numeral of the number,
beginning with the letter "A" and going down the alphabet in regular succession
until all such residence or places of business shall be properly designated.
(Ord. 207 § 2, 1985)
12.12.030: DESIGNATION OF NUMBERS:
   A.   Commencing at Hall Street, all streets running in a northerly direction
shall have even numbers on the right or east sides, and odd numbers on the left
or west sides; and all streets running in a southerly direction shall have even
numbers on the right or west sides and odd numbers on the left or east sides.
   B.   Commencing at Franklin, all streets running in a westerly direction
shall have even numbers on the right or north sides, and odd numbers on the
left or south sides; and all streets running in an easterly direction shall
have even numbers on the right or south sides, and odd numbers on the left or
north sides. (Ord. 303, 2001: Ord. 207 § 3, 1985)
12.12.040: EACH BLOCK TO START NEW HUNDRED SERIES:
In going east and west from Franklin Street and north and south from Hall
Street, the numbering in each block shall commence with the next consecutive
even hundred above the block just preceding it. (Ord. 207 § 4, 1985)
12.12.050: LOCATION AND SIZE OF NUMBERS:
All numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous place, facing the street or avenue
on which the residence or place of business to be numbered shall have its main
entrance (and in the case of residences or places of business facing upon
alleys, the numbers shall be placed on the main entrance facing such alley) and
the figure or figures of any such number (or letter) shall be not less than
four inches (4") in height; provided, that if the lot or piece of ground
occupied by a single dwelling house is of sufficient width to require more than
one number or shall be so situated as to be partially within two (2) 50-foot
number districts, it shall be sufficient to place on such dwelling house the
number of the lot or fifty foot (50') fraction on which the main front entrance
is situated. (Ord. 207 § 5, 1985)
12.12.060: DESIGNATION BY VILLAGE CLERK:
The village clerk, upon application of the owner or agent of any building used
as a residence or place of business now or hereafter to be erected, shall
designate the proper number or numbers thereof in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 207 § 6, 1985)
12.12.070: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER:
It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or agent of any building used as a
residence or place of business in the village to refuse, fail or neglect to
number such building within the time specified or attempt to number such
building otherwise than in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The
village shall immediately cause such building to be correctly numbered and the
expense thereof shall be and remain a lien upon the premises so numbered until
fully paid. (Ord. 207 § 7, 1985)
12.12.080: UNLAWFUL TO TAMPER WITH NUMBERS:
Any person who shall purposely deface, mutilate or in any manner mar or injure
any residence or place of business number put up under the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 207 § 8, 1985)
CHAPTER 12.14
PARKING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED
SECTION:
12.14.010: Short Title
12.14.020: Violations And Penalties
12.14.010: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter may be cited as the PARKING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED. It shall be
unlawful for any vehicle to park or remain parked on a sidewalk. This shall
include that portion of any driveway that intersects and thus functions as a
sidewalk. (Ord. 417, 3-8-2022)
12.14.020: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). If the violation is of a
continuing nature, each and every day during which it continues will constitute
a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 383, 2016; Ord. 417, 3-8-2022)
TITLE 13
PUBLIC SERVICES
Water System Regulations   13.04
Sewer Connection And Service Charges   13.08
Sewer Use Regulations   13.12
CHAPTER 13.04
WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS
SECTION:
13.04.010: Water Application; Contract
13.04.020: Connection Specifications
13.04.030: Village Authority To Restrict Water Use
13.04.040: Charges For Service Connection And Maintenance
13.04.050: Meter Installation And Turn On
13.04.060: Water Rates
13.04.070: Payment Of Accounts
13.04.075: Disconnection Of Service; Reconnection
13.04.080: Charges To Be A Lien Against Property
13.04.090: Testing Of Meters
13.04.100: Authority To Make Connections
13.04.110: Unlawful To Draw Water Directly Into Steam Boiler
13.04.120: Fire Hydrants
13.04.130: Damaging Or Interfering With Village Owned Equipment Prohibited
13.04.140: Property And Authority Of Village
13.04.150: Notice Of Work To Be Done
13.04.160: Water Service Outside Of Village Limits
13.04.010: WATER APPLICATION; CONTRACT:
   A.   Before water shall be supplied to any person, firm or corporation or
for any premises from the village mains, application for the use of such water
must be made at the office of the village clerk on printed forms furnished for
that purpose. Every such application must be signed by the owner of such
property to be benefited or his agent and must state fully and truly the
purposes for which the water is to be used, the name and address of the person,
firm or corporation to be billed for such service, the description of lot and
block or tract, name of the street on which property fronts and must agree to
the rules and regulations established from time to time as a condition for the
use of water.
   B.   The application shall constitute a contract on the part of the village
to furnish water and on the part of the applicant to pay the stipulated rates
at the time and in the manner provided for in this chapter, reserving to the
village the right to enforce and collect rate and penalties in the manner
provided for in this chapter; to charge rates and to temporarily discontinue
service at any time without notice to the consumer; and further to provide that
the water department of the village, or the officials or employees thereof,
shall not be responsible for any damages, by water or otherwise resulting from
defective plumbing, broken or faulty service, or condition of the water itself,
or any substance that may be mixed with, or be in the water, as delivered to
the consumer. (Ord. 43 § 1, 1935)
13.04.020: CONNECTION SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   When an applicant has complied with all the requirements of this
chapter relating to the application for meter service, and has paid all charges
incurred, the water department shall cause the property described to be
connected with the village water mains in the following manner:
      1.   Where property is located upon a street in which a water main is
laid, same shall be connected with the water system by a service pipe extending
at right angles from the main to the curb line, a stopcock placed inside the
street curb line with a meter box and box cover; provided however, nothing in
this subsection shall interfere with the water department installing a service
pipe of sufficient size from the water main to the curb for the purpose of
leading branches to the right and left in the parking to supply other
properties.
      2.   Where property is located on a street in which there exists no water
main in front of the premises applied for, the water department shall estimate
the cost of any extension and upon payment by the applicant of the charges
estimated, the same shall be installed by the water department; provided, that
only one service connection may be allowed on a three-fourths inch (3/4") pipe,
two (2) service connections on a one inch (1") pipe, four (4) service
connections on a one and one-half inch (11/2") pipe and eight (8) service
connections on a two inch (2") pipe.
   B.   No water pipes laid in the streets or alleys of the village of less
than three inches (3") shall be considered as mains and the water department
may at any time order such pipes removed and mains installed. (Ord. 43 § 2,
1935)
13.04.030: VILLAGE AUTHORITY TO RESTRICT WATER USE:
   A.   Name: This section shall be known as WATER CONSERVATION. This section
shall both require and encourage all users of water of the municipal water
utility to reduce water consumption and waste.
   B.   Intent:
      1.   To assist in reducing overall per capita water use by fifteen
percent (15%).
      2.   To reduce yard irrigation and irrigation related water waste, i.e.,
over watering, inefficient watering or release of excess water which generates
fugitive water in the public right of way.
      3.   To require water conservation for new and existing family
residences, apartment buildings, businesses and all other properties.
   C.   Application:
      1.   The restrictions contained in this section shall apply to all
properties served by the municipal water utility.
      2.   This section does not apply to water provided by Elephant Butte
irrigation district for irrigation purposes, or to water provided from private
domestic wells.
   D.   Outdoor Vegetation Watering Restrictions:
      1.   All outdoor vegetation on residential and commercial properties
with:
         a.   An even numbered street or mailing route address shall be watered
only on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays;
         b.   An odd numbered street or mailing route address shall be watered
only on Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays.
      2.   All outdoor vegetation watering shall be prohibited on each Monday
for all properties.
      3.   From April 1 to September 30, all outdoor vegetation watering is
prohibited between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M.
   E.   Miscellaneous Water Use Restrictions:
      1.   The use of a free flowing hose to wash any vehicle or other types of
equipment is prohibited. Vehicles may be washed only from a hand held bucket or
a hand held hose equipped with a positive shut off nozzle for quick rinses. The
restriction does not apply to the washing of vehicles or equipment at a
commercial car wash, commercial service station or commercial vehicle repair
facility.
      2.   The following uses of water are defined as "wasting water" and are
prohibited:
         a.   Allowing water to flow onto adjacent property or on any street,
alley or other public right of way, ditch or drain;
         b.   Watering outdoor vegetation excessively so that water ponds on
site;
         c.   Failing to repair a water leak within five (5) working days of
the discovery of same;
         d.   Washing sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts,
patios and other impervious surfaces with a hose, except in emergencies to
remove spills of hazardous materials or to eliminate dangerous conditions which
threaten the public health, safety or welfare.
   F.   Penalty:
      1.   Any person who is convicted of a violation of any provision of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance
with the general violation provisions of this code, or shall be subject to
having water service disconnected.
      2.   With respect to violations that are continuous in time, each day the
violation continues is a separate offense.
   G.   Exceptions To Enforcement:
      1.   The following shall constitute exceptions from compliance with the
provisions of this section concerning outdoor vegetation watering restrictions
and miscellaneous water use restrictions:
         a.   Water flow resulting from natural events such as rain or snow
unless user is watering at same time;
         b.   Water flow resulting from temporary water supply system failures
or malfunctions;
         c.   Water flow resulting from firefighting or routine inspection of
fire hydrants or from fire training activities;
         d.   Water applied for dust control, pavement cutting or compaction of
soil as may be required by municipal codes;
         e.   Water applied to abate spills of flammable or otherwise hazardous
materials, where water is the appropriate methodology;
         f.   Water applied to prevent or abate health, safety or accident
hazards where alternate methods are not available;
         g.   Water flow resulting from routine inspection, operation or
maintenance of the municipal water supply system;
         h.   Water use is permitted under a variance granted by the village;
         i.   Water applied for street sweeping, sewer maintenance or other
established utility practices;
         j.   Water application necessary for newly planted landscaping
vegetation establishment, permitted for up to two (2) weeks continuous,
contrary to the odd/even and/or time of day requirements.
   H.   Water Emergency:
      1.   The village board of trustees may declare a water emergency in the
event of a severe drought or any condition which significantly reduces the
village's ability to supply water in order to protect the public health, safety
or welfare or to preserve the water supply.
      2.   During such a water emergency, the village board of trustees may
implement additional water use restrictions or rationing as conditions dictate.
      3.   The following water conservation stages shall be in effect at the
times specified. When stage 1 or stage 2 water rationing is in effect, no
person, firm or corporation shall use any water in violation of any provision
of this section.
         a.   Stage 1 Water Rationing: Whenever the storage facilities for the
village's public water supply system contain less than or cannot sustain fifty
percent (50%) of capacity, the village board of trustees shall have the
authority to impose stage 1 water rationing. The following requirements shall
be in effect:
            (1)   The village shall make public announcements through the local
print and broadcast media concerning the stage 1 water rationing, whenever
stage 1 is in effect. The announcement will include a description of the water
rationing restrictions.
            (2)   Use of water through a sprinkler system or use of water
through a hose to water any grass, trees, plants or other vegetation shall be
determined as follows:
               (A)   Users with odd numbered addresses shall be permitted to
use water in the above manner on each Sunday.
               (B)   Users with even numbered addresses shall be permitted to
use water in the above manner on each Saturday.
               (C)   Watering in the above manner shall be prohibited between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
            (3)   These restrictions shall apply to all residences and to all
businesses having lawns, gardens, trees, or shrubs and shall be followed at all
parks and public buildings. Areas watered with private well or Elephant Butte
irrigation district water are exempted from these restrictions. These
restrictions shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of growing or selling plants of any kind.
            (4)   No swimming pools shall be filled. Swimming pools that were
filled before stage 1 water rationing went into effect may have water added to
make up losses through evaporation or splashing. Water lost through draining or
through leaks in the pool may not be made up during stage 1 water rationing.
            (5)   Newly seeded or sodded lawns or newly planted trees or shrubs
shall be exempted from stage 1 water rationing for the time needed to establish
the lawn, trees or shrubs as long as it does not exceed sixty (60) days. No
lawns shall be newly seeded or sodded or trees or shrubs planted after stage 1
is imposed.
         b.   Stage 2 Water Rationing: Whenever the storage facilities for the
village's public water supply system contains less than or cannot sustain
twenty five percent (25%) of capacity, and the village board of trustees finds
that the village is in a state of emergency, the following measures are
necessary to protect the health and welfare of the citizens: The village board
of trustees shall have the authority to impose stage 2 water rationing. The
following requirements will be in effect:
            (1)   The village shall make public announcements through the print
and broadcast media that stage 2 is in effect. The announcements will include a
description of the rationing restrictions.
            (2)   The village board of trustees shall be called into emergency
session after the imposition of stage 2 to amend or lift the stage 2 water
rationing as circumstances warrant.
            (3)   Use of water through a sprinkler system or use of water
through a hose to water any grass, trees, plants or other vegetation shall be
prohibited. This restriction shall apply to all residences and to all
businesses having lawns, gardens, trees, or shrubs and shall be followed at all
parks and public buildings. Areas watered with private well or Elephant Butte
irrigation district water are exempt from these restrictions.
            (4)   No water shall be used to wash any vehicle, including
fundraising car washes and businesses either with attendants, with automatic
equipment or by self-service.
            (5)   No swimming pools will be filled and no water shall be added
to any swimming pool.
            (6)   It shall be the policy of the village to keep stage 2 in
effect for a period no longer than absolutely necessary. The village board of
trustees shall consider lifting stage 2 restrictions as soon as lifting the
restrictions will not endanger the water supply by reducing amounts of water in
storage.
      4.   No person shall be convicted of violating this section unless such
person in fact turned on water, directed the turning on of water, or kept water
turned on after learning it was turned on in violation of this section, or
failed to turn off automatic devices capable of turning on water in violation
of this section. It will not be necessary, however, to present a witness who
saw the accused turning on the water, if circumstances indicated the accused
did turn on the water.
      5.   The utilities superintendent will make written reports to the
village board of trustees at every regular and emergency meeting while water
rationing is in effect to document progression of public water supply
improvements. (Ord. 286, 1997)
13.04.040: CHARGES FOR SERVICE CONNECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   The water department shall make the following charges for service
connections and the perpetual maintenance of all services, meters and meter
boxes, the same to be and remain the property of the village:
      1.   For all service lines and meters two inches (2") and under, seven
hundred dollars ($700.00) or the actual cost to the village for the connection
plus two hundred dollars ($200.00), whichever is the greater amount;
      2.   For all service lines and meters greater than two inches (2"), one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or the actual cost to the village for the
connection plus two hundred dollars ($200.00), whichever is the greater amount;
      3.   In cases where more than one dwelling/unit will be serviced by a
single hookup, the hook up fee will be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each dwelling/unit served plus the base hook up fee;
      4.   Other special use hook up fees will be determined by the governing
body of the village on a case by case basis but in no case will the base hook
up fee be less than those outlined above.
These rates shall apply to all water connections made on or after the effective
date hereof.
These connection rates are to remain in effect so long as the village board of
trustees deems necessary.
   B.   These prices shall include the service connection complete, the meter
box with the meter in place and metal cover for the box, except in cases where
meters are required to be placed under a sidewalk excavated to the curb line,
in which case the property owner shall construct a concrete box for the meter,
open on the topside only.
   C.   Service connections must be arranged so that the supply for each
separate house or premises may be controlled by a separate stopcock placed
within or near the line of the street curb, and one (1) person, firm or
corporation must be responsible and pay for all the water used through the
service for his or their use, or for the use of others to whom it may be
accessible. The Water Department may decline to supply any connection until
separate services are provided in this connection. (Ord. 257, 1993: Ord. 248,
1988: Ord. 43 § 4, 1935)
13.04.050: METER INSTALLATION AND TURN ON:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the authorized agents or
employees of the Water Department to turn on water after the same has been
turned off as herein provided, or for any person, excepting as hereinafter
mentioned, to take or use water from the Village water system without first
having been put into service in the regular manner by the Water Department of
the Village. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in section
1.08.010 of this Code. (Ord. 308 § 3, 2001: Ord. 43 § 5, 1935)
13.04.060: WATER RATES:
   A.   The following rates shall apply on all water used on and after August
20, 2023:
Meter Size Single Residential Monthly Minimum Single Commercial Monthly Minimum
           Charge1                            Charge2
Meter Size  Single Residential Monthly Single Commercial Monthly Minimum
            Minimum Charge1            Charge2
5/8" x 3/4" $29.45                     $32.91
1"          $32.05                     $38.10
11/2"       $38.10                     $41.56
2"          n/a                        $45.04
3"          n/a                        $77.94
4"          n/a                        $103.92
6"          n/a                        $311.74
 
   Notes:
      1.    Minimum charge includes 3,000 gallons.
      2.    Multiple units under 1 roof with only 1 meter. Number of units x
minimum charge + water usage. Example: 5 unit apartments (5 units x $29.45 +
metered water usage).
   B.   Water charges in addition to minimum monthly charges:
 
3,000 - 10,000 gallons   $3.03 per 1,000 gallons
10,000 - 30,000 gallons  $3.47 per 1,000 gallons
30,000 - 300,000 gallons $10.39 per 1,000 gallons
Over 300,000 gallons     $12.13 per 1,000 gallons
 
   C.   Water meter installation:
      1.   Water tap, labor and materials (residential 3/4 x 5/8"): One
thousand three hundred and twenty dollars ($1,320.00) per meter tap.
      2.   If a bore under a road, ditch, or other structure is required, the
additional cost will be included in the charges. (Ord. 422, 2023: Ord. 411,
2020: Ord. 407, 2020: Ord. 385, 2017)
13.04.070: PAYMENT OF ACCOUNTS:
   A.   Billing: All accounts for service furnished shall become due and
payable upon rendering of the bill for such service.
   B.   Delinquent Accounts: Accounts shall become delinquent if not paid
within twenty (20) days of the rendering of the bill for service. After such
time, a penalty of five dollars ($5.00) or fifteen percent (15%) of the amount
in arrears, whichever is the greater, shall be added to the bill, and a notice
of delinquency and disconnection of service shall be issued. The user shall
have an additional five (5) days to make the payment in full.
   C.   Temporary Discontinuance Of Service: Should it be desired to
discontinue the use of all water supplying any premises for a period of not
less than one (1) month, notice in writing must be given to the Village Clerk,
and payment made in full at the Clerk's Office. The water shall then be turned
off and will be turned on again upon payment of the reconnection fee as set
forth in section
13.04.075 of this chapter. In no event shall there be any remission of charges
during the month in which the water was turned off. (Ord. 333, 2006: Ord. 308 §
4, 2001: Ord. 43 § 7, 1935)
13.04.075: DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE; RECONNECTION:
If the user fails to make payment in full as provided in section
13.04.070 of this chapter, the user's service shall be disconnected until such
time as all delinquent charges, including penalties, any costs incurred by the
Village in making the disconnection and collecting charges, and any
reconnection fees, have been paid. The fee for reconnection of service is fifty
dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 308 § 5, 2001)
13.04.080: CHARGES TO BE A LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY:
   A.   In addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter for the
enforcement and collection of any water rate, charge or account, all rates
provided for in this chapter shall be charged against the property to which
service is furnished, and against the owner thereof, and shall be a lien
against the premises. The property owner and occupant shall be severally
responsible to the village in an action waged by such village in any court of
competent jurisdiction for the amount of all sums as may be due and unpaid,
together with all penalties provided herein and costs. No change of ownership
or occupancy shall affect the application of this section.
   B.   All water furnished to the various departments of the village including
city hall, jail, or other village project or premises, shall be measured by
meter and all water so used shall be charged to their respective accounts and
paid monthly into the waterworks account. (Ord. 308 § 6, 2001: Ord. 43 § 8,
1935)
13.04.090: TESTING OF METERS:
   A.   All water meters installed by the water department shall remain at all
times the property of the village and shall be maintained and repaired when
rendered unserviceable through fair wear and tear, and renewed by the water
department; provided, that where replacements, repairs or adjustments are
rendered necessary by the age, neglect or carelessness of the owner or occupant
of any premises, any expense caused to the department thereby shall be charged
against and collected from the owner of the premises.
   B.   Any customer shall have the right to demand that the meter through
which water is being furnished be examined and tested by the water department
for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is registering correctly the
amount of water which is delivered through it by the department to such
consumer; provided, that when any consumer desires to have the meter so
examined and tested such consumer shall make application therefor in writing to
the department and shall deposit with the application the amount charged for
the various sizes as follows:
      1.   For testing a three-fourths inch (3/4") meter, one dollar ($1.00);
      2.   For testing a one inch (1") meter, one dollar twenty five cents
($1.25);
      3.   For testing a one and one-half inch (11/2") meter, one dollar fifty
cents ($1.50);
      4.   For testing a two inch (2") meter, two dollars ($2.00).
   C.   Upon said application being made it shall be the duty of the water
department to cause the meter to be examined and tested for the purpose of
ascertaining whether or not it is registering correctly the water being
delivered through it. If on such examination and test the meter shall be found
to register more than two and one-half percent (21/2%) more water than actually
passes through it, another meter will be substituted therefor and the fee
charged in the application returned to the person making the application.
   D.   Whenever a meter gets out of order and fails to register correctly, the
consumer shall be charged with an average daily consumption as shown by the
meter when in good working order and registering correctly, said average to be
taken over a period of three (3) months. (Ord. 43 § 9, 1935)
13.04.100: AUTHORITY TO MAKE CONNECTIONS:
   A.   All tapping of mains must be done by the authorized plumber, under bond
to the village in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), indemnifying the
village against the breakage of mains, tapping machine and other tools
furnished by the village and guaranteeing that the work will be performed in an
approved and efficient manner.
   B.   No plumber or other person will be allowed to make connections with
village mains, or make connections in any conduit or other fixture connected
herewith or to connect pipes when they have been disconnected, or to turn water
off or on any premises without written instructions from the water department.
   C.   No one but licensed plumbers shall be allowed to do any work in
connection with the village service, where water may be drawn from the village
mains, and all plumbers must make, to the village clerk, a true and accurate
report of the work done within twenty four (24) hours after its completion and
before the water will be turned on. (Ord. 43 § 10, 1935)
13.04.110: UNLAWFUL TO DRAW WATER DIRECTLY INTO STEAM BOILER:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to draw water from
any village pipe direct into any stationary steam boiler of any size or kind in
the corporate limits of the village. Where water from the village waterworks
system is used to supply a steam boiler its owner must provide a tank of
sufficient capacity to afford a supply for at least twelve (12) hours into
which the service pipe must be discharged. Persons, firms or corporations not
complying with this section shall have their water turned off immediately and
be subject to the payment of the reconnection fee as set forth in section
13.04.075 of this chapter after compliance has been effected.
   B.   The village will in no way be responsible for any damage that may occur
on account of the water being shut off for the purpose or on account of the
breaking of any pipe, fixture or appurtenance by pressure of the village mains.
(Ord. 308 § 7, 2001: Ord. 43 § 11, 1935)
13.04.120: FIRE HYDRANTS:
   A.   Fire hydrants are provided for the sole purpose of extinguishing fires
and are to be opened and used only by the water and fire departments or for
such purposes as may be specifically designated by the water department and
then only by a duly authorized agent of the department.
   B.   To ensure the safety and efficiency of the fire protection, any person
authorized to open the same, for any purpose, will be required to use only an
approved spanner wrench, and to replace the caps on the outlets when the same
are not in use.
   C.   Any person, firm or individual violating the provisions of subsection A
of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 43 §
12, 1935)
13.04.130: DAMAGING OR INTERFERING WITH VILLAGE OWNED EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED:
   A.   Seals placed upon meters, boxes, doors or any other appurtenances or
equipment of the water department must not be removed by persons unauthorized
to do so.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any persons to open, close, turn, interfere
with, or to attach to or connect with any fire hydrant, stop valve, or stopcock
belonging to the village water system, or to damage any machinery, pipe, tools,
valve, manhole, stopcock, meter or meter box connected with the said water
system, or to confine any animal or place any object, material, debris, or
structure of any kind so as to prevent free access to the same at all times, or
to deface or disturb, or tie horses or other animals to fire hydrants, or
injure any building, structure, or to trespass upon the tank, tank site or
other corporate property of the village water system. Any person or persons
violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty
as set forth in section
1.08.010 of this code. (Ord. 308 § 8, 2001: Ord. 43 § 13, 1935)
13.04.140: PROPERTY AND AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE:
   A.   All water pipes laid in the streets, alleys or public thoroughfares
within the corporate limits of the village shall be and become the property of
the village.
   B.   All water systems laid within the corporate limits of the village and
connected with or supplying water from mains of the village shall be
constructed under the supervision and in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the water department of the village. (Ord. 43 § 14,
1935)
13.04.150: NOTICE OF WORK TO BE DONE:
All contractors, persons, corporations, etc., who open, grade, regrade, fill,
excavate or work a street, shall give ten (10) days' notice, written to the
water department, for the removal or displacement of any water mains, pipes,
fittings, meters or other waterworks material that may interfere with such
street work and failure to furnish such notice, or any damage resultant from
such failure, will be charged against the person or persons responsible. (Ord.
43 § 15, 1935)
13.04.160: WATER SERVICE OUTSIDE OF VILLAGE LIMITS:
   A.   Upon application to the governing body of the village, any person, firm
or corporation may make application for use of water provided by the village
outside the village limits. The application shall set forth the reasons why the
applicant feels service outside the village limits is necessary/desirable. The
governing body of the village will review and pass upon the application and the
applicant is free to present whatever evidence deemed necessary to justify the
service.
   B.   If the application is granted, the applicant must then comply with all
other requirements of the water system's regulations as set forth in this code.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, however, the applicant will be
responsible for the full cost of extending service to obtain village water.
   C.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the applicant understands
that should there ever be a shortage of water within the village water system,
the village has the right to disconnect the applicant without recourse. The
granting of service to the applicant in no way gives rise to any right of
continued service by the village.
   D.   The applicant will also be responsible to comply with whatever other
delivery engineering criteria are necessary as required by the staff of the
village. If the applicant runs multiple lines from the original line applied
for, the village then reserves the right to completely cut off the water
supply, thereby terminating all water service to the applicant. (Ord. 258,
1993)
CHAPTER 13.08
SEWER CONNECTION AND SERVICE CHARGES
SECTION:
13.08.010: Connection Fees
13.08.020: Declarations
13.08.030: Sewer Service Rates
13.08.040: Required Connections
13.08.050: Separate Connections
13.08.060: Costs Of Connection
13.08.070: Owner's Responsibility For Installation
13.08.080: Billings; Generally
13.08.090: Billings; Payment
13.08.100: Delinquent Payments
13.08.110: Disconnection
13.08.120: Charges Constitute A Lien
13.08.130: Reconnection To System
13.08.140: Revision Of Rates And Charges
13.08.150: Authority Of Village Officers
13.08.010: CONNECTION FEES:
The connection fee for sewer service is one thousand three hundred dollars
($1,320). If for any reason the sewer service is cut off for any user, a
connection charge as set forth in section 13.04.075 of this title shall be paid
upon such reconnection. The aforesaid connection fee does not include the costs
of actually making the connection to the sewer facilities. These actual costs
of connecting shall be paid by the user. (Ord. 423, 2023: Ord. 412, 2020: Ord.
408, 2020: Ord. 332, 2005: Ord. 308 § 9, 2001: Ord. 222 § A, 1988: Ord. 177 §
1, 1976)
13.08.020: DECLARATIONS:
The aforesaid fees and the following schedule of rates, fees, tolls and charges
for the sewer facilities and services furnished by or through, or for the use
of the sewer system, are found and declared to be reasonable and just, taking
into account and consideration the value of the system and the cost of
maintaining and operating the system, and the proper and necessary allowances
for the depreciation thereof in the amounts necessary for the retirement of all
bonds and other securities payable from the revenues of the system, the
accruing interest on all bonds and reserves therefor. (Ord. 177 § 2, 1976)
13.08.030: SEWER SERVICE RATES:
The following rates shall apply on all sewer services on and after August 20,
2023:
Classification Rate
Classification                                                    Rate
Apartment units                                                   $34.22
Car washes (per stall)                                            $51.96
Commercial laundries (minimum plus $4.00 per machine)             $51.96
Convenience stores (no food service)/gas service station (minimum $45.04
plus $10.00 per car wash stall)
Food service - convenience stores, restaurants, bars              $67.55
Hospitals, clinics, churches, other commercial buildings          $93.52
Mobile park units                                                 $34.22
Motels and hotel rooms                                            $34.22
RV units (per stall)                                              $17.33
Residences                                                        $34.22
Schools                                                           $1,030.45
Septic tank haulers (per 500 gallons)                             $235.53
Stores and office buildings                                       $40.71
Trailer dumps                                                     $95.26
Other                                                             $60.62
 
(Ord. 423, 2023: Ord. 412, 2020: Ord. 408, 2020: Ord. 386, 2017)
13.08.040: REQUIRED CONNECTIONS:
The Board of Trustees has caused a survey to be made of sanitary conditions
within the Village, including the geological aspects in relation to industrial,
business and residential establishments as the same affect the health and
welfare of the inhabitants of the village, and has determined that it is
necessary for the protection of the public health and for sanitary purposes
that owners of inhabited property within the village be required to connect
their industrial, business and residential establishments or other inhabited
property to the sewer system and to cease to use all other methods of sewage
disposal, and the board does so require; provided only, that each such
establishment or other inhabited property is within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of the nearest sewer service line and is capable of being served by and
through the village's sewer system at the established rates. In the event any
owner of such inhabited property fails or refuses to make such a connection
upon being requested to do so by the village officials, the village may take
such lawful action as may be necessary or desirable to effect such connection.
Any owner of such inhabited property shall be compelled so to connect the
property. Upon a failure so to connect within sixty (60) days after written
notice to do so transmitted by registered first class mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to each last known owner at his last known address according to the
records of the village and the real property assessment roll in the county in
which the property is located, the board shall cause such connection to be made
and a lien to be filed against the property for the expense in making such
connection. (Ord. 177 § 4, 1976)
13.08.050: SEPARATE CONNECTIONS:
Every separate structure must have a separate connection to the sewer system.
Exceptions from this requirement will only be made after written application to
the board and a showing of good cause therefor which shall include a showing as
to each and all of the following:
   A.   The two (2) structures to be connected by a single connection to the
sewer are owned by the same applicant;
   B.   The buildings or structures are so located that each does not have
substantial frontage along the sewer line, but instead one building is so
behind the other, making it unlikely that the buildings will ever pass into
separate ownership;
   C.   The applicant agrees that if the buildings ever pass into separate
ownership, the applicant will pay for the cost of a second connection and grant
all necessary easements therefor;
   D.   The applicant will cause to be paid a full connection fee for each such
separate structure prior to the issuance of a connection permit. (Ord. 177 § 5,
1976)
13.08.060: COSTS OF CONNECTION:
Connection to the sewer system shall only be made after the payment of the
connection fee and issuance of a permit to do so, to any owner of the property
to be connected, by the clerk of the village, upon approval of the board, the
cost of connection to be defrayed by such owner, including, but not limited to,
the cost of installing a stub or service line from the lateral line to the
property connected. (Ord. 177 § 6, 1976)
13.08.070: OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR INSTALLATION:
The responsibility for installing the sewer service line from the municipal
sewer lateral to the property connected shall be the responsibility of the
owner and shall be done in accordance with the following conditions:
   A.   All sewer lines installed by the owner must be inspected by the
village's representative before connection into the village lines is made. It
is the responsibility of the owner to first obtain a connection permit and
thereafter to notify the village when the service line is ready for inspection,
such notice to be given at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the
inspection. Any line backfilled without an inspection will not be accepted for
service.
   B.   All pipe and fittings must be laid on undisturbed solid ground, or on a
sand or clean gravel fill. Pipe shall be four inches (4") in diameter or
greater, as required by the village.
   C.   All service lines must be either soil pipe, cast iron pipe, asbestos
cement pipe, VCP or PVC with rubber gaskets. The asbestos cement pipe shall not
be used in lengths in excess of five feet (5').
   D.   Cleanouts shall be installed by the owner on his property at every
ninety foot (90') interval of line and at each bend or direction change of
thirty degrees (30°) or more, extending into the property. Additional cleanouts
may be required for larger than four inch (4") sewer service lines. Cleanouts
shall consist of a standard combination Y and one-eighth (1/8) bend with
standard riser and a four inch (4") brass cleanout plug. Cleanouts set out on a
slope must be braced with timber.
   E.   Cement or concrete mortar or lead joints will not be permitted for
jointing of any pipe, nor will the village permit encasing of the pipe or
fittings with concrete, but all joints must be installed with rubber gaskets.
(Ord. 177 § 7, 1976)
13.08.080: BILLINGS; GENERALLY:
The village shall bill any owner of such connected property for the payment of
such rates, tolls and charges specified in this chapter; provided, that the
village shall bill a lessee or lessees obligated to pay such rates and charges
upon written notice delivered to the clerk of the village and executed by both
the owner or owners and the lessee or lessees of the connected property. The
rates and charges shall be due regardless of the person or persons billed
therefor or so designated to be billed therefor. (Ord. 177 § 8, 1976)
13.08.090: BILLINGS; PAYMENT:
All bills for rates, tolls and charges for sewer service or facilities
furnished or served by or through the system shall be rendered and payable as
set forth in section 13.04.070 of this title. (Ord. 308 § 10, 2001: Ord. 177 §
9, 1976)
13.08.100: DELINQUENT PAYMENTS:
Delinquent bills shall be subject to the provisions set forth in section
 13.04.070 of this title. (Ord. 308 § 11, 2001: Ord. 177 § 10, 1976)
13.08.110: DISCONNECTION:
Users whose sewer charges are delinquent are subject to disconnection as set
forth in section
13.04.075 of this title. (Ord. 308 § 11, 2001: Ord. 177 § 11, 1976)
13.08.120: CHARGES CONSTITUTE A LIEN:
Pursuant to the laws of New Mexico, this code and all laws thereunto enabling,
until paid, all rates, tolls or charges shall constitute a perpetual lien on
and against the property served, and such lien shall be forthwith foreclosed in
the manner provided by law. (Ord. 308 § 12, 2001: Ord. 177 § 12, 1976)
13.08.130: RECONNECTION TO SYSTEM:
Upon the payment in full of all rates, tolls and charges due in connection with
any inhabited property, service which has previously been shut off or
discontinued may be reestablished at the expense of any owner thereof, upon the
payment of a reconnection fee as set forth in section
13.04.075 of this title. (Ord. 308 § 13, 2001: Ord. 177 § 13, 1976)
13.08.140: REVISION OF RATES AND CHARGES:
Nothing in this chapter shall be so construed in such a manner as to prevent
the revision, modification, increase or decrease, by the board, from time to
time, of the rates, tolls and charges herein fixed, prescribed, established and
levied, subject to any limitation in any covenant of the village for the
protection of any holder of any bond, security or other obligation payable from
any revenues of the system or any part thereof. (Ord. 177 § 14, 1976)
13.08.150: AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE OFFICERS:
The officers of the village are authorized and directed to take all action
necessary or appropriate to collect the rates, tolls and charges prescribed in
this chapter and otherwise to effectuate the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
177 § 15, 1976)
CHAPTER 13.12
SEWER USE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
13.12.010: Short Title
13.12.020: Definitions
13.12.030: Discharge Of Industrial Liquid Wastes
13.12.040: Discharge Of Stormwater, Runoff And Wastewater
13.12.050: Storm Sewers
13.12.060: Prohibited Discharges Designated
13.12.070: Certain Harmful Wastes Prohibited
13.12.080: Authority Of Governing Body Of Village
13.12.090: Grease Traps In Public Food Preparation Facilities
13.12.100: Pit Toilets And Septic Tanks
13.12.110: Indoor Chemical Type Toilets
13.12.120: Flush Type Toilet Facilities
13.12.130: Sewer Service Line Connections
13.12.140: Violation; Penalty
13.12.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the SANITARY SEWER USE AND RATE ORDINANCE OF
HATCH. (Ord. 163 § 1, 1973)
13.12.020: DEFINITIONS:
BOD: Denoting biochemical oxygen demand, means the quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter by standard methods procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C) expressed in milligrams per
liter (mg/l).
COD: Denoting chemical oxygen demand, is a measure of the oxygen consuming
capacity of organic and inorganic matter present in wastewater as milligrams
per liter (mg/l).
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and
from the handling, storing and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL LIQUID WASTES: All waterborne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes
resulting from any industrial, manufacturing or food processing operation or
process, or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of
these with water or domestic sewage as distinct from normal domestic sewage.
Industrial manufacturing processes shall include, but are not limited to:
ordnance and accessories; food and allied products; tobacco manufacturers;
textile mill products; apparel and other finished products made from fabrics
and similar materials; lumber and wood products, except furniture and fixtures;
printing, publishing and allied industries; chemicals and allied products;
petroleum refining and related industries; rubber and miscellaneous plastics
products; leather and leather products; stone, clay, glass and concrete
products; primary metal industries; fabricated metal products, except ordnance,
machinery and transportation equipment; machinery, except electrical;
electrical machinery, equipment and supplies; transportation equipment;
professional, scientific and controlling instruments; photographic and optical
goods; watches and clocks, miscellaneous manufacturing industries.
INTERFERENCE WITH ANY WASTEWATER TREATMENT PROCESS: Any condition or
combination of conditions which cause degradation of the operational efficiency
of a wastewater facility.
MAYOR: The mayor of the village of Hatch, New Mexico, or his designated
representative.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Waterborne wastes normally discharging from the
sanitary convenience of buildings including apartment houses and hotels, office
buildings, factories and institutions, free from stormwater, surface water and
industrial wastes. "Normal domestic wastewater" means "normal" for Hatch, New
Mexico.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
of a solution.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have
equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER: The public sewer portion of a wastewater facility which
transports wastewater and to which storm, surface and ground water are not
intentionally admitted.
SERVICE LINE: The line carrying wastewater from a building to the sanitary
sewer system.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM: A system of disposing of wastes and includes sanitary sewers
and wastewater treatment works.
STORM SEWER: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but
excludes wastewater and polluted industrial wastes.
TRAP: A device for retaining sand, silt, grit, mineral material, petroleum
solvent, grease or oil by gravity differential separation from wastewater and
of a design and capacity approved by the village.
UNPOLLUTED PROCESS WATER: Any water or waste containing none of the following:
free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali, phenols, or other substances
in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and noxious or odorous gases.
WASTEWATER: The used water of a community. Such used water may be a combination
of the liquid and waterborne wastes from residences, commercial buildings and
institutions.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, transport and treat domestic wastewater and dispose of the effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating domestic wastewater and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with
"waste treatment plant," "wastewater treatment plant" or "sewage treatment
plant".
VILLAGE TRUSTEES: The village trustees of the village of Hatch, New Mexico.
(Ord. 163 § 2, 1973)
13.12.030: DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL LIQUID WASTES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any industrial liquid
wastes to any sanitary sewer except in accordance with the industrial liquid
waste ordinance of Hatch, and then only with the specific review and approval
of the village trustees. (Ord. 163 § 3, 1973)
13.12.040: DISCHARGE OF STORMWATER, RUNOFF AND WASTEWATER:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. This will
include wastewater from commercial carwash facilities and auto garages and
service stations where autos and machinery are cleaned and washed. (Ord. 163 §
4, 1973)
13.12.050: STORM SEWERS:
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved
by the governing body of the village. (Ord. 163 § 5, 1973)
13.12.060: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES DESIGNATED:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described liquids or wastes to any public sewers:
   A.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   B.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater facility, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works, including but not
limited to cyanides in excess of two milligrams per liter (2 mg/l) as CN in the
wastes as discharged to the public sewer;
   C.   Any herbicides and pesticides;
   D.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the wastewater facility;
   E.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
   F.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facility such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders. (Ord. 163 § 6, 1973)
13.12.070: CERTAIN HARMFUL WASTES PROHIBITED:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the governing body of the village that such wastes can harm the wastewater
facility, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In
forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the governing body
of the village will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature and capacity of the wastewater facility,
degree of treatability of wastes in the wastewater treatment works and other
pertinent factors. The substances which must be considered include but are not
limited to the following:
   A.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C);
   B.   Any water or waste containing fats, grease, wax or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F) (0 and 65°C);
   C.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder larger than those normally manufactured and
sold for residential and noncommercial use will not be installed without
specific review and approval by the governing body of the village. The
installation and operation of garbage grinders of any size or capacity is
prohibited in any food preparation facility serving the public;
   D.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment works employed, or are
emendable to treatment only to such degree that the effluent cannot meet the
requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving
waters. (Ord. 163 § 7, 1973)
13.12.080: AUTHORITY OF GOVERNING BODY OF VILLAGE:
   A.   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in section
13.12.070 of this chapter and which in the judgment of the governing body of
the village may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the governing body of the village may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers; or
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
   B.   If the governing body of the village permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the governing body of
the village and state and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws. (Ord. 163 § 8, 1973)
13.12.090: GREASE TRAPS IN PUBLIC FOOD PREPARATION FACILITIES:
All existing public food preparation facilities within the village limits, such
as restaurants, cafes; hotel and motel dining rooms, snack and sandwich bars,
hospitals and clinics must install and maintain approved grease traps by March
1, 1974, where approved traps do not now exist. All new public food preparation
facilities built after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter must construct approved grease traps as an integral part of such
facility. (Ord. 163 § 9, 1973)
13.12.100: PIT TOILETS AND SEPTIC TANKS:
The use of outdoor pit type toilets and septic tank sewage treatment systems
now existing within the village limits will be discontinued by March 1, 1974.
Exceptions will be allowed where sewer mains and laterals are not available for
service line connection. (Ord. 163 § 10, 1973)
13.12.110: INDOOR CHEMICAL TYPE TOILETS:
The use of all indoor chemical type toilets now existing within the village
limits will be discontinued by March 1, 1974. Exceptions will be allowed where
sewer mains and laterals are not available for service line connection. (Ord.
163 § 11, 1973)
13.12.120: FLUSH TYPE TOILET FACILITIES:
Flush type toilet facilities must be installed and connected to the village
sanitary sewer system by March 1, 1974, in all residences, motels, hotels,
hospitals and clinics and businesses providing public toilet facilities within
the village limits where these facilities do not now exist. Exceptions will be
allowed where sewer mains and laterals are not available for service
connection. (Ord. 163 § 12, 1973)
13.12.130: SEWER SERVICE LINE CONNECTIONS:
All sewer service lines connected to the village sewer system after the
effective date hereof must be made by a state licensed plumber and must comply
with the state plumbing code. (Ord. 163 § 13, 1973)
13.12.140: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Every person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment for not
more than thirty (30) days or both and each day this chapter is violated shall
constitute a separate offense. The conviction and punishment of any person for
violation shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any fee
due or unpaid at the time of such conviction and nothing herein shall prevent a
criminal prosecution of any violation of the provisions of this chapter. All
remedies prescribed or liens created hereunder or under the provisions of the
law for collection and enforcement of the fees shall be cumulative and the use
of one or more remedies by the village trustees shall not bar the use of any
other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or any
liens created by the law. The fees fixed by this chapter shall be a lien in
favor of the village upon the personal property of the person used in
connection with the sewer use which gave rise to the fee and such lien shall be
imposed, collected, enforced and paid as provided by the law. No property of
any person shall be exempt from levy and sale of execution issued for the
collection of a judgment for any fee imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 163 § 17,
1973)
TITLE 14
RESERVED
TITLE 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Fire Limits   15.04
Electrical Installations   15.08
Gas Code (Rep. by Ord. 401, 2019)   15.12
Flood Damage Prevention   15.16
CHAPTER 15.04
FIRE LIMITS
SECTION:
15.04.010: Fire Limits Designated
15.04.020: Permit Required For Construction
15.04.030: Permit Application; Form
15.04.040: Permit Application; Filing And Fee
15.04.050: Building Design
15.04.060: Foundations
15.04.070: Construction Specifications
15.04.080: Openings In Walls
15.04.090: Roof Coverings
15.04.100: Ends Of Floors, Ceilings And Beams
15.04.110: Chimneys
15.04.120: Smoke Pipes
15.04.130: Vent Flues Or Ducts
15.04.140: Floor Area Between Fire Walls
15.04.150: Frame Or Wooden Buildings
15.04.160: Buildings Housing Hazardous Occupancies
15.04.170: Gas, Oil Or Charcoal Burning Stoves
15.04.180: Storage Of Combustible Materials
15.04.190: Removal Of Damaged Frame Buildings
15.04.200: Violation; Penalty
15.04.010: FIRE LIMITS DESIGNATED:
The following described boundaries shall constitute the fire limits of the
village of Hatch, and all blocks, portions of blocks, streets or alleys or
parts of streets or alleys, and all lands lying or situated within the
described boundaries shall come within the meaning of this chapter and shall be
subject to the regulations and provisions set forth in this chapter:
Beginning at a point in the middle line track of the A.T. & S.F. railway which
would be intersected by an extension of the north and south centerline of
Wilson Avenue in the Weiler Addition to the Town of Hatch and running along
said line until it intersects the centerline of the alley running east and west
through the west half of Block 1, of the said Weiler Addition; thence east
along said centerline of said alley to a point in the center of the alley
running north and south through said block; thence north along the centerline
of said alley to a point which intersects the centerline of Davis Street;
thence east along said centerline of Davis Street to a point which intersects
the east boundary of Clapp's Subdivision of the village of Hatch; thence south
along said east boundary of said subdivision to a point in the center of the
main line tract of said railway; thence westerly along said centerline of said
main line track to its junction with the switch or house track, which is north
of the main line track; thence following westerly along the centerline of said
house track to its intersection with the aforesaid main line track; thence
westerly along said centerline to the place of beginning.
Beginning at a point where Hall Street intersects the A.T. & S.F. railroad
right-of-way, thence north to Davis Street; thence west along Davis Street to
Buckelew (now known as Carr Street); thence south from Davis Street to the A.T.
& S.F. railroad right of way; thence east along the A.T. & S.F. right of way to
the place of beginning, or where Hall Street intersects the A.T. & S.F. right
of way property.
(Ord. 118 § 1, 1966: Ord. 77 § 1, 1957: Ord. 64, 1940: Ord. 50, 1936: Ord. 38 §
1, 1934)
15.04.020: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   No wall, structure, building or part thereof shall hereafter be built,
enlarged or altered within the aforesaid fire limits until a plan of the
proposed work, together with a statement of the materials to be used shall have
been submitted to the board of trustees, who shall, if they are in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, issue a permit for the proposed
construction.
   B.   Structures hereafter erected without a permit shall be removed by
proceedings as provided by law.
   C.   No building within said limits shall be moved and no building shall be
moved into the area within said fire limits until a permit has been obtained
from the mayor who shall not issue the permit if, in his judgment, the proposed
new location of the building would seriously increase the fire hazard of the
surrounding buildings. Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the mayor
may appeal to the board of trustees at its next regular meeting. (Ord. 50,
1936: Ord. 38 § 2, 1934)
15.04.030: PERMIT APPLICATION; FORM:
All applications for permits under section
 15.04.020 of this chapter shall be in writing, signed by the owner, lessee, or
agent, and shall state the lot and block upon which the work proposed is to be
done, the purpose for which the building, wall or structure is to be used, and
such application shall be accompanied with full and complete specifications for
such work. (Ord. 38 § 3, 1934)
15.04.040: PERMIT APPLICATION; FILING AND FEE:
Such applications shall be filed with the clerk of the village and the permits,
when granted, shall be issued by the clerk under the seal of the village. The
permittee shall pay a fee of three dollars ($3.00) for the first one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or fraction thereof, and two dollars ($2.00) per thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
fractional part thereof, of the value of the work or the contract price, before
delivery of the permit, said fee, or such part thereof as may be necessary to
be used to compensate a competent building inspector for his services in
connection with the proving and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 38 § 4, 1934)
15.04.050: BUILDING DESIGN:
All parts of every building shall be designed to carry safely the loads to be
imposed thereon, and in all other respects shall conform to good engineering
practice. (Ord. 38 § 5, 1934)
15.04.060: FOUNDATIONS:
Foundations for all buildings, except permissible wooden structures erected
within the fire limits of the village, shall not be of less width than the
thickness of walls which are to rest upon them as prescribed in this chapter,
and footings for the foundations of one-story buildings shall be at least four
inches (4") thick and eight inches (8") wider than the foundations. Footings
for buildings more than one story shall be at least six inches (6") thick and
eight inches (8") wider than foundations. (Ord. 38 § 6, 1934)
15.04.070: CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
No wall, structure, or building shall be erected, built, enlarged or altered
unless the plans for such construction comply with the following provisions:
   A.   Walls constructed of brick or concrete shall have at least the
thickness prescribed as follows:
      1.   One-story building of concrete, eight inches (8");
      2.   One-story building of brick, twelve inches (12");
      3.   Two-story building of concrete, ten inches (10") for the first story
and eight inches (8") for the second story;
      4.   Two-story building of brick, thirteen inches (13") for the first
story and nine inches (9") for the second story;
      5.   Three-story building of concrete, eighteen inches (18") for the
first story, twelve inches (12") for the second story, and eight inches (8")
for the third story;
      6.   Three-story building of brick, eighteen inches (18") for the first
story, fourteen inches (14") for the second story, and ten inches (10") for the
third story.
   B.   Stone walls shall be three inches (3") thicker than brick walls.
   C.   Walls constructed of adobe shall not be less than the following
thickness:
      1.   Two-story building, eighteen inches (18") for the first story and
ten inches (10") for the second story;
      2.   One-story building, twelve inches (12").
   D.   All division and party walls shall extend the full thickness of the top
story to at least two feet (2') above the roof surface of the building as a
parapet, and shall be properly coped.
   E.   Cornices and copings shall be of fireproof material. (Ord. 38 § 7,
1934)
15.04.080: OPENINGS IN WALLS:
No opening in an interior masonry wall shall exceed ten feet by seven feet (10'
x 7'). If the opening is in a party wall or fire wall it shall have a standard
automatic fire door. If an opening in a fire wall is made to serve as an
emergency exit, it shall not exceed forty eight feet (48') in area, and a self-
closing fire door shall be substituted for one of the automatic fire doors. The
total openings in a fire wall shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) in
linear length of the wall. (Ord. 38 § 8, 1934)
15.04.090: ROOF COVERINGS:
Every building hereafter erected within the fire limits shall have a standard
fire resisting roof covering and no existing wooden shingle roof, if damaged
more than twenty five percent (25%) shall be renewed or repaired, other than
with metal or other fire resisting material as approved by the National Board
of Fire Underwriters. (Ord. 38 § 9, 1934)
15.04.100: ENDS OF FLOORS, CEILINGS AND BEAMS:
   A.   The ends of all floors, ceilings, or roof beams, entering a party or
fire wall from opposite sides, shall be separated by at least six inches (6")
of solid masonry. Such preparation may be obtained by corbeling the wall or
staggering the wall, or the beams may be supported by steel wall hangers, but
no wall shall be corbeled more than four inches (4") for this purpose. The ends
of all wooden beams which enter walls shall be cut to level to make them self-
releasing.
   B.   No wooden beams or joists shall be placed within two inches (2") of the
outside face of a chimney or flue, whether the same is for smoke, air or any
other purpose.
   C.   No woodwork shall be within four inches (4") of the back wall of any
fireplace.
   D.   All spaces between chimneys and wooden beams shall be solidly filled
with mortar, mineral wool, or other incombustible material. (Ord. 38 § 10,
1934)
15.04.110: CHIMNEYS:
All chimneys shall be constructed of brick or other incombustible material
lined with terra cotta and must extend from the foundation to at least three
feet (3') above flat roof surfaces and two feet (2') above pitched roof
surfaces. Flue openings must be at least nine inches (9") from ceilings or any
partition containing wood or other combustible material. (Ord. 38 § 11, 1934)
15.04.120: SMOKE PIPES:
   A.   No smoke pipe shall be within nine inches (9") of any woodwork or any
wooden lath and plaster partition or ceiling.
   B.   Where smoke pipes pass through a wooden lath and plaster partition or
ceiling, they shall be guarded by galvanized iron thimbles at least twelve
inches (12") larger in diameter than the pipes, or by galvanized iron thimbles
built in at least eight inches (8") of brick work or other incombustible
materials. No smoke pipe shall pass through any floor or combustible roof of
any building. (Ord. 38 § 12, 1934)
15.04.130: VENT FLUES OR DUCTS:
Vent flues or ducts, for the removal of foul or vitiated air, in which the
temperature of the air cannot exceed that of the rooms, shall be constructed of
metal or other incombustible material, and shall not be placed nearer than two
inches (2") to any woodwork, and no such flue shall be used for any purpose
other than that. (Ord. 38 § 13, 1934)
15.04.140: FLOOR AREA BETWEEN FIRE WALLS:
The floor area between fire walls of nonfireproof buildings shall not exceed
the following, unless equipped with approved automatic sprinklers, in which
case the floor area may be fifty percent (50%) greater: when fronting on one
street, five thousand (5,000) square feet; when fronting on two (2) streets,
six thousand (6,000) square feet; when fronting on three (3) streets, seven
thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. (Ord. 38 § 14, 1934)
15.04.150: FRAME OR WOODEN BUILDINGS:
No frame or wooden structure shall be built or moved within the fire limits
hereafter established, except the following, and all roofs placed upon such
buildings or structures shall have an incombustible covering:
   A.   Temporary one-story frame buildings for the use of builders;
   B.   One-story sheds not over fifteen feet (15') high, open on the long side
with sides covered with incombustible material, and with an area of not
exceeding five hundred (500) square feet;
   C.   Wooden fences not over ten feet (10') high;
   D.   Piazzas or balconies not exceeding ten feet (10') in width nor
extending more than three feet (3') above the second story floor beams. No such
structure shall extend beyond the lot line, or be joined to any similar
structure of another building;
   E.   Bay windows when covered with incombustible material;
   F.   Privies not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area and
nine feet (9') in height. (Ord. 38 § 15, 1934)
15.04.160: BUILDINGS HOUSING HAZARDOUS OCCUPANCIES:
   A.   No building shall be used for a public garage, filling station, coffee
roaster, bakery, paint shop, or other responsible hazardous occupancy within
the fire limits unless it has incombustible floors and partitions, metal lath
and plaster or equivalent ceilings and masonry walls.
   B.   Buildings within the fire limits used for dry cleaning shall not
contain more than a total of three hundred feet (300') of floor area and shall
be constructed entirely of incombustible material. Such buildings shall not be
located within ten feet (10') of other buildings.
   C.   No building shall be used for the exhibition of moving pictures unless
the motion pictures machine or device, before being operated is installed in a
booth constructed entirely of substantially incombustible material, including
floor and ceilings. The booth must not be placed directly over an exit, and in
all cases must be securely supported or fastened so as to prevent dislodgment
in case of panic. Each booth must be not less than six feet (6') in height and
six feet (6') in width, with an additional three feet (3') in width for each
additional picture machine or stereopticon over one. All openings must be
provided with standard automatic fire doors. Each booth must be provided with
an unobstructed metal vent, at least ten inches (10") in diameter, to the
outside of the building, said vent to be properly insulated from combustible
material. (Ord. 38 § 16, 1934)
15.04.170: GAS, OIL OR CHARCOAL BURNING STOVES:
All gas, gasoline, oil or charcoal burning stoves or hearing devices shall be
placed on iron stands at least six inches (6") above the combustible supports,
unless the burners are at least five inches (5") above the base, with metal
guard plates four inches (4") below the burners. (Ord. 38 § 17, 1934)
15.04.180: STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS:
No person, persons, company, partnership or corporation shall store or cause to
be stored, or pile or cause to be piled upon any lot or space within the fire
limits, any wood, lumber or other combustible material, nor construct or cause
to be constructed, any outhouse, shed, or other buildings or structures within
said fire limits without first obtaining a permit from the board of trustees.
(Ord. 38 § 18, 1934)
15.04.190: REMOVAL OF DAMAGED FRAME BUILDINGS:
Any existing frame building within the fire limits which may hereafter be
damaged by fire, decay, or any other cause, like or unlike, to the extent of
fifty percent (50%) of its value, exclusive of the foundation shall not be
repaired or built but shall be removed by the owner, and if not removed by the
owner, such building shall be removed by order of the board of trustees within
thirty (30) days after five (5) days' notice to the owner, lessee, or occupant,
if any, has been given. (Ord. 38 § 19, 1934)
15.04.200: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, association, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00). If any
violation of this chapter shall extend over a period of more than one day, then
each day on which such violation occurs shall be and constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 38 § 20, 1934)
CHAPTER 15.08
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS
SECTION:
15.08.010: Office Of Electrical Inspector Created
15.08.020: Appointment Of Electrical Inspector
15.08.030: Permit Required For Alterations Or Additions
15.08.040: Inspection Of Wiring
15.08.050: Issuance Of Certificate Of Inspection
15.08.060: Conduit And Service Cabinet Specifications
15.08.070: Recordkeeping
15.08.080: Permit Application And Fees
15.08.090: Appeal When Electrical Work Is Condemned
15.08.100: Periodic Inspections By Electrical Inspector
15.08.110: Right Of Entry
15.08.120: Fire Limits
15.08.130: Violation; Penalty
15.08.010: OFFICE OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR CREATED:
There is created the office of electrical inspector. The person appointed to
fill the office of electrical inspector shall be a competent electrician and
shall be well versed in the approved methods of electrical construction for
safety to life and property, the electrical bulletins of the Mountain States
inspection bureau, the National Board of Fire Underwriters electrical code and
the national electrical safety code of the bureau of standards, and shall be of
good moral character. (Ord. 49 § 1, 1935)
15.08.020: APPOINTMENT OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
The electrical inspector shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of
the board of trustees of the village and shall hold office for such time as the
board of trustees may deem advisable and at their pleasure. (Ord. 49 § 2, 1935)
15.08.030: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS:
No alterations or additions shall be made in the existing wiring of any
building after inspection, without first notifying the electrical inspector
(and no alterations or additions shall be made in the existing wiring of any
building) nor shall any building be wired for the placing of any electrical
lights, motors, hearing devices, or any apparatus requiring the use of
electrical current, nor shall any alterations be made in any electrical
appliances or the wiring in any building after inspection, without first
notifying the electrical inspector and securing a permit therefor, as provided
in section
15.08.080 of this chapter, except minor repair work such as repairing flush and
snap switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles, tapping
bare joints and repairing drop cords. (Ord. 49 § 3, 1935)
15.08.040: INSPECTION OF WIRING:
Upon the completion of the wiring of any building, it shall be the duty of the
person, firm, or corporation doing the same to notify the electrical inspector,
who shall inspect the installation within twenty four (24) hours of the time
such notice is given; and if it is found to be fully in compliance with this
chapter and does not constitute a hazard to life and/or property, he shall
issue a certificate of inspection authorizing connection to the electrical
service and the turning on of the current. All wires which are to be hidden
from view shall be inspected before concealment, and any person, firm, or
corporation installing such wires shall notify the electrical inspector, giving
him twenty four (24) hours in which to make the required inspection before
wires are covered up. (Ord. 49 § 4, 1935)
15.08.050: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION:
No certificate of inspection shall be issued unless the electric light, power
or heating installation and all other electrical circuits and apparatus to be
connected are in strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and
unless they are in conformity with the approved methods of construction for
safety to life and property; the regulations laid down in the national
electrical code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, the electrical
bulletins of the Mountain States inspection bureau, and the national electrical
safety code of the bureau of standards shall be prima facie evidence of such
approved methods. (Ord. 49 § 5, 1935)
15.08.060: CONDUIT AND SERVICE CABINET SPECIFICATIONS:
All electrical wiring hereafter installed, including additional extensions, or
changes in existing wiring, used for the transmission of current for light,
heat or power, in or on all buildings located within the fire limits shall be
installed in approved steel conduits or metal molding. All electrical services
hereafter installed for buildings located within or without the fire limits and
within the corporate limits of Hatch shall be in approved metal conduits
equipped at the outer end with an approved service or conduit fitting, and
shall run continuously without outlet or junction box, into a service cabinet
of approved steel construction with the Underwriter's label or approval
attached thereto. Said cabinet shall be located within the walls of the
building in the nearest accessible place to the point where the wires enter the
building, but in no case fifteen feet (15') from point of entrance except in
cases where an approved weatherproof cabinet may be used. The cabinet shall be
so hung that the handle of the service switch shall not be more than seven feet
(7') above a permanent floor or ground level. Conduits and cabinets are to be
securely bonded and grounded, but in no case shall the conduit system be used
to ground secondary systems. Conductors of electricity for all underground
services and all conductors in or beneath basement floors shall be considered
as subject to moisture and must be lead sheathed. (Ord. 49 § 6, 1935)
15.08.070: RECORDKEEPING:
The electrical inspector shall keep complete records of all permits issued and
inspections made and other official work performed under the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 49 § 7, 1935)
15.08.080: PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEES:
   A.   Application for permit to install electric wires and appliances shall
be made to the electrical inspector by the person, firm, or corporation
installing such wires and appliances, and the following fees paid to the
village clerk:
      1.   A minimum charge of one dollar ($1.00) for installation for two (2)
circuits or less; for three (3) to five (5) circuits, one dollar ($1.00) for
the first two (2) circuits and fifty cents ($0.50) for each additional circuit;
six (6) to twenty five (25) circuits, two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) for the
first five (5) circuits and twenty five cents ($0.25) for each additional
circuit; twenty six (26) to fifty (50) or more circuits, seven dollars fifty
cents ($7.50) for the first twenty five (25) circuits and ten cents ($0.10) for
each additional circuit;
      2.   A minimum charge of one dollar ($1.00) for the inspection of ten
(10) fixtures or less; more than ten (10) fixtures, one dollar ($1.00) for the
first ten (10) and five cents ($0.05) for each additional fixture;
      3.   A minimum charge of one dollar ($1.00) for the installation of two
(2) arc lamps, mercury vapor lamps, or fans or less; for more than two (2), one
dollar ($1.00) for the first two (2) and twenty five cents ($0.25) for each
additional lamp or fan shall be charged;
      4.   Fees for inspecting motor, generator (including feeders), and
heating appliances shall be one dollar ($1.00) for the first machine or
appliance and fifty cents ($0.50) for each additional machine or appliance up
to five (5); additional machines or appliances more than five (5) shall be
twenty five cents ($0.25) each;
      5.   Each heating device shall be the same as one motor or generator.
   B.   The village clerk shall issue a receipt for such fees and the
electrical inspector, upon presentation of the receipt for such fees shall
issue a permit and proceed to make inspection as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 49 § 8, 1935)
15.08.090: APPEAL WHEN ELECTRICAL WORK IS CONDEMNED:
When the electrical inspector condemns all or part of the electrical work in
any building, the owner may, within five (5) days after receiving written
notice from the electrical inspector, file a petition in writing for review of
said action of the electrical inspector to the board of trustees, upon the
receipt of which, the board of trustees shall at once proceed to determine
whether said electrical construction complies with this chapter, and within
three (3) days from the date of the meeting held for the purpose of such
decision, shall make a decision in accordance with the finding. (Ord. 49 § 9,
1935)
15.08.100: PERIODIC INSPECTIONS BY ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
The electrical inspector periodically shall make a thorough examination of all
the electrical wires and appliances installed within the village and when such
wires or appliances are found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, he
shall notify the person, firm, or corporation owning, using, operating or
installing the same to place them in a safe condition. Any person, firm or
corporation failing or refusing to make the necessary repairs or changes, and
have such work completed within fifteen (15) days, or any longer period as may
be deemed reasonable by the electrical inspector, after the receipt of said
notice, shall forfeit and pay into the village treasury a sum of five dollars
($5.00) for each day which shall elapse after expiration of the period, and the
electrical inspector is empowered with authority to order the discontinuance of
electrical service to such defective wires or appliances until they have been
repaired, removed or changed as directed by the electrical inspector, subject
to the limitation of this chapter. (Ord. 49 § 10, 1935)
15.08.110: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The electrical inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter
any public or private buildings in the discharge of his official duties, or for
the purpose of making any inspection or test of the electric wires and
appliances contained therein, and shall have the authority to order the
discontinuance and cause the turning off of all electrical currents and to cut
or disconnect in cases of emergency any wire where such electrical currents are
dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the fire
department. (Ord. 49 § 11, 1935)
15.08.120: FIRE LIMITS:
The fire limits within the meaning and intent of this chapter shall be the same
as those set forth and established in chapter 15.04 of this code, or subsequent
amendments thereto, for prevention of the erection of certain types of
buildings which might constitute a fire hazard. (Ord. 49 § 12, 1935)
15.08.130: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars
($50.00), and in default thereof, by imprisonment not less than ten (10) nor
more than ninety (90) days, together with the costs of prosecution. (Ord. 49 §
13, 1935)
CHAPTER 15.12
GAS CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 401, 2019)
CHAPTER 15.16
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
15.16.010: Statutory Authorization
15.16.020: Findings Of Fact
15.16.030: Statement Of Purpose
15.16.040: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
15.16.050: Definitions
15.16.060: Lands To Which This Chapter Applies
15.16.070: Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
15.16.080: Establishment Of Development Permit
15.16.090: Compliance
15.16.100: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
15.16.110: Interpretation
15.16.120: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
15.16.130: Designation Of Floodplain Administrator
15.16.140: Duties And Responsibilities Of Floodplain Administrator
15.16.150: Permit Procedures
15.16.160: Variance Procedures
15.16.170: Flood Hazard Reduction General Standards
15.16.180: Flood Hazard Reduction Specific Standards
15.16.190: Standards For Subdivision Proposals
15.16.200: Severability
15.16.210: Penalties For Noncompliance
15.16.010: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state of New Mexico has in statutes amended 1978,
section 3-18-7, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to
adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the village of
Hatch in Dona Ana County, New Mexico, does ordain as follows. (Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.020: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the village of Hatch are subject to periodic
inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.030: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area. (Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.040: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may
increase flood damage;
   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.050: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path
of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan
flooding can occur.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of property as
the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the
use of the principal structure.
AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD: The land area that would be inundated
by the one percent (1%) annual chance (100-year) flood based on future
conditions hydrology.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a
community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR,
AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A,
AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from the flood that has a one percent (1%) chance of equaling or
exceeding that level in any given year; also called the base flood.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL: A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has
its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear
walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an
examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or
flood related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the
administrator, where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow)
related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as zones A,
M, and/or E.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): See definition of Flood Elevation Study.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY: See definition of Regulatory Floodway.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior; or
      2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is: a) built on a single chassis; b) four
hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections; c) designed to be self- propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: See definition of Area Of Special Flood Hazard.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal barrier resources act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not, however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions, or b) any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.060: LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the village of Hatch. (Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.070: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled,
"the flood insurance study (FIS) for Doña Ana County, New Mexico, dated July 6,
2016 with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and FIRM dated July 6, 2016.
(Ord. 426, 2025: Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.080: ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.090: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.100: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 380,
2016)
15.16.110: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
a) considered as minimum requirements; b) liberally construed in favor of the
governing body; and c) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under state statutes. (Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.120: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 380,
2016)
15.16.130: DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
The Dona Ana County flood commission by joint powers agreement is hereby
appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (emergency
management and assistance - national flood insurance program regulations)
pertaining to floodplain management. (Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.140: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Review permit application to ensure that the proposed building site
project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding.
   C.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
   D.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
   E.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
   F.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency which is the department of homeland security and emergency
management, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management agency.
   G.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained.
   H.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
section
15.16.070 of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of sections
15.16.170 through
15.16.210 of this chapter.
   I.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and
AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. (Ord. 426,
2025: Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.150: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to
the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but
not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
      3.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of subsection
15.16.180B of this chapter;
      4.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
      5.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
subsection
15.16.140A of this chapter.
   B.   Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use. (Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.160: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and
render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
   B.   The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   C.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may
appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   D.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency
management agency upon request.
   E.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or
the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   F.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection
15.16.150B of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one- half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
   G.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter (see section
 15.16.030 of this chapter).
   H.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   I.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   J.   The prerequisites for granting variances are:
      1.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      2.   Variances shall only be issued upon: a) showing a good and
sufficient cause; b) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and c) a determination that
the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
      3.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   K.   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that: 1) the criteria outlined in
subsections A through I of this section are met, and 2) the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and create no additional threats to public safety. (Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.170: FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION GENERAL STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for
all new construction and substantial improvements:
   A.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   B.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   C.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   D.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   E.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
   F.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
   G.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.180: FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in: a) section
15.16.070, b) subsection
15.16.140H, or c) subsection
15.16.190C of this chapter, the following provisions are required:
   A.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement),
elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in
subsection
15.16.150A1 of this chapter, is satisfied.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
   C.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
      1.   A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
      2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
      3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   D.   Manufactured Homes:
      1.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a
community's FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize
flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be
elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      2.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: a)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, b) in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision, or d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      3.   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-
30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of
this subsection D be elevated so that either:
         a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base
flood elevation, or
         b.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
   E.    Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones). Located within
the areas of special flood hazard established in section
15.16.070 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) foot to three (3)
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. Therefore, the following provisions
apply:
      1.   All new construction, substantial improvements, and reconstruction
due to substantial damage of residential structures, including all equipment or
mechanical items servicing the structure, shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one (1)
foot above the BFE specified on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if
no BFE is specified).
      2.   All new construction, substantial improvements and reconstruction
due to substantial damage, of nonresidential structures, including all
equipment or mechanical items servicing the structure shall:
         a.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth number specified
in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is
specified); or
         b.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effect of buoyancy.
      3.   A registered professional engineer or surveyor shall submit a
certification to the ESD, for review by the floodplain administrator, that the
standards of this section, as proposed in section
15.16.170, are satisfied.
      4.   Within zone AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes shall be required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
   F.   Recreational Vehicles:
      1.   Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-
30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
         a.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days, or
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
         c.   Meet the permit requirements of section
15.16.170, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured
homes" in section D of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions. (Ord. 426, 2025: Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.190: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS:
   A.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections
15.16.020,
15.16.030, and
15.16.040 of this chapter.
   B.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain
development permit requirements of sections
15.16.080 and
15.16.150 of this chapter, and the provisions of sections
15.16.170 through
15.16.210 of this chapter.
   C.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section
15.16.070 or subsection
15.16.140H of this chapter.
   D.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
   E.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.200: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said
holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter. (Ord. 380, 2016)
15.16.210: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) per day for each violation, and in
addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the village of Hatch from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 380, 2016)
TITLE 16
SUBDIVISIONS
Subdivision Regulations   16.04
CHAPTER 16.04
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
16.04.010: Title
16.04.020: Statutory Authority And Jurisdiction
16.04.030: Severability
16.04.040: Purpose
16.04.050: Interpretation; Conflicting Provisions
16.04.060: Prior Penalties, Actions, Liabilities, Or Rights
16.04.070: Definitions
16.04.080: Platting Procedures And Requirements
16.04.090: Engineering And Design Standards
16.04.100: Resubdivision By Description
16.04.110: Modification Of Requirements; Hardship
16.04.120: Alternate Summary Procedure
16.04.130: Approval Necessary For Utility Service
16.04.140: Penalties
16.04.150: Fees
16.04.010: TITLE:
The requirements in this chapter shall be called the LAND SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS OF THE VILLAGE OF HATCH. (Ord. 319 § 1, 2003)
16.04.020: STATUTORY AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION:
These regulations are created and adopted pursuant to the authority set forth
in New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, sections 3-19-5, 3-19-6 and 3-20-
1 through 3-20-16. The land subdivision regulations of the village of Hatch
shall be applicable to all the territory within the present municipal
boundaries of all the village, all territory within the area of
extraterritorial planning and platting jurisdiction, and, if annexation of land
to the village should occur, to the annexed land and the new extraterritorial
jurisdiction that is a consequence of the annexation. (Ord. 319 § 2, 2003)
16.04.030: SEVERABILITY:
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision of this chapter,
for any reason, be held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the
invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph, sentence, clause or
provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 319 § 2.1, 2003)
16.04.040: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is that of ensuring sites suitable for building
purposes and human habitation, of providing for the harmonious development of
the village, of providing adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light
and air, of providing proper distribution of population, and creating
conditions favorable to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens. Additionally, it is a purpose of this chapter to ensure that the
subdivision originate at no cost to the municipality. (Ord. 319 § 3, 2003)
16.04.050: INTERPRETATION; CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
necessary for the promotion of the public health and general welfare.
   B.   Conflicting Provisions:
      1.   Public Provisions: This chapter is not intended to interfere with,
abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other
provisions of law except as noted in this chapter. Where any provisions of this
chapter impose restrictions different from those imposed by any other
ordinance, rule or regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions
are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
      2.   Private Provisions: This chapter is not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, provided that,
where the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other private
agreement or restriction, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Where
the provisions of the easement, covenant, or private agreement or restriction
impose duties and obligations more restrictive than this chapter and such
private provisions are not inconsistent with this chapter or determinations
thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to
this chapter and determinations made thereunder. (Ord. 319 § 4, 2003)
16.04.060: PRIOR PENALTIES, ACTIONS, LIABILITIES, OR RIGHTS:
This chapter shall not be construed as abating any action now pending or by
virtue of prior existing subdivision regulations, or discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting
the liability of any person, or as waiving any right of the village under any
section or provision existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, or as
vacating and annulling any rights obtained by any person by lawful action of
the village, except as shall be expressly provided for in this chapter. (Ord.
319 § 5, 2003)
16.04.070: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates to the
contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used
in the plural number include the singular, the word "herein" means in. The word
"person" includes a corporation, a partnership and an incorporated association
of persons such as a club. The term "shall" is always mandatory. The term
"building" includes "structure". The term "building" or "structure" includes
any part thereof. The term "used" or "occupied", as applied to any land or
building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied". The following words, terms, phrases, when
used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALLEY: A public or private right of way primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on some other street.
APPLICANT: The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his representative.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, or boundary lines of
municipalities.
BOND OR PERFORMANCE BOND: Any form of security, including a cash deposit,
surety bond, collateral, property or instruments of credit, in an amount and
form satisfactory to the council.
BUILDING: Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels or movable property of any kind.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM: A proposed schedule of all future municipal
improvement projects listed in order of construction priority, together with
cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project.
COMMISSION: The planning commission of the village of Hatch.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The document or part thereof, officially adopted by the
village trustees, which provides for the development of the village and which
indicates, the general locations recommended for major roadways, parks, public
utilities and buildings, and land uses.
CONSTRUCTION PLAN: The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and
showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the
subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the council as a condition
of the approval of the plat.
CUL-DE-SAC: A local street with only one common inlet/outlet and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
DEVELOPER: The owner of land proposed to be subdivided, or his representative.
EASEMENT: Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a
specified purpose of any designated part of his property.
ESCROW: A deposit of cash with the local government in lieu of an amount
required and still in force on a performance or maintenance bond.
FINAL PLAT: The map, plan or record of a subdivision and any accompanying
material, as described in this chapter.
FRONTAGE: That side of a lot abutting on a street or way and ordinarily
regarded as the front of the lot, but it shall not be considered as the
ordinary side of a corner lot.
GRADE: The slope of a road, street or other public way, specified in percentage
terms.
LOT IMPROVEMENT: Any building, structure, work of art or other object, or
improvement of the land on which they are situated, constituting a physical
betterment a real property.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION: All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions,
including, but not limited to, subdivisions of four (4) or more lots, or any
size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of village facilities or
the creation of any public improvements.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision containing not more than three (3) lots
fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road or the
creation of any public improvements, and not adversely affecting the remainder
of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or
portion of the comprehensive plan, the zoning code, the official zoning map or
this chapter.
MODEL HOME: A dwelling used initially for display purposes which typifies the
units that will be constructed in the subdivision.
MUNICIPALITY: The village, as incorporated by state law.
NEIGHBORHOOD PARK AND RECREATION IMPROVEMENT FUND: A special fund established
by the village to retain monies contributed in accordance with the "fee in lieu
of land" provisions of this chapter, to develop land within reasonable
proximity of the land to be subdivided so as to be of local use to the future
residents of the subdivision.
NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION: A subdivision whose intended use is other than
residential, such as commercial, or industrial subdivisions.
OFF SITE: Any premises not located within the area of the property to be
subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for
subdivision approval.
ORDINANCE: Any legislative action of a local government which has the force of
law, including any amendment or repeal of any ordinance.
OWNER: Any person, group of persons, firm, corporation or other legal entity
having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to
be subdivided under this chapter.
PERIMETER STREET: Any existing street to which the parcel of land to be
subdivided abuts on only one side.
PLANNING AUTHORITY: The planning authority for the village shall be the
planning commission.
PLAT: A map, chart, survey, plan or replat, certified by a New Mexico licensed
registered land surveyor, containing a description of the subdivided land with
ties to permanent monuments.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: The preliminary drawings, described in this chapter,
indicating the proposed manner of layout of the subdivision.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk,
pedestrianway, tree, lawn, off street parking area, lot improvement or other
facility for which the village may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation, or which may effect an improvement for which village
responsibility is established.
REGISTERED ARCHITECT: An architect licensed and registered in the state of New
Mexico.
REGISTERED ENGINEER: An engineer licensed and registered in the state of New
Mexico.
RESUBDIVISION: A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat,
if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon
for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan legally
recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water
main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or trees, or for another special use.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street right of way intended for driving or parking.
SALE AND LEASE: Any immediate or future transfer of ownership or any possessory
interest in land, including a contract for sale, lease, interstate succession,
or other written instrument.
SKETCH PLAT: A sketch preparatory to the preparation of the preliminary plat
(or final plat in the case of minor subdivisions) to enable the subdivider to
save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the planning
commission as to the form of the plat and the objectives of this chapter.
STREET: A general term used to describe a paved right of way, municipally or
privately owned, serving as a means of vehicular travel. Streets are classified
by function as follows:
Arterial Street: A street designed to carry large amounts of traffic across or
through the village and designated as such by the comprehensive plan.
Collector Street: A street connecting local residential streets to each other,
to community facilities and to principal or minor arterial streets.
Local Street: A street intended to serve and provide access exclusively to the
properties abutting thereon, and not connecting with other streets in such a
manner as to encourage through traffic.
Service Street: A street running parallel to a freeway, expressway or other
roadway, and serving abutting properties, also called a frontage road.
STREET, DEAD END: "Dead end street" means a street or a portion of street with
only one vehicular traffic outlet.
SUBDIVIDE OR SUBDIVISION: For the purpose of approval by the planning
commission, means:
   A.   For the area of land within the corporate boundaries of the village,
the division of land into two (2) or more parts by platting or by metes and
bounds descriptions into tracts for the purposes set forth in this definition;
and
   B.   For the area of land within the village extraterritorial subdivision
and platting jurisdiction the division of land into two (2) or more parts by
platting or by metes and bounds description into tracts of less than five (5)
acres in any one calendar year for the purposes set forth in this definition.
   C.   The division of land pursuant to this definition shall be for the
purpose of:
      1.   Sale for building purposes;
      2.   Laying out a municipality or any part thereof;
      3.   Adding to a municipality;
      4.   Laying out suburban lots; or
      5.   Resubdivision.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person who, having an interest in land, causes it, directly or
indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision; or who, directly or indirectly,
sells, leases or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or develop, or advertises
for sale, lease or development, any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit or plat
in a subdivision; or who engages directly or through an agent in the business
of selling, leasing, developing or offering for sale, lease or development a
subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel, site or plat in a subdivision; and
who is directly or indirectly controlled by or under direct or indirect common
control with any of the persons mentioned in this definition.
SUBDIVISION AGENT: Any person who represents or acts for or on behalf of a
subdivider.
SUBDIVISION PLAT: The final map or drawings, described in this chapter, on
which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the planning
commission and the council for approval and which, if approved, shall be
submitted to the county clerk or recorder of deeds for filing.
TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT: Improvement built and maintained by a subdivider during
construction of the subdivision and prior to release of the performance bond.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The professional engineer engaged by the village trustees.
(Ord. 319 § 6, 2003)
16.04.080: PLATTING PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Preapplication Contact And Sketch Plat:
      1.   Prior to the submission of a sketch plat as required by this
chapter, the subdivider shall contact the planning commission chairman and any
other administrative personnel or private agencies to determine:
         a.   Procedures and requirements for filing the sketch plat and
preliminary and final plat.
         b.   Availability of public water and sewer, or requirements when
public systems are not readily available.
         c.   Zoning requirements on the property.
         d.   Requirements of the duly adopted comprehensive plan for major
streets, land use, schools, parks and other public open space.
         e.   The location and extent of any floodplains.
      2.   As a part of this contact, the subdivider may discuss with the
planning commission, or any other appropriate agency, its tentative proposals
for the development of the property.
      3.   The subdivider shall submit, and the planning commission shall
review and comment on, a sketch plat prior to the preparation of a preliminary
plat. The sketch plat shall contain:
         a.   The outline of the area to be subdivided with approximate
boundary dimensions and locations or reference points to existing lots or
development.
         b.   Existing streets and roads and principal utility lines and storm
drainways on adjoining properties to service the area, location and extent of
floodplain.
         c.   North point, scale and date.
         d.   Total acreage within proposed subdivision.
The planning commission shall make such a review at its next regular meeting
and make its comments known to the subdivider in writing within five (5) days
from the date of the review.
      4.   The purpose of this preapplication procedure is to determine any
problems with the proposed development before expenses are incurred in the
preparation of a preliminary plat. No official action is required of the
planning commission or other agencies, other than offering appropriate comments
on the proposal and indicating suitability for proceeding through the platting
process.
   B.   Preliminary Plat:
      1.   Preliminary plats shall be submitted in twelve (12) copies and, if
requested, a reproducible copy to the planning commission. The preliminary plat
shall consist of drawings and accompanying material and information as
prescribed by this chapter.
      2.   The preliminary plat drawing shall be prepared at a scale of one
inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger for subdivisions where the
majority of lots are less than five (5) acres in size. The scale may be reduced
to one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') for subdivisions in which the
minimum lot size is five (5) acres or more. The face of the drawing shall
contain the following information:
         a.   The name of the subdivision. The name shall not duplicate or too
closely resemble the name of any subdivision previously filed in the county.
         b.   Date of preparation, scale and north arrow. The top or left side
of each sheet shall represent north wherever possible.
         c.   The name, address and telephone number of the developer or
subdivider, and the individual or firm responsible for the preparation of the
preliminary plat.
         d.   The boundary lines of the subdivision in a heavy solid line,
referenced to section or quarter lines.
         e.   Existing contours at a maximum interval of five feet (5') unless
waived by the planning commission.
         f.   General location and extent of any significant natural features
such as drainageways, or steep slopes.
         g.   Floodplains as delineated on maps available from the planning
commission or other agency.
         h.   Location, dimensions and names of existing roads, streets,
alleys, and structures within one hundred feet (100') immediately adjacent to
the property showing how they relate to the proposed subdivision layout.
         i.   Location, size and grades of existing sanitary and storm sewers
and location and size of water mains, gas lines, pipelines or other underground
utilities or installations within the proposed subdivision and within one
hundred feet (100') adjacent thereto.
         j.   Location and dimension of all easements of record.
         k.   Location and width of proposed streets, alleys, pedestrianways
and easements.
         l.   Layout, numbers and dimensions of proposed lots and blocks.
         m.   Location, dimension and size in acres of all sites proposed to be
used for commercial, industrial, multi-family, residential, public or quasi-
public use with the use noted.
      3.   The following information and material shall be a part of any
preliminary plat submittal and shall accompany the preliminary plat drawing:
         a.   Payment of the total amount of the preliminary plat fee.
         b.   A vicinity map drawn at a scale of one inch equals one thousand
feet (1" = 1,000'), or one inch equals two thousand feet (1" = 2,000'), showing
the location of the proposed subdivision in the village and its relationship to
surrounding development.
         c.   A legal description of the subdivision boundary.
         d.   A description of all monuments both found and set, which mark the
boundary of the subdivision, and a description of all control monuments used in
the survey.
         e.   Existing zoning and land use of the proposed subdivision and
immediately adjacent areas.
         f.   A summary of the total number of acres, number of lots, acreage
of commercial or industrial areas, acreage of open space, and amount of land in
rights of way, and other descriptive material useful in reviewing the proposed
subdivision.
         g.   A statement explaining the proposed design and function of the
water, sewage, paving, sidewalk and drainage systems, their compatibility with
existing systems, and the timing and/or phasing of installation.
         h.   A statement describing the development and maintenance
responsibility for any private streets, ways or open space.
         i.   The recommendations of a qualified professional engineer of the
affected soil conservation district regarding soil suitability, erosion
control, sedimentation and flooding problems.
         j.   A description of phasing and scheduling of phases for the
development if the final plat is to be submitted in separate phases.
         k.   A petition for annexation to the village if the land to be
subdivided is contiguous to and outside (either by itself or as part of a
larger tract) the boundaries of the village.
         l.   An application for appropriate zoning for the subdivided area if
the area is to be annexed or if the existing zoning district does not allow the
types of uses proposed.
         m.   The names and addresses of all owners of subdivided lots and
unplatted land contiguous to or within two hundred feet (200') of the boundary
of the proposed subdivision.
         n.   A completed preliminary plat checklist on the standard forms
provided.
      4.   After receipt of the preliminary plat and all required supporting
material the village trustees shall schedule for consideration at the next
regular meeting of the planning commission which occurs within twenty one (21)
days after the plat is submitted. Within three (3) days, copies of the
preliminary plat will be sent to appropriate officials for review and comment.
      5.   Individuals receiving referral copies of the preliminary plat will
return written comments to the planning commission within ten (10) days after
receipt of the plat. The planning commission will summarize received comments
and present these and recommendations for consideration.
      6.   At least seven (7) days prior to the date of the planning commission
meeting at which the plat is to be considered, the village shall, from
information provided by the subdividers, notify owners of the subdivided lots
and owners of unplatted land within two hundred feet (200') of the boundaries
of the proposed subdivision of the time and date of the meeting.
      7.   The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend
the planning commission meeting at which the proposal is scheduled for
consideration.
      8.   At the planning commission meeting, the subdivider and all other
interested or affected parties shall be allowed to offer comments. Within
fifteen (15) days of the meeting, the commission shall approve or disapprove
the preliminary plat; within ten (10) days after the date of the meeting at
which final action was taken, the commission shall notify the subdivider and
the council of its decision. If conditions are attached to its approval, the
subdivider and council shall be informed of such conditions; if the preliminary
plat is approved, a certificate, to be worded as follows, will be issued to the
subdivider:
The proposed plan of subdivision as shown in the preliminary plat herein is
approved and the Commission now is ready to receive the final plat of said
subdivision for consideration.
Signed and dated by the chairman of the planning commission.
      9.   Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the planning commission's
recommendation, the council shall, by motion, act on the preliminary plat and
the commission's recommendation, and shall send notices of its action to the
commission and the subdivider.
      10.   Approval of the preliminary plat by the council shall be effective
for six (6) consecutive calendar months from the date of approval. The
subdivider may apply in writing for, and the planning commission may, for cause
shown, grant up to a six (6) month extension. If a final plat has not been
submitted within this specified period on all or a portion of the land area
included in the preliminary plat, a preliminary plat must again be submitted
for approval. In a phased development, if there is any land area for which a
preliminary plat has been approved and for which a final plat has not been
submitted within twenty four (24) months from the date of the approval of the
preliminary plat, the applicant shall not be allowed to proceed with final
platting until a new preliminary plat is submitted and approved.
   C.   Contents And Approval Of Final Plat:
      1.   After approval of the preliminary plat, a final plat may be prepared
and submitted. The final plat shall be prepared and certified as to its
accuracy by a registered land surveyor licensed to do such work in the state of
New Mexico. The final plat and required supporting material shall conform to
the design and engineering standards set forth in this chapter and to any
conditions of approval specified by the planning commission and council.
      2.   Final platting may be accomplished in stages covering reasonable
portions of the area of an approved preliminary plat. When this is done, each
sheet of the final plat shall contain a vicinity map showing the location of
the portion being submitted in relationship to the area for which the
preliminary plat was submitted. All final plats so submitted shall be of the
same scale, shall have identical titles, legends and other information, and
shall have match lines so that mosaics of the entire subdivision can be
developed. Each stage of the subdivision shall be nearly self-sustaining and
complete as possible and shall by itself, or in conjunction with previous
stages, meet the design standards set forth in this chapter so that, if
development of the entire subdivision is interrupted or discontinued after one
or more stages are completed, a viable development will result.
      3.   The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black
waterproof India ink upon tracing linen, Mylar of 0.004 inch thickness
(minimum), or some similar stable base material. Required affidavits,
certificates and acknowledgments shall be legibly printed on the plat in opaque
ink. The sheet size of all final plats shall be twenty four inches (24") high
by thirty six inches (36") wide. Information of the plat should be so
positioned that a one and one-half inch (11/2") margin is on the left hand side
of the plat and a one-half inch (1/2") margin is shown on the remaining sides.
The final plat shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet
(1" = 100'), or at a scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') for
subdivisions in which the minimum lot size is five (5) acres or more. Each
sheet of the final plat shall be numbered, and the total number of sheets
comprising the plat shall be stated on each sheet (for example, "Sheet 2 of
4"). The relationship of one sheet to the other shall be shown by key maps and
by match lines.
      4.   The original linen or Mylar, one reproducible copy (sepia not
acceptable) and four (4) prints of the final plat and two (2) copies of all
required supporting material shall be submitted to the planning department at
least fourteen (14) days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the
final plat is to be considered.
      5.   The submitted final plat shall contain the notarized signatures of
the owners of any and all equitable or legal interest in the land, of whatever
nature, and the signature of the registered land surveyor who prepared the
plat.
      6.   All final plats shall include the following information on the face
of the plat:
         a.   All final plats shall include the subdivision, centered at the
top of each sheet.
         b.   General location of the subdivision by section, township, range,
county and state, entered under the name of the subdivision.
         c.   North arrow, date and scale.
         d.   Boundary lines of the subdivision in a heavy solid line.
         e.   Bearings, distances and curve data of all perimeter boundary
lines indicated outside of the boundary lines.
         f.   On curved boundaries and on all curves within the plat,
sufficient data to allow the reestablishment of the curves on the ground.
         g.   The location and layout of lots, blocks, tracts, streets, alleys,
easements and other public grounds immediately adjoining the plat with accurate
dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet, bearings, curve data, length of
radii and/or arcs of all curves.
         h.   Drainage easements, clearly labeled as such.
         i.   The names of all streets.
         j.   All lots logically and consecutively numbered in the center of
the lot.
         k.   All dimensions shown on irregularly shaped lots.
         l.   Parcels completely or partially surrounded by the area being
subdivided, clearly marked, "Excepted", and the common boundary with the
subdivision shown in a heavy solid line with bearings and distances.
      7.   The following material shall be submitted to the planning commission
with the final plat:
         a.   Legal description of the subdivision boundary based on accurate
traverse, giving bearing and linear dimensions that result in a maximum
allowable error of closure of one part in ten thousand (10,000).
         b.   The location and description of the point of beginning and its
proper reference to the monumented boundary survey.
         c.   The location and description of all monuments.
         d.   A notation of the total acreage of the subdivision and the total
number of lots.
         e.   A notarized certificate by all parties having any titled interest
in or lien upon the land, consenting to the recording of the plat and
dedicating public ways, grounds and easements.
         f.   A notarized certificate of a registered land surveyor, registered
under the laws of the state, stating that the plat is true, accurate, and
complete.
         g.   A notarized certificate of a licensed engineer attesting to the
adequacy of and in compliance with engineering provisions and requirements.
         h.   Certificate of preliminary approval by the village planning
commission.
         i.   Certificate for recording by the county clerk and recorder.
      8.   The final plat shall be accompanied by the total amount of the final
plat fee.
      9.   After receipts of the final plat, the planning commission shall
review the submittal for completeness and for conformance with the approved
preliminary plat. The commission may refer copies of the final plat to and seek
comment from other officials and agencies. Any such comments should be made
known to the commission within ten (10) days after the date of submittal of the
final plat.
      10.   The final plat shall be scheduled for the consideration of the
planning commission at its next regular meeting after a fourteen (14) day
review period. After due deliberation, the planning commission shall approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove the final plat. Approval of a final plat
by the planning commission shall remain effective for eighteen (18) months.
      11.   Within ten (10) days after the date of the meeting at which final
action was taken, the planning commission shall notify the subdivider and the
council of its action. If the final plat is approved, the subdivider may
proceed in accordance with subsection D of this section. If the final plat is
disapproved by the commission or conditionally approved, and the subdivider
wishes to appeal the conditions, the subdivider may request a hearing before
the council appealing the action of the commission. The request shall be
submitted in writing within thirty (30) days of the action or decision appealed
from and shall state the specific relief which the subdivider or landowner
seeks. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of such a request, the council
shall hold a hearing to determine the proper disposition of the matter. At the
hearing, the council shall consider not only the subdivider's appeal, but also
the written or verbal comments of the commission. The council shall either
reaffirm or modify the decision of the commission, and shall note the decision
in the record of its hearing. This decision shall be binding upon all boards
and administrative personnel of the village.
   D.   Supporting Materials For Final Plat; Recording Of Plat:
      1.   Required Submittals: A complete final plat submittal shall consist
of the final plat as approved by the planning commission and all required
supporting materials. Following approval of the final plat by the planning
commission, the subdivider shall submit the following supporting material
relating to the final plat to the planning commission:
         a.   Final Plat Checklist: A final plat checklist shall be submitted
on the standard forms provided.
         b.   Drainage Report: A drainage report for the site in question and
all pertinent off site areas shall be prepared by a licensed engineer or
hydrologist. The report shall examine 100-year storm flows and the 100-year
high water mark of any river, creek, arroyo, gully, diversion ditch, spillway,
reservoir, etc., that may in any way affect the project area, along with the
depth of flow for 100-year runoff. A certificate shall be provided, signed and
sealed by a registered professional engineer, that all drainage facilities
utilizing gutters and streets are designed and sized to handle one hundred
percent (100%) of the flow of the 100-year runoff (Q 100).
         c.   Soils Report: A soils report for the site in question and
pertinent off site areas shall be prepared by a licensed engineer or soil
scientist. The report shall indicate the type and location of soils, using the
unified soil classification system, shall contain drill logs and swell
consolidation curves, and shall contain a discussion of any present or
potential hazards associated with the soils on the site along with measures
which could be taken to mitigate such hazards. In addition, the soils report
shall contain recommendations on subsurface area drains and peripheral drains,
foundation design, erosion control measures and surface drainage.
         d.   Grading, Drainage And Development Plan:
            (1)   A grading, drainage and development plan shall be prepared at
a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger showing
rights of way, easements, walkways, parks, common areas, roadways, water lines
and reservoirs, sewer lines, manholes and treatment facilities, curbs and
gutters, culverts, drains, storm water detention and retention basins, swales,
ditches and other drainage devices, spot top of curb elevations, high and low
street points, drainage arrows, street plans, all drainage areas and acreage,
all 100-year storm flows (Q 100s) adjacent to and/or flowing onto the
development and on site at each surface flow junction, storm water pick up and
take off points designed to handle 100-year flow on the surface, and cross
sections and high water elevations for all 100-year flows. Spot elevations
shall be given for all inverts, low points and flowing entry and exit points.
            (2)   For residential subdivisions, all minimum building setbacks
shall be shown. No 100-year flow line shall encroach upon any minimum setback
line.
            (3)   The following standards shall be used in preparation of the
grading, drainage and development plan: 100-year storm flows shall not exceed
two hundred (200) CFS per half street when feasible; pipes into which surface
water flows will have a minimum diameter of fifteen inches (15"); and a
capability for handling all Q 100s on the surface of the roadway. Exceptions
and variations to these standards must be recommended by a licensed engineer
and approved by the village engineer or acting village engineer.
         e.   Construction Plans And Details: Construction plans and details
must be prepared by a registered professional engineer in the state of New
Mexico and shall provide for all improvements indicated on the grading,
drainage, and development plan, including right of way and easement cross
sections showing construction and placement of streets, walks, curbs, gutters,
medians, ditches, utilities, planting strips and property lines; details of
fire hydrants, valves, manholes, pipe junctions, pumps, catch basins, etc.;
street profiles showing natural and finished grades, centerlines and both
curbs, with a recommended minimum vertical scale of one inch equals fifty feet
(1" = 50'); sanitary sewer line and manhole profiles with natural finished
grades, showing area under drains, if applicable, and the location of gravity
outfall lines; storm drainage system profiles showing natural and finished
grade; erosion control and revegetation details; and other details as necessary
to adequately convey the design intent.
         f.   Deeds: When required by the village, assurance of a warranty deed
or other acceptable instrument conveying any public lands other than streets,
alleys, or easements shown on the final plat to the village and title insurance
of said public lands, shall be presented to the village upon approval of the
final plat. Method of assurance shall be approved by the village attorney.
         g.   Fees In Lieu Of Land: Payment of any fees in lieu of public land
dedication, or any initial payment and a payment schedule keyed to a
subdivision development, if the subdivision is to be phased, shall be
submitted.
         h.   Title Opinion: Evidence satisfactory to the village must be
submitted showing all taxes and assessments due on the property to be
subdivided to be paid in full, showing title or control of the property to be
subdivided, and showing the property to be subdivided as free and clear of any
liens. An attorney's title opinion or ownership and encumbrance report from a
land title company shall be considered satisfactory evidence.
         i.   Floodplain Statement: If a subdivision lies within the 100-year
floodplain, this statement shall appear on the face of the final plat and on
all contracts and agreements relating to the subdivision:
This subdivision is located in the 100-year floodplain as defined by the
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
         j.   Performance Bond: A contractor's performance bond to guarantee
the complete and timely development of any facilities or improvements which are
the subdivider's responsibility shall be submitted.
      2.   Review: Upon submittal of all required supporting material to the
final plat, the planning commission shall review such material for completeness
to determine whether a complete final plat submittal has been made and shall
refer the material to appropriate personnel for review and comment. Upon being
notified of the comments and any necessary approvals, the planning commission
shall recommend that the subdivision be approved or disapproved. If approval is
recommended, a certificate, worded as follows:
This final plat of subdivision is recommended to the governing body for
approval, subject to certifications by the Clerk that all arrangements for
public improvements required by the Land Subdivision Regulations have been
made.
Signed and dated by the members of the planning commission and the final plat,
together with pertinent supporting materials, and the commission's
recommendation shall be forwarded to the council for action. No incomplete
final plats shall be forwarded to the council for action.
      3.   Council Action: Following receipt of the recommendations of the
planning commission along with the final plat and accompanying materials, the
council shall either approve the final plat or disapprove the final plat and
notify the subdivider of the condition to be met to gain approval. If a
disapproved final plat is modified and resubmitted to the council at a later
date for its consideration. The council may require the concurrent submittal of
an updated ownership and encumbrance report or title opinion.
      4.   Subdivisions Outside Of The Incorporated Municipality: The county
and a municipality shall exercise concurrent jurisdiction over territory within
the platting jurisdiction of both the county and the municipality. Therefore,
any proposed subdivision within the extraterritorial planning and platting
jurisdiction of the village shall have the approval of both the village and
Dona Ana County before the final plat of the subdivision shall be recorded by
the Dona Ana County clerk.
      5.   Filing With The County Clerk: Upon approval of the final plat by the
council, the subdivider shall be notified to submit payment for the recording
fee to the planning commission, and the planning commission shall transmit the
subdivider's recording fee and the duly approved and executed final plat to the
Dona Ana County clerk for the filing of the final plat among the official
records of the county. (Ord. 319 § 7, 2003)
16.04.090: ENGINEERING AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Permanent Markers: All subdivision boundary corners and the
intersections of the street centerlines shall be marked with a permanent
monument. A permanent monument shall be deemed to be concrete with a minimum
dimension of four inches (4") in diameter, extending three feet (3') below the
surface of the ground, or steel pipe firmly imbedded in concrete which extends
at least three feet (3') below the surface of the ground. Either configuration
shall have a brass cap permanently attached at the surface. Should conditions
prohibit the placing of monuments on line, offset marking will be permitted,
provided however, the offset courses and distances are shown on the plat. A
permanent bench mark shall be accessibly placed within the subdivision, the
elevation of which shall be referred to the USC&GS datum and accurately noted
on the subdivision plat.
   B.   Street Improvements:
      1.   Conformity To Comprehensive Plan: The location and width of all
streets shall conform to the latest comprehensive plan and to the provisions
herein. Streets and alleyways in any subdivision adjoining a municipality shall
be continuous with and correspond in direction and width to the streets and
alleys of the municipality.
      2.   The minimum street right of way width shall be shown on the
comprehensive plan map, or if not shown on such plan, shall be not less than
fifty feet (50') wide. Subdivisions that adjoin existing or planned streets
shall dedicate the right of way as necessary to meet the minimum street width
requirements set forth in this section as follows:
         a.   The entire additional right of way shall be provided where the
subdivision is on both sides of the street.
         b.   When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing
or planned street, as shown on the comprehensive plan, one-half (1/2) of the
required additional right of way shall be provided which shall be not less than
thirty feet (30'). In no case shall the resulting eventual right of way width
be less than fifty feet (50').
      3.   Grades on a major thoroughfare shall not exceed five percent (5%).
Grades on other streets shall not exceed ten percent (10%).
      4.   Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is
possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than sixty degrees
(60°). Four-way intersections shall be discouraged in residential areas.
      5.   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less that one hundred twenty
five feet (125') shall not be allowed, whether between two (2) proposed streets
or between an existing and a proposed street.
      6.   Residential streets that are dead end streets, also called cul-de-
sacs, shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside
roadway diameter of at least eighty feet (80') and a street right of way
diameter of one hundred feet (100').
      7.   A proposed street which is in alignment with and joins an existing
and named street shall bear the name of the existing street. In no case shall
the proposed name of a street duplicate the name of an existing street within
the area covered by this chapter. Use of a suffix such as "street", "avenue",
"boulevard", "drive", "place", "court", etc., shall not be a distinction
sufficient to constitute compliance with this chapter.
      8.   When a subdivision or portion thereof adjoins a major thoroughfare
no single-family residential lot shall have direct access thereto. Said lots
shall be provided with frontage on a marginal access street. Lots with double
frontage shall be avoided except where necessary when single-family residential
development abuts arterial streets.
      9.   All streets shall be graded and the roadway improved by paving
subject to the approval of the village engineer. Curbing, gutter, and sidewalk
shall be subject to approval of the village engineer. Layouts for local,
collector and arterial streets shall be as those shown in and have as minimum
dimensions those dimensions shown in appendices A, B, and C on file in the
village. Minimum paving for local streets shall have four inch (4") subgrade,
six inch (6") aggregate base, and two inch (2") asphalt. No paving is to be
installed unless all utility lines have been placed and stubbed out under the
areas to be paved.
   C.   Alleys: Alleys twenty feet (20') wide shall be provided to the rear or
side of all lots to be used for commercial or industrial uses. Alleys may be
required for apartment or multi-family subdivisions. Dead end alleys shall not
be allowed.
   D.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four feet (4'),
shall be ADA approved, shall be constructed as indicated in appendices A, B,
and C on file in the village, and subject to the approval of the village
engineer.
   E.   Easements For Utilities: Except where alleys are provided, utility
easements not less than ten feet (10') in width shall be provided along rear or
side lot lines where necessary for use in erecting, construction and
maintaining poles, wires conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas mains,
water mains, electrical lines and other public utilities reasonably required
for urban structure. Whenever practical, utilities shall be placed underground.
No building shall be erected on said easement. All final plats should be
accompanied with evidence that all utilities concur, and that said easements
indicated on the plat are suitable for servicing the area.
   F.   Water Lines: The subdivider shall make necessary arrangements to serve
each lot within the corporate limits from a water system that is approved by
the state engineer and the state environment department to supply potable water
for domestic needs and for fire protection. Water lines shall be installed to
at least the back side of proposed sidewalks before any paving is installed.
   G.   Sanitary Sewers: The subdivider of land within the village limits shall
connect with a sanitary sewer system, private or public if one is available,
and provide adequate sewer lines accessible to each lot. Sewers to be
constructed to service lots shall be constructed under the supervision of and
subject to the approval of the village engineer. All lines which lie under
paving shall be installed prior to paving.
   H.   Drainage: Adequate provision shall be made for drainage of storm water
including easements and provisions for lining and checking the rainway, if
open, or for the installation of storm sewer conduit. Drainage improvements
shall maintain any natural watercourse and shall prevent the collection of
water in any low spot. No lot shall be platted to obstruct natural water flow.
Storm water drainage shall not combine with sanitary sewer. Drainage channels
must be designed and installed subject to the approval of the village engineer.
   I.   Street Signs: A four-way metal street sign shall be installed at each
street intersection at the expense of the developer. Letters on such signs must
be at least four inches (4") high. Style, color, and material must be approved
in advance by the village. Signs on state highways shall meet the standards of
the state highway commission.
   J.   Recreational Areas: Design consideration shall be given to the
allocation of areas suitably located and of adequate size for playgrounds and
parks for local or neighborhood use as well as public service areas.
Consideration shall be given to locations designed for school bus loading
purposes. Where proposed open space for recreation is shown on the
comprehensive plan and is located in whole or in part in the proposed
subdivision, a condition of final plat approval is that the subdivider shall
dedicate such land or a part thereof to the village without charge for the
recreational purposes. The subdivider may propose and the council negotiate
payment of a fee to be held in trust by the village for use in maintaining or
improving recreational facilities for the benefit of residents of the proposed
subdivision as an alternative to dedication of land.
   K.   Completion Of Improvements: The improvements required by the
preliminary and final plats shall be installed with the provision that no
residence or other building shall be constructed until the street, curb,
gutter, sidewalk, water and sewer improvements, underground utilities or storm
drain provisions as may be required have been installed for the entire block in
which the residence or other building shall be located. (Ord. 319 § 8, 2003)
16.04.100: RESUBDIVISION BY DESCRIPTION:
Every person who desires to subdivide land shall furnish a plat of the proposed
subdivision, except that the resubdivision of already platted tracts that are
less than one acre and which are contiguous with each other, for the purpose of
increasing or reducing the size of such contiguous tracts, but not less than
the minimum standard size required by the village, shall not require a plat of
said resubdivision provided that a certificate of survey setting forth the
legal description of tracts resulting from such resubdivision shall be filed
with the commission, the county clerk and the county assessor of Dona Ana
County and such filing shall be considered as a rededication of said described
lots in all respects. The plat shall refer to permanent monuments and shall
accurately describe each lot, number each lot in progression, give its
dimensions and the dimensions of all land dedicated for public use or for use
of the owners of lots fronting or adjacent to the land. Description of the lots
by number and plat designation are valid in conveyances and for the purpose of
taxation. (Ord. 319 § 9, 2003)
16.04.110: MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS; HARDSHIP:
   A.   Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision it can be shown
that strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter would result in
extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography, or
other nonself-inflicted condition, or that these requirements would result in
inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of this chapter, the commission
may recommend to the governing body to vary, modify, or waive the requirements
so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured;
provided that such variance, modification, or waiver will not have the effect
of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter or any utility regulations
or other requirements of the village or interfere with carrying out the
comprehensive plan.
   B.   Application for any variance or modification shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider at the time the preliminary plat is filed and shall
state fully the grounds for the application and the facts relied upon by the
subdivider. The commission shall give its written recommendation thereon at the
time of its approval or disapproval of said preliminary plat.
   C.   In no case shall any variation or modification be contrary to the
mandatory requirements of state law, nor be more than a minimum easing of the
requirements.
   D.   In granting variances and modifications, the commission may recommend
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objective of
the requirements so varied or modified. In all cases the decision of the
governing body shall be final. (Ord. 319 § 10, 2003)
16.04.120: ALTERNATE SUMMARY PROCEDURE:
The village clerk, upon recommendation of the commission, is hereby authorized
to approve and sign certain subdivision plats as follows:
   A.   Subdivision of not more than two (2) parcels of land; or
   B.   Resolution, where the combination or recombination of portions of
previously platted lots does not increase the total number of lots; or
   C.   Subdivisions of two (2) or more parcels of land in areas zoned for
industrial use. Any subdivision approved and authorized in this section shall
be in substantial conformity with this chapter. Approval by this summary
procedure shall be endorsed on the plat or on the instrument of conveyance in
lieu of a plat and such approval shall be conclusive evidence of approval by
the commission. (Ord. 319 § 11, 2003)
16.04.130: APPROVAL NECESSARY FOR UTILITY SERVICE:
Until a final plat has been approved by the governing body, any official of the
village or public utility company who shall serve or connect the land within
the subdivision with any public utility such as water, sewer, electric or gas
is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 319 § 12, 2003)
16.04.140: PENALTIES:
Whoever being the owner, or agent of the owner, of any land located in the
village or within the extraterritorial limits of the village, transfers, sells,
or agrees to sell or negotiate to sell such land by reference to any exhibition
of or by use of a plat or subdivision of such land before such plat has been
approved as herein provided for in this chapter and recorded in the office of
the Dona Ana County clerk, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon
conviction, he shall forfeit and pay a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for each lot transferred or sold, or agreed, or negotiated to be sold. The
village, through its attorney or other designated official, may enjoin such
transfer or sale or agreement by action for injunction or may recover the
penalty by civil action. (Ord. 319 § 13, 2003)
16.04.150: FEES:
Since the municipal administrative staff will be involved in reviewing plats;
advertising notification and attendance of public hearings, property
investigations and other costs involving or incidental to processing of
subdivisions, fees will be charged in accordance with a schedule established by
resolution of the village council. (Ord. 319 § 14, 2003)
TITLE 17
ZONING
General Provisions   17.04
Administration   17.08
R-1 Single-Family Residential District   17.12
R-1-M Single-Family Residential, Mobile Homes Permitted District   17.16
R-2 Multi-Family Zoning District   17.20
R-2-M Mobile Home Park/Mobile Home Neighborhood District   17.24
R-O Large Lot Single-Family Residential District   17.28
R-O-M Large Lot Single-Family Residential District   17.32
C-1 Commercial Zoning District   17.36
M-1 Manufacturing Zone   17.40
Rural Agriculture District And Holding Zone   17.42
Legal Nonconforming Uses And Structures   17.44
Parking Requirements   17.48
Fence And Wall Requirements   17.52
Signs   17.56
Definitions   17.60
CHAPTER 17.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
17.04.010: Short Title
17.04.020: Purpose
17.04.030: Accordance With Comprehensive Plan
17.04.040: Division Into Zoning Districts
17.04.050: Statutory Authority
17.04.060: Repealer
17.04.070: Severability
17.04.080: Interpretation And Conflict
17.04.090: Amendments To This Title
17.04.100: Zoning Districts Exclusive
17.04.110: Violation Of Zoning Ordinance; Enforcement Provisions
17.04.010: SHORT TITLE:
This title, including the official map, shall be known as the COMPREHENSIVE
ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF HATCH, NEW MEXICO and shall be referred to
elsewhere as "this title". (Ord. 256 art. I § 1, 1993)
17.04.020: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to encourage appropriate use of land and to
promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community within the
village. (Ord. 256 art. I § 2, 1993)
17.04.030: ACCORDANCE WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
The regulations within this title have been made in accordance with a current
comprehensive plan and are deemed necessary to regulate and restrict the
following:
   A.   Height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures;
   B.   Percentage of a lot that may be occupied;
   C.   Size of yards, courts and other open space;
   D.   Density of the population; and
   E.   Location and use of buildings, structures, signs and land for
residence, trade, industry or other purposes. (Ord. 256 art. I § 2A, 1993)
17.04.040: DIVISION INTO ZONING DISTRICTS:
For said purposes, the governing body of the village shall:
   A.   Divide the area under its jurisdiction into districts of such number,
shape, area and form as is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the community;
   B.   Show the aforementioned districts on a map entitled the "official
zoning district map" of the village of Hatch, New Mexico, which is attached to
the ordinance codified in this title and is on file in the office of the
village clerk;
   C.   Regulate or restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair or use of buildings, structures or land in each district.
All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of building within
each district, but regulation may differ between districts;
   D.   Provide for the administration and interpretation of such regulations;
and
   E.   Provide for the manner in which zoning regulations, restrictions, and
boundaries of districts are determined, established, enforced, amended,
supplemented and repealed. (Ord. 256 art. I § 2B, 1993)
17.04.050: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
This title is created and adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in the
New Mexico state statutes 1978, sections 3-21-1 and 3-21-5, as amended, and
shall be applicable to all property within the village, except for state and
federal land being used for public purposes. (Ord. 256 art. I § 3, 1993)
17.04.060: REPEALER:
The ordinance codified in this title repeals and supersedes the village of
Hatch municipal zoning ordinance, ordinance 234, adopted January 22, 1990.
Further, the ordinance codified in this title repeals and supersedes any other
resolution or ordinance previously adopted by the village trustees which
resolution or ordinance permitted the activities or uses governed by this
title. (Ord. 256 art. I § 4, 1993)
17.04.070: SEVERABILITY:
If any article, section, paragraph, sentence, phrase or part hereof is declared
unconstitutional or invalid, the remaining portions shall not be affected.
(Ord. 256 art. I § 5, 1993)
17.04.080: INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT:
   A.   Interpretation Of District Boundaries: Where uncertainty exists
concerning the boundaries of any district shown on the official zoning district
map, the following rules shall apply:
      1.   Boundaries shall be construed as the centerline of existing, future
or vacated streets, highways, railroads, alleys, drainage or irrigation canals,
or other public rights of way.
      2.   Where property has been subdivided into block and lot, the
boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines.
      3.   Where property is not otherwise designated, divided or subdivided,
the boundary line shall be determined by the scaled distance shown on the
official zoning district map.
      4.   In cases where property has not been specifically included within a
zone, or where territory has become part of the village through annexation,
these areas shall be given a zoning classification by the governing body after
recommendation by the planning and zoning commission.
   B.   Interpretation Of Meaning: The village codes enforcement officer shall
initially interpret the meaning of this title. Disagreement with an
interpretation of the village codes enforcement officer may be appealed to the
village planning and zoning commission. Disagreement with an interpretation of
the planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the governing body.
   C.   Local Conflict: Where the provisions of any local ordinance, regulation
or covenant imposes greater restrictions than those of this title, the
provisions of such document shall prevail.
   D.   Federal And State Conflict: Any provisions of U.S. or New Mexico state
law, which impose a greater duty, standard or requirement than those contained
herein shall supersede the provisions of this title.
   E.   Conflict Within This Zoning Title: When two (2) or more provisions of
this title are in conflict, the most restrictive provision shall apply.
   F.   Access To The Zoning Ordinance: This zoning ordinance and the official
zoning district map shall be filed with the village clerk and shall be
available for examination by any citizen. (Ord. 256 art. I § 6, 1993)
17.04.090: AMENDMENTS TO THIS TITLE:
Any portion or all of this title can be amended, supplemented or repealed.
   A.   Review By The Planning And Zoning Commission And Governing Body: All
proposed amendments must be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission,
which shall make recommendations to the governing body. At a minimum this title
shall be reviewed and evaluated by the planning and zoning commission every
five (5) years beginning from the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this title. Recommendations for approval of amendments to this title must be
approved by a majority vote of the planning and zoning commission.
   B.   Final Authority Resides In The Governing Body: The governing body has
final authority over the recommended action. Adoption of amendment to this
title must be approved by a majority vote of the governing body.
   C.   Public Hearing Required: The planning and zoning commission shall
review any proposed changes or supplements to this title and make its
recommendations to the governing body. Before the governing body can act on any
proposed changes or supplements to this title, the governing body must conduct
a public hearing. Notice of the time and location of the public hearing shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Hatch area at least
ten (10) days prior to date of the hearing. In applications for zoning changes,
whenever a change in zoning is proposed for an area of one block or less,
notice of the hearing shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owners of lots or land within one hundred feet (100') of the
lot that zone change is requested for. (Ord. 282, 1996: Ord. 256 art. I § 7,
1993)
17.04.100: ZONING DISTRICTS EXCLUSIVE:
The zoning districts in this title are exclusive. The permitted and conditional
uses listed in each district are unique to that district and are not applicable
to any other district except as may be specifically stated within this title.
(Ord. 256 art. III, 1993)
17.04.110: VIOLATION OF ZONING ORDINANCE; ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS:
   A.   It shall be a violation of this title for any person, firm, or
corporation to neglect, refuse to comply with, or resist the enforcement of any
provision of this title or any requirements pursuant thereto, or in any way
use, change, or construct a building or structure in nonconformance without
zoning approval. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
   B.   The municipal court shall impose a fine for each violation. The fine
shall be no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each day the violation is found to have occurred.
Penalties shall be assessed for each day of violation after the date of
notification of the violation by code enforcement officials. In addition to any
fines thus imposed, the municipal court is authorized to issue orders to remove
the structures or take other actions to abate, remove or bring into compliance
any violation of this title. Code enforcement officials shall notify the
landowner of record, as determined by reference to the real property tax
records maintained by the county tax assessor. Notice shall be by letter sent
registered mail to the landowner of record. Letters sent by registered mail
shall be deemed received five (5) days after mailing.
Failure to comply with such orders or judgments of the municipal court,
including failure to pay fines previously imposed, shall constitute contempt of
court and may be separately punished at the discretion of the municipal court.
   C.   Violations of this title shall be brought into compliance, abated,
removed, or taken to municipal court for judgment. In all cases where the court
rules to allow a structure to remain in nonconformance with this title, there
shall be a pro forma action by the governing body permitting such use. Such
action shall be consistent with the court's ruling, and thereafter said use
shall be considered a legal nonconforming use and shall be subject to the
relevant provisions of this code.
   D.   Nothing herein shall limit the village from seeking other remedies at
law or equity to enforce this zoning ordinance. (Ord. 298, 2000)
CHAPTER 17.08
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
17.08.010: Applications
17.08.020: Public Hearing And Notice Requirements
17.08.030: Duties Of Zoning Officials
17.08.031: Employment Standard
17.08.040: Appeals
17.08.050: Procedures And Criteria For Home Occupation Permits
17.08.060: Procedures And Criteria For Cottage Industry Permits
17.08.070: Procedures And Criteria For Conditional Use Permits
17.08.080: Procedures And Criteria For Temporary Use Permits
17.08.090: Procedures And Criteria For Zone Changes
17.08.100: Procedures And Criteria For Variances
17.08.010: APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Submittal To The Village Codes Enforcement Officer: Applications for
all home occupation permits, cottage industries, conditional use permits,
temporary use permits, zone changes, initial zoning and variances shall be
submitted to the village codes enforcement officer.
   B.   Proof Of Right To Make Application: All applicants shall be required to
submit evidence of legal authority to submit an application. All applications
must be complete before they may be accepted by the codes enforcement officer.
Applications will be accepted only from the owners or lessees of the subject
property, or their agents, or persons who have contracted to purchase property
contingent upon their ability to acquire the necessary permits under this
title, or the agents of such persons who may make applications in the name of
such owners, lessees or contract vendors. The fee owner of the subject property
must sign the application.
   C.   Late Applications Not Accepted: All applications received three (3)
days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the planning and zoning
commission will be accepted for review for that meeting. Applications submitted
after this deadline will be processed and reviewed along with the following
month's submittals.
   D.   Incomplete Applications Not Accepted: Incomplete applications will not
be accepted.
   E.   Fee Required: All applications for the following must be accompanied by
the appropriate fee:
      1.   Home occupation permit, ten dollars ($10.00);
      2.   Cottage industries permit, twenty five dollars ($25.00);
      3.   Conditional use permit, fifty dollars ($50.00);
      4.   Temporary use permit, fifty dollars ($50.00);
      5.   Zone changes, one hundred dollars ($100.00);
      6.   Initial zoning, one hundred dollars ($100.00);
      7.   Variance permit, one hundred dollars ($100.00);
      8.   Sign variance permit, twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   F.   Official Permits: The village clerk of the village of Hatch shall issue
an official permit to the applicant of all approved permits or zone changes.
The village clerk shall also notify, in writing, any applicant whose permit or
zone change request was denied. (Ord. 356, 2009: Ord. 282, 1996: Ord. 256 art.
II § 1, 1993)
17.08.020: PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   What Types Of Applications Require Hearing: A public hearing is
required for all requests for zone changes, conditional use permits, variances,
and initial zoning requests and temporary use permits.
   B.   Who Is Notified, And How: Notice of the agenda of all public hearings
held by the village to review or act on such a request shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Hatch area at least ten (10) days prior
to the hearing. Additionally, notice of public hearings for zone changes,
initial zoning, conditional use permits or variances held by the village to
review or act on such a request, whenever a change in zoning is proposed for an
area of one block or less, shall be sent by certified mail to all property
owners who own property within one hundred feet (100') of the property to be
affected by the proposed action, as shown by the records of the Dona Ana County
clerk. (Ord. 283, 1996: Ord. 256 art. II § 2, 1993)
17.08.030: DUTIES OF ZONING OFFICIALS:
   A.   Duties Of The Codes Enforcement Officer:
      1.   All applications shall be received by the village codes enforcement
officer. The codes enforcement officer will check all applications to ensure
completeness before accepting them.
      2.   Applications for home occupation permits shall be approved, denied
or revoked by the codes enforcement officer, who shall submit a monthly report
of all such approvals or denials to the planning and zoning commission and to
the governing body.
      3.   Applications for cottage industries, conditional use permits, and
temporary use permits located in the C-1 and M-1 zoning districts, shall be
reviewed by the codes enforcement officer to determine if they meet the
requirements of the zoning ordinance and to determine if they should be
approved, approved with conditions, or denied. The codes enforcement officer
shall write a report and recommendation which will be presented to the planning
and zoning commission along with a copy of the application and all
correspondence or other documentation submitted in support or opposition of the
application.
      4.   Applications for zone changes, initial zoning and variances, along
with all correspondence or other documentation submitted in support or
opposition of an application, shall be forwarded by the codes enforcement
officer to the village planning and zoning commission for its determination as
to the compliance or noncompliance of the application with the regulations of
the village.
      5.   The codes enforcement officer may prepare amendments to the land use
regulations of the village, but shall submit any such proposed amendments to
the planning and zoning commission in a written report.
      6.   The codes enforcement officer shall, under general supervision,
perform the following services: zoning ordinance enforcement, building code
enforcement and business license enforcement;
      7.   Seek compliance, issue warnings and assist in providing information
for citations relating to codes enforcement;
      8.   Prepare written reports on violations of the village's zoning,
building and business license codes;
      9.   Provide detailed investigations on activities which are in violation
of the municipal codes;
      10.   Meet with members of the public to describe code enforcement
programs;
      11.   Contact violators of ordinances to seek compliance with
regulations;
      12.   Testify in court, if necessary, as a result of code enforcement
investigations;
      13.   Assist the Hatch police department in the issuance of citations to
violators of the municipal code.
      14.   The codes enforcement officer shall enforce this title.
   B.   Duties Of The Planning And Zoning Commission:
      1.   The planning and zoning commission shall review and may, in a public
hearing, approve, approve with conditions, deny applications for all cottage
industries, conditional use permits, and temporary use permits in the C-1 and
M-1 zoning districts, and may revoke such permits if the terms of approval of
said permits are not met.
      2.   The planning and zoning commission shall review applications for
zone changes, initial zoning and variances, and shall submit its recommendation
for approval, approval with conditions, or denial on those cases to the
governing body.
      3.   The planning and zoning commission shall review any amendments to
the land use regulations of the village which are submitted to it, and, after a
majority vote of its membership, shall submit the proposed amendment and its
written recommendations to the governing body for the governing body's
consideration. The commission may develop amendments to the village zoning code
and other land use documents and, following a majority vote of its membership,
shall submit the proposed amendment and its written recommendations to the
governing body for their consideration.
      4.   The planning and zoning commission shall serve as a board of appeals
to decisions involving home occupation permits and cottage industries made by
the codes enforcement officer.
      5.   The planning and zoning commission shall provide written minutes,
with recommendations as necessary, to the governing body on all matters that
are brought before the commission.
   C.   Duties Of The Governing Body:
      1.   The governing body shall review and approve, approve with
conditions, or deny applications for zone changes, initial zoning and
variances.
      2.   The governing body shall serve as a board of appeals in cases when a
decision by the planning and zoning commission is appealed.
      3.   The governing body shall vote on all proposed amendments to the land
use regulations of the village. (Ord. 323, 2003: Ord. 256 art. II § 3, 1993)
17.08.031: EMPLOYMENT STANDARD:
   A.   The codes enforcement officer shall hold the following standards:
      1.   Any combination of education, experience and licenses equivalent to
the completion of high school, as well as a valid New Mexico driver's license
and a good driving record.
      2.   The ability to interpret regulations regarding zoning, building and
the municipal code. The ability to deal with the public in a calm and
reasonable manner. The ability to use good judgment and discretion. The ability
to prepare written and oral reports promptly and accurately.
      3.   Knowledge in the basic elements of planning and zoning
administration and the use of related ordinances as well as the knowledge of
general building construction methods. (Ord. 323, 2003)
17.08.040: APPEALS:
   A.   Progression Of Appeals:
      1.   Any decision or ruling on the contents of this title by the village
codes enforcement officer may be appealed to the village planning and zoning
commission by any person aggrieved by the decision or ruling.
      2.   Orders or decisions of the planning and zoning commission may be
appealed to the governing body by any person aggrieved by the order or ruling.
      3.   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the governing body may present
to the district court a petition, duly verified, setting forth that the
decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the
illegality. An appeal to a decision by the governing body must be submitted to
the district court within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision.
   B.   Village Filing Deadlines: An appeal to a decision by the village codes
enforcement officer or by the village planning and zoning commission must be
filed with the village clerk no later than ten (10) working days after the date
of the decision. An appeal is considered filed when it and the required appeal
fee are delivered to and accepted by the village clerk. The date and time of
filing shall be entered on the appeal by the village clerk.
      1.   Appeal fee: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   C.   Nature Of Appeals Specified: An appeal must be in writing, and must
state the exact nature of the appeal and specific reasons for it, including the
section of this title which is proposed as having been violated in the
decisions being appealed.
   D.   Administration Of Appeals: Within ten (10) days of receiving the notice
of appeal, the village clerk shall inform the planning and zoning commission or
the governing body that an appeal has been filed. The planning and zoning
commission or the governing body shall set the appeal for hearing at the next
legally permissible meeting. One week prior to the meeting at which the appeal
will be heard, the village clerk shall transmit the appeal and all documents
constituting the record relating to the action being appealed to the planning
and zoning commission, or the governing body. Upon hearing the appeal the
planning and zoning commission or the governing body may affirm or reverse (in
part or in whole), or may modify the order, requirement or decision or
determination that in its opinion ought to be made in the case before it.
   E.   Required Findings For Approving Appeals: Prior to deciding an appeal
and reversing a ruling by the codes enforcement officer, the planning and
zoning commission must determine and make findings that the codes enforcement
officer's decision was illegal, in whole or in part. The governing body must
determine and make findings that the planning and zoning commission's decision
was illegal, in whole or in part prior to deciding an appeal and reversing a
ruling by the planning and zoning commission.
   F.   Public Notice Of Appeals: The village clerk shall mail a notice of the
time, place and purpose of the appeal hearing to the applicant, and shall
fulfill the notification requirements set forth in section
17.08.020 of this chapter.
   G.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed unless the codes enforcement officer or
planning and zoning commission certifies that by reasons therein stated, a stay
would cause imminent peril of life and property. Upon certification, the
proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of a district court. (Ord. 285
§ 4, 1997; Ord. 256 art. II § 4, 1993)
17.08.050: PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA FOR HOME OCCUPATION PERMITS:
In recognition of the importance of small businesses in the village's economy,
the home occupation permit section allows the operation of small, individually
owned businesses in residential districts under the following conditions:
   A.   Evaluation Criteria: A home occupation permit is the minimum approval
required for the conduct of trade, services or manufacturing within a dwelling
unit in a residential zone. The applicant must submit a completed application
stipulating the following conditions, which the codes enforcement officer shall
use as the criteria for approving or denying home occupation permit
applications.
      1.   No exterior storage of stock in trade or materials used in the
conduct of the home occupation shall be permitted.
      2.   There shall be no external (outside) evidence of the business
activity such as noise, dust, odors, fumes, electrical interference or other
nuisances emitted from the home occupation.
      3.   Only members of the family residing in the dwelling unit for which
this home occupation is granted may be engaged in the home occupation.
      4.   There shall be no sale of goods or performance of services done
which affect the residential nature of the neighborhood as a result of the home
occupation.
      5.   The establishment and conduct of a home occupation shall not change
the principal residential character or use of the dwelling unit involved in the
home occupation, and shall not occupy more than twenty five percent (25%) of
the floor area of the home.
      6.   Required off street parking of the dwelling unit shall not be
reduced or expanded as a result of the home occupation.
      7.   The home occupation shall not create any vehicular traffic at the
dwelling or in the neighborhood in excess of that normally generated by the
residential use of that dwelling.
      8.   No more than one pickup truck, automobile or van bearing commercial
lettering or other evidence of its use as part of a commercial enterprise may
be kept on the site of the home occupation.
      9.   Except for the one permitted automobile, pickup truck or van bearing
commercial lettering, there shall be no change of the outside appearance of the
residential building or premises or any other visible evidence of the conduct
of a home occupation within the dwelling.
      10.   A sign not larger than six (6) square feet located within ten feet
(10') of the dwelling unit front wall indicating the home occupation shall be
allowed.
   B.   Revocation Of Home Occupation Permits: Failure of the applicant to
abide with the terms of the home occupation permit shall be cause for immediate
revocation of the permit.
   C.   Additional Permits Required: Approval of a home occupation permit does
not relieve the applicant from responsibility, to obtain all other federal,
state or local permits required for the type of business. Approval of a home
occupation permit specifically includes the requirement that the applicant must
obtain a village business registration.
   D.   Nontransferability: Home occupation permits may not be transferred from
location to location. Prior to moving a home occupation, the owner or agent of
the business must apply for and receive a new permit for the proposed new
location. (Ord. 282, 1996; Ord. 256 art. II § 5, 1993)
17.08.060: PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA FOR COTTAGE INDUSTRY PERMITS:
In addition to the criteria shown for conditional use permits in section
 17.08.070 of this chapter, the applicant must provide and the codes
enforcement officer shall use the following criteria when determining approval
or denial of cottage industry applications:
   A.   Proof Of Right:
      1.   Legal description of the property;
      2.   Proof of ownership, or when the applicant is not the owner of the
property, proof of legal right to apply for the permit.
   B.   Support Documentation:
      1.   A site and development plan consisting of a scaled drawing or map of
the property showing the location of existing and proposed streets, driveways,
parking and loading sites, pedestrian walks, structures, drainage improvements,
landscaped areas, utility easements and setbacks;
      2.   A traffic impact analysis describing potential traffic flows
(average daily traffic) and the impact of that traffic on the transportation
system;
      3.   An evaluation of the existing infrastructures' capacities to serve
the use's needs for potable water, liquid waste disposal, and solid waste
disposal;
      4.   The impacts of the proposed use on surrounding properties and
compliance of the proposed use with this title and with the official zoning map
of the village.
   C.   General Conditions:
      1.   The business activity shall be conducted within an enclosed
building;
      2.   Cottage industries shall comply with all village building and fire
codes;
      3.   Hours of operation are limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven
thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M.;
      4.   The principal residence of the owner/proprietor shall be located on
the same lot or parcel as the cottage industry;
      5.   The cottage industry shall employ no more than two (2) employees on
site in addition to the residents of the property, and in no case shall the
total number of employees exceed four (4), including the residents of the
property;
      6.   One on premises sign is permitted. The sign may not exceed six (6)
square feet. Signs located on the ground must meet all setbacks applicable to
the zoning district within which the cottage industry is located. Wall mounted
signs may not be placed so that the top edge of the sign is higher than eight
feet (8') from ground level. All signs must contain a street address number.
Garishly painted signs, lighted signs and signs with reflecting surfaces are
prohibited;
      7.   Outside storage of materials is limited to three hundred seventy
five (375) square feet and any such materials stored outside shall be screened
from view by an opaque fence or wall at least six feet (6') tall. Materials may
not be stacked higher than the fence height;
      8.   The cottage industry shall not generate traffic, dust, noise, odors
or other nuisances or safety hazards that affect the residential character of
the neighborhood;
      9.   Cottage industries shall provide off street parking facilities in
accordance with the commercial zone parking standards of this regulation;
      10.   No more than one pickup truck, automobile or van bearing commercial
lettering or other evidence of its use as part of a commercial enterprise may
be kept on the site of the cottage industry;
      11.   Except for the one permitted pickup truck, automobile or van
bearing commercial lettering, there shall be no change of the outside
appearance of the residential building or premises or any other visible
evidence of the conduct of a cottage industry;
      12.   Cottage industries shall comply with all applicable local, state
and federal laws and regulations. All necessary permits must be obtained by the
applicant before a cottage industry permit becomes effective. Approval of a
cottage industry permit specifically includes the requirement that the
applicant must obtain a village business registration;
      13.   A site plan for the cottage industry must be approved by the codes
enforcement officer.
   D.   Revocation Of Cottage Industry Permits: Failure of the applicant to
abide with the terms of the cottage industry shall be cause for immediate
revocation of the permit.
   E.   Uses Permitted As Cottage Industries: The following land uses are
permitted as cottage industries:
Arts and crafts studios;
Bicycle repair and service shops;
Child and adult care, nurseries and similar uses, excluding hospices;
Dressmaking and tailor shops;
Musical instrument repair and fabrication shops;
Professional services such as accountants, appraisers, attorneys, engineers,
surveyors, interior decorators, real estate services, data processing, typing
and similar services.
Small skilled trade shops;
   F.   Nontransferability: Cottage industries may not be transferred from
location to location. Prior to moving a cottage industry, the owner or agent of
the business must apply for a new permit for the proposed new location. (Ord.
256 art. II § 6, 1993)
17.08.070: PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
The applicant must submit and the planning and zoning commission shall use the
following criteria when determining approval or nonapproval of conditional use
permits:
   A.   Proof Of Right:
      1.   Legal description of the property;
      2.   Proof of ownership, or when the applicant is not the owner of the
property, proof of legal right to apply for the permit.
   B.   Support Documentation: The following items must be submitted along with
the completed conditional use permit application:
      1.   A site and development plan consisting of a scaled drawing or map of
the property showing the location of existing and proposed streets, driveways,
parking and loading sites, pedestrian walks, structures, drainage improvements,
landscaped areas, utility easements and setbacks;
      2.   A traffic impact analysis describing potential traffic flows
(average daily traffic) and the impact of that traffic on the transportation
system;
      3.   An evaluation of the existing infrastructures' capacities to serve
the use's needs for potable water, liquid waste disposal, and solid waste
disposal;
      4.   The impact of the proposed use on surrounding properties including
the compatibility of the proposed use with the comprehensive plan of the
village and the compatibility of the proposed use with the official zoning map
of the village;
      5.   The appropriate application fee.
   C.   Payment Of Analysis And Development Costs, Bonding And Permits: The
following conditions apply to all conditional use permits:
      1.   All infrastructure analysis shall be undertaken and paid for by the
applicant.
      2.   Prior to a conditional use permit taking affect, the developer shall
bond or construct any and all improvements to existing infrastructure systems
which are required to bring those systems up to the capacity required by the
proposed development.
      3.   All necessary state and local permits must be approved prior to a
conditional use permit becoming effective.
   D.   Approval Or Denial: The following conditions shall be cause for denial
of a conditional use permit:
      1.   Lack of legal right by the applicant to use the property as
requested;
      2.   Inconsistency of the site plan with the requirements of this title;
      3.   Insufficiency of infrastructure to handle the impacts of the
proposed use, and inability of the applicant to improve the infrastructure to
the level of service required to serve the proposed use;
      4.   Inconsistency of the proposed use with the official zoning map or
comprehensive plan of the village;
      5.   Failure of the applicant to obtain required permits;
      6.   Conditions associated with the proposed conditional use permit which
would negatively impact the health, safety or general welfare of the residents
of the village.
   E.   Nontransferability: Conditional use permits are site specific
approvals. A conditional use permit may not be transferred from one location to
another location. If the owner or agent of a conditional use permit business
wishes to move the business, the owner or agent must apply for a new permit for
the proposed new location.
   F.   Voting On Conditional Use Permits: An affirmative vote of a majority of
the members of the planning and zoning commission is required for the
commission to approve a conditional use permit.
   G.   Revocation Of Conditional Use Permits: Failure of the applicant to
abide with the terms of the conditional use permit or of this title, or the use
of fraud or misrepresentation in gaining a conditional use permit, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit. (Ord. 256 art. II § 7, 1993)
17.08.080: PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA FOR TEMPORARY USE PERMITS:
The applicant shall provide and the planning and zoning commission shall use
the following criteria when reviewing temporary use permits in the C-1 and M-
1 zoning districts. The following items must be submitted along with the
completed temporary use permit application:
   A.   Proof Of Right:
      1.   Legal description of the property;
      2.   Proof of ownership, or when the applicant is not the owner of the
property, proof of legal right to apply for the permit.
   B.   Support Documentation: The following reports must accompany the
completed temporary use permit application:
      1.   A site and development plan consisting of a scaled drawing or map of
the property showing: the location of existing and proposed vehicular access
and circulation; parking and loading sites; pedestrian walks; temporary and
permanent structures; location of portable toilets; location of trash
receptacles; drainage improvements; location of all mechanical and electrical
machinery;
      2.   A traffic impact analysis describing potential traffic flows
(average daily traffic) and the impact of that traffic on the transportation
system, including proof of capacity to serve the use's potential traffic flows,
including off site traffic management;
      3.   An evaluation of the existing infrastructures' capacities to serve
the use's needs for potable water, liquid waste disposal, and solid waste
disposal;
      4.   The impact of the proposed use on surrounding properties including
the compatibility of the proposed use with the comprehensive plan of the
village, compatibility of the proposed use with the official zoning map of the
village, and compatibility with the development requirements of this title;
      5.   The appropriate application fee;
      6.   All required liability and cleanup bonds.
   C.   Payment Of Analysis And Development Costs, Bonding And Permits: The
following conditions apply to all temporary use permits:
      1.   All infrastructure analysis shall be undertaken and paid for by the
applicant.
      2.   Prior to a temporary use permit taking affect, the developer shall
bond or construct any and all improvements to existing infrastructure systems
which are required to bring those systems up to the capacity required by the
proposed development.
      3.   All necessary state and local permits must be approved prior to a
temporary use permit becoming effective.
   D.   Voting On Temporary Use Permits: An affirmative vote of a majority of
the planning and zoning commission is required for the commission to approve a
temporary use permit.
   E.   Approval Or Denial: The following conditions shall be cause for denial
of a temporary use permit:
      1.   Lack of legal right by the applicant to use the property as
requested;
      2.   Inconsistency of the site plan with the requirements of this title;
      3.   Insufficiency of infrastructure capacity to handle the impacts of
the proposed use, and inability of the applicant to improve the infrastructure
to the level of service required to serve the proposed use;
      4.   Inconsistency of the proposed use with this title, the zoning map or
comprehensive plan of the village;
      5.   Failure of the applicant to provide required permits, bonding, or
the required indemnification and hold harmless agreement.
   F.   Nontransferability: Temporary use permits are site specific approvals.
A conditional use permit may not be transferred from one location to another
location. If the owner or agent of a temporary use permit business wishes to
move the business, the owner or agent must apply for a new permit for the
proposed new location.
   G.   Time Limitations:
      1.   A temporary use permit may be approved for a period up to but not to
exceed ninety (90) consecutive days.
      2.   Additional temporary use permits may not be issued for uses
occurring on the same parcel of land within thirty (30) days of the conclusion
of any temporary use permit.
      3.   Hours of operation of temporary use permits shall be established by
the planning and zoning commission to promote the public's health, safety and
welfare.
   H.   Requirements Prior To Issuance Of Temporary Use Permits:
      1.   Prior to a temporary use permit taking affect, the developer shall
bond or construct any and all improvements to existing infrastructure systems
which are required to bring those systems up to the capacity required by the
proposed use.
      2.   Liability bonding of a minimum of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) shall be required prior to the issuance of temporary use permits.
      3.   All necessary state and local permits, including a village business
registration when required, must be approved prior to a temporary use permit
becoming effective.
      4.   The applicant must execute an indemnification and hold harmless
agreement approved as to form by the attorney for the village and sufficient to
protect the village from claims arising from the conduct of the event.
      5.   A clean up bond in the amount determined by the planning and zoning
commission to insure that each site occupied by a temporary use will be left
free of debris, litter, or any other evidence of the temporary use upon
completion or removal of the temporary use.
   I.   Revocation Of Temporary Use Permits: Failure of the applicant to abide
with the terms of the temporary use permit or of this title, or the use of
fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining a temporary use shall be cause for
immediate revocation of the permit. (Ord. 256 art. II § 8, 1993)
17.08.090: PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA FOR ZONE CHANGES:
The applicant must submit and the village planning and zoning commission and
governing body shall use the following criteria when reviewing zone change
applications. The following items must be submitted along with the completed
zone change application:
   A.   Proof Of Right:
      1.   Legal description of the property;
      2.   Proof of ownership, or when the applicant is not the owner of the
property, proof of legal right to apply for the permit.
   B.   Support Documentation:
      1.   A traffic impact analysis describing potential increases in average
daily traffic, and the ability of the existing transportation system to handle
increased traffic which will be caused by approval of the zone changed;
      2.   An analysis of existing infrastructure capacities to serve
additional users' needs for potable water, liquid waste disposal, and solid
waste disposal;
      3.   Proof of compatibility of the proposed zone with the comprehensive
plan and the future zoning map of the village;
      4.   The appropriate application fee.
   C.   Payment Of Analysis And Development Costs: All infrastructure analysis
shall be undertaken and paid for by the applicant.
   D.   Approval Or Denial: The following conditions shall be cause for denial
of a zone change application:
      1.   Lack of legal right by the applicant to apply for the requested
change;
      2.   Inability of the existing transportation system to handle increased
traffic which will be caused by approval of the zone change, and inability of
the applicant to improve the system to the level of service required by the
proposed zone;
      3.   Insufficiency of existing water, sewage and solid waste
infrastructure to handle the impacts of the proposed zone, and inability of the
applicant to improve the infrastructure to the level of service required to
serve the proposed zone;
      4.   Inconsistency of the proposed zone with the future zoning map or
comprehensive plan of the village;
      5.   Conditions associated with the proposed zone change which would
negatively impact the health, safety or general welfare of the residents of the
village.
   E.   Voting On Zone Change Requests:
      1.   An affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the planning and
zoning commission is required for the commission to recommend approval of a
zone change application to the governing body.
      2.   An affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the governing
body is required for the approval of a zone change application. (Ord. 256 art.
II § 9, 1993)
17.08.100: PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA FOR VARIANCES:
The applicant must submit and the village planning and zoning commission and
governing body shall use the following criteria when voting to approve or not
approve variances. The following items must be submitted along with the
completed variance application:
   A.   Proof Of Right:
      1.   Legal description of the property;
      2.   Proof of ownership, or when the applicant is not the owner of the
property, proof of legal right to apply for the permit.
   B.   Support Documentation:
      1.   Proof of compatibility of the proposed variance with the
comprehensive plan of the village;
      2.   The appropriate application fee.
   C.   Considerations: Cost and inconvenience to the applicant of strict or
literal compliance with the regulation may be given consideration, but shall
not be the sole reason for granting a variance. Variances will be considered in
the following cases:
      1.   Height, yard, setback, lot area, site coverage and gross floor area
requirements;
      2.   Parking and loading requirements;
      3.   Sign and fence requirements;
      4.   Limitations for minimum stated distances.
   D.   Required Findings: Before recommending approval of a variance the
planning and zoning commission must make the following findings, and before
approving a variance request that the governing body must also make the
following findings:
      1.   Approval of the variance request will not allow a use which is not
permitted by right, by conditional use permit, or by temporary use permit;
      2.   Granting of the variance will not constitute a grant of special
privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the same
land use district and in the immediate vicinity of the variance request;
      3.   Granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare, or be materially injurious to properties or
improvements in the immediate vicinity;
      4.   By granting the variance, the spirit of this title will be observed,
public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done; and
      5.   The variance is warranted for one or more of the following reasons:
         a.   Strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified
performance standard or regulation would result in extreme and unnecessary
physical hardship inconsistent with the purposes of this code,
         b.   Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
resulting from size, shape or existing structures thereon, or from topographic
or physical conditions on the site or in the immediate vicinity that are
related to the site of the variance but that do not apply generally to other
properties in the same land use district in other parts of the village.
   E.   Duration Of A Variance: A variance may be issued for an indefinite
duration or for a specified time.
   F.   Voting On Variance Requests: The following votes are required for
approval of a variance:
      1.   An affirmative vote of a majority of the planning and zoning
commission is required for the commission to recommend approval of a variance
application to the governing body.
      2.   An affirmative vote of a majority of the governing body is required
for the approval of a variance application.
   G.   Recordation Of Variances: The case number of a variance shall be
entered on the parcel identified on the official zoning map of the village as
the parcel for which such variance is issued. (Ord. 256 art. II § 10, 1993)
CHAPTER 17.12
R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
17.12.010: Purpose
17.12.020: Development Standards
17.12.030: Permitted Uses
17.12.040: Temporary Uses
17.12.050: Conditional Uses
17.12.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide for the development of areas of single-
family detached site built housing and manufactured housing as defined in state
statute 3-21A-2(a) with the intent of protecting the residential character of
those areas. (Ord. 256 art. III § 1A, 1993)
17.12.020: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development standards in the R-1 district are:
   A.   Minimum lot size: Five thousand (5,000) square feet;
   B.   Minimum lot width: Fifty feet (50');
   C.   Minimum lot depth: Seventy feet (70');
   D.   Minimum front setback: Twenty feet (20');
   E.   Minimum side setback: Ten feet (10');
   F.   Minimum rear setback: Twenty five feet (25');
   G.   Maximum height: Thirty five feet (35');
   H.   Minimum off street parking: Two (2) spaces per lot. (Ord. 256 art. III
§ 1B, 1993)
17.12.030: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the R-1 district include:
4-H or FFA projects conducted for educational purposes or school credits when
the codes enforcement officer determines that such use will not cause a public
nuisance from sanitation, noise, odor, or traffic and inconvenience to the
general neighborhood.
Accessory buildings or structures meeting minimum setback requirements.
Home occupation permits.
One detached single-family site built dwelling unit per lot.
Private swimming pools and private tennis courts which meet the setback and
fencing requirements of this title.
Residential type satellite dishes and receiving antennas.
Seasonal retail sale of agricultural products (fruit and vegetable stands) for
periods not to exceed ninety (90) days per year, for produce raised on the
premises, provided that the number of stands is limited to one per lot and the
size of the stand does not exceed four hundred (400) square feet of floor area.
Storage of a boat, recreational vehicle, camper or trailer provided they meet
the setback requirements of this zone and provided that they are not lived in.
Yard sales, garage sales, or similar uses are allowed at the rate of three (3)
sales per year at a given address. Such sales shall not exceed three (3)
consecutive days. (Ord. 256 art. III § 1C, 1993)
17.12.040: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses in the R-1 district include:
Contractor's offices, mobile home residences for security guards, and storage
yards on the site of an active construction project.
Religious, patriotic, historic or similar displays or exhibits within yards,
parking areas or landscaped areas, for not more than twenty (20) consecutive
days of display. (Ord. 256 art. III § 1D, 1993)
17.12.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses require a public hearing and approval by the governing body
pursuant to section
 17.08.020 of this title:
Childcare and home care centers.
Churches.
Community buildings.
Cottage industries.
Schools. (Ord. 256 art. III § 1E, 1993)
CHAPTER 17.16
R-1-M SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, MOBILE HOMES PERMITTED DISTRICT
SECTION:
17.16.010: Purpose
17.16.020: Development Standards
17.16.030: Design Standards For Mobile Homes
17.16.040: Permitted Uses
17.16.050: Temporary Uses
17.16.060: Conditional Uses
17.16.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide for residential areas of single-family
detached housing, including mobile homes, with the intent of protecting the
residential character of those areas. (Ord. 256 art. III § 2A, 1993)
17.16.020: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development standards in the R-1-M district are:
   A.   Minimum lot width: Fifty feet (50');
   B.   Minimum lot depth: Seventy feet (70');
   C.   Minimum front setback: Twenty feet (20');
   D.   Minimum side setback: Ten feet (10');
   E.   Minimum rear setback: Twenty five feet (25');
   F.   Maximum height: Thirty five feet (35');
   G.   Minimum off street parking: Two (2) spaces per lot. (Ord. 285 § 2,
1996: Ord. 256 art. III § 2B, 1993)
17.16.030: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR MOBILE HOMES:
   A.   The home must be covered with an exterior material customarily used on
conventional dwellings. Exterior siding which has a high gloss finish or is
smooth, ribbed or of corrugated metal or plastic panels is prohibited. Vinyl
siding (PVC) is allowed per HUD and MHI listed materials is NMAC 14.12.1.7(L)
(2).
   B.   The hitch, axles and wheels must be removed from all mobile homes
installed in the R-1-M zoning district.
   C.   Mobile home undercarriages shall be concealed by an appropriate,
nonflammable skirting developed for the particular mobile home by the
manufacturer, or its equal, and meeting the requirements of the state of New
Mexico manufactured housing division rules and regulations on the installation
of skirting.
   D.   Mobile homes shall be installed consistent with rules and regulations
adopted under the manufactured housing act relating to mobile homes. (Ord. 376,
2015: Ord. 256 art. III § 2C, 1993)
17.16.040: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the R-1-M district include:
Accessory buildings or structures meeting minimum setback requirements.
Home occupation permits.
One detached single-family dwelling unit per lot.
Private swimming pools and private tennis courts provided they meet the fencing
requirements and setback requirements of this title.
Residential type satellite dishes and/or receiving antennas.
Seasonal retail sale of agricultural products (fruit and vegetable stands) for
periods not to exceed ninety (90) days, per year for produce raised on the
premises, provided that the number of stands is limited to one per lot and that
the size of the lot does not exceed four hundred (400) square feet of floor
area.
Storage of a boat, camper or trailer provided they meet the setback
requirements for this zone.
Yard sales, garage sales, or similar uses are allowed at the rate of three (3)
sales per year at a given address. Such sales shall not exceed three (3)
consecutive days. (Ord. 256 art. III § 2D, 1993)
17.16.050: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses in the R-1-M district include:
Contractor's offices and storage yards on the site of an active construction
project.
Mobile home residences for security purposes on the site of an active
construction project.
Religious, patriotic, historic or similar displays or exhibits within yards,
parking areas or landscaped areas, for not more than twenty (20) consecutive
days of display. (Ord. 256 art. III § 2E, 1993)
17.16.060: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses require a public hearing pursuant to section
17.08.020 of this title and approval by the governing body:
Childcare and home care centers.
Churches.
Community centers.
Cottage industries.
Schools. (Ord. 256 art. III § 2F, 1993)
CHAPTER 17.20
R-2 MULTI-FAMILY ZONING DISTRICT
SECTION:
17.20.010: Purpose
17.20.020: Development Standards
17.20.030: Permitted Uses
17.20.040: Temporary Uses
17.20.050: Conditional Uses
17.20.010: PURPOSE:
This zone is intended to accommodate site built multiple-family dwelling units
and accessory structures characteristic of apartment, townhouse and condominium
living. (Ord. 256 art. III § 3A, 1993)
17.20.020: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development standards in the R-2 district are:
   A.   Maximum density: A maximum of ten (10) dwelling units per acre;
   B.   Minimum lot size: Five thousand (5,000) square feet;
   C.   Minimum width: Sixty feet (60');
   D.   Minimum depth: Seventy feet (70');
   E.   Minimum front setback: Twenty feet (20');
   F.   Minimum side setbacks: Seven feet (7');
   G.   Minimum rear setbacks: Twenty feet (20');
   H.   Maximum height: Forty five feet (45').
Additionally, all developments in this zone shall meet the standards contained
in chapters 17.48, 17.52 and 17.56 of this title and the permissible and
nonpermissible designs contained in appendix A of the zoning ordinance, which
is on file in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 256 art. III § 3B, 1993)
17.20.030: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the R-2 district include:
Accessory buildings.
Public or private swimming pools and tennis courts provided they meet the
fencing requirements and setback requirements of this title.
Public parks and playgrounds.
Residential type satellite dishes and receiving antennas.
Site built multi-family dwelling units. (Ord. 256 art. III § 3C, 1993)
17.20.040: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses in the R-2 district include:
Contractor's offices and storage yards on the site of an active construction
project.
Mobile home residences for security, purposes on the site of an active
construction project.
Religious, patriotic, historic or similar displays or exhibits within yards,
parking areas or landscaped areas, for not more than twenty (20) consecutive
days of display. (Ord. 256 art. III § 3D, 1993)
17.20.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses in the R-2 district are the same as the conditional uses in
the R-1 district plus:
Art gallery.
Library.
Museum.
Storage areas for boats, vehicles, campers or recreation vehicles of the
residents of a multi-family dwelling unit located within the zone. (Ord. 256
art. III § 3E, 1993)
CHAPTER 17.24
R-2-M MOBILE HOME PARK/MOBILE HOME NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT
SECTION:
17.24.010: Purpose
17.24.020: Development Standards For Mobile Home Parks
17.24.030: Development Standards For Mobile Home Neighborhoods
17.24.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-2-M zoning district is to provide for properly planned and
well designed mobile home parks, mobile home neighborhoods, and RV parks in
areas containing at least two (2) acres where public utilities are available;
to establish basic standards for their character; and to mitigate any adverse
effect on surrounding properties. Lots in mobile home parks are for purposes of
lease only and shall not be sold. (Ord. 285 § 3, 1996; Ord. 256 art. III § 4A,
1993)
17.24.020: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS:
Development standards for mobile home parks in the R-2-M district are:
   A.   Densities:
      1.   Maximum density: Ten (10) mobile home units per acre/one unit per
space;
      2.   Minimum area per mobile home space: Three thousand five hundred
(3,500) square feet;
      3.   Minimum width per mobile home space: Thirty five feet (35');
      4.   Minimum depth per mobile home space: One hundred feet (100');
      5.   Minimum size of mobile home parks: Two (2)acres.
   B.   Minimum Spacing Of Mobile Homes:
      1.   Side to side: Twenty feet (20');
      2.   Back to back: Twenty feet (20');
      3.   Boundary to mobile home: Ten feet (10');
      4.   Mobile home to accessory building: Ten feet (10').
   C.   Site Coverage:
      1.   Minimum open space: Forty percent (40%);
      2.   Maximum coverage of impervious material: Forty percent (40%);
      3.   Minimum required road surfacing: Six inches (6") compacted gravel,
thirty six feet (36') wide.
   D.   Additional Standards: Additionally, all development in this zone must
meet the standards contained in chapters 17.48, 17.52 and 17.56 of this title
and the permissible and nonpermissible designs contained in appendix A of the
zoning ordinance, which is on file in the office of the village clerk.
   E.   Installation Standards For Mobile Homes: The owner of such mobile home
park is responsible for seeing that its tenants comply with the rules and
regulations governing installation of mobile homes.
   F.   Refuse: The management of a mobile home park shall provide adequate
refuse collection facilities. These collection facilities shall be constructed
and maintained in accordance with all state and municipal health regulations.
Refuse shall be removed from collection sites at least once a week.
   G.   Permitted Uses:
Accessory buildings, swimming pools, home occupations, and recreation areas and
buildings.
Convenience establishments of a commercial nature, including laundries, stores,
beauty shops and barber shops, subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   Such establishments and parking area primarily related to their
operations, shall not occupy more than seven percent (7%) of the area of the
park;
      2.   Such establishments shall be subordinate to the residential use and
character of the park;
      3.   Such establishments shall be located, designed and intended to serve
the frequent trade or service needs only of persons residing in the park;
      4.   Such establishments shall present no visible evidence of their
commercial character from any portion of any zoning district outside the park;
and
      5.   Such convenience areas shall be considered accessory uses to the
primary use of mobile homes and shall be discontinued if the mobile home park
is discontinued.
Stationing of residential mobile homes with complete hookup of utilities. (Ord.
285 § 3, 1996: Ord. 256 art. III § 4B, 1993)
17.24.030: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MOBILE HOME NEIGHBORHOODS:
Development standards for mobile home neighborhoods in the R-2-M district are:
   A.   General Standards:
      1.   Minimum lot size: Five thousand (5,000) square feet;
      2.   Minimum lot width: Fifty feet (50');
      3.   Minimum lot depth: Seventy feet (70');
      4.   Minimum front setback: Twenty feet (20');
      5.   Minimum side setback: Ten feet (10');
      6.   Minimum rear setback: Twenty five feet (25');
      7.   Maximum height: Thirty five feet (35');
      8.   Maximum number of trailers per lot: One per lot;
      9.   Minimum off street parking: Two (2) spaces per lot.
   B.   Installation Standards For Mobile Homes: The owner of such mobile home
is responsible for complying with all rules and regulations governing
installation of mobile homes.
   C.   Permitted Uses:
Accessory buildings or structures meeting minimum setback requirements.
Home occupation permits.
Private swimming pools and private tennis courts provided they meet the fencing
requirements and setback requirements of this title.
Residential type satellite dishes and or receiving antennas.
Seasonal retail sale of agricultural products (fruit and vegetable stands) for
periods not to exceed ninety (90) days, per year for produce raised on the
premises, provided that the number of stands is limited to one per lot and that
the size of the stand does not exceed four hundred (400) square feet of floor
area.
Stationing of residential mobile homes with complete hookup of utilities.
Storage of a boat, camper or trailer provided they meet the setback
requirements for this zone.
Yard sales, garage sales, or similar uses are allowed at the rate of three (3)
sales per year at a given address. Such a sale shall not exceed three (3)
consecutive days.
   D.   Temporary Uses In The R-2-M Zoning District:
Contractor's offices and storage yards on the site of an active construction
project.
Mobile home residences for security purposes on the site of an active
construction project.
Religious, patriotic, historic or similar displays or exhibits within yards,
parking areas, or landscaped areas, for not more than twenty (20) consecutive
days of display.
   E.   Conditional Use Permits In The R-2-M Zoning District: RV parks are
permitted by conditional use permit in the R-2-M district. A conditional use
permit is required for all RV parks. Recreational vehicles used for living
purposes shall be located solely in such parks and shall meet the following
development standards:
      1.   Densities:
         a.   Maximum density: Twenty (20) RV units per acre/one unit per
space,
         b.   Minimum area per RV space: One thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet,
         c.   Minimum width per RV space: Twenty feet (20'),
         d.   Minimum depth per RV space: Sixty feet (60'),
         e.   Minimum size of RV park: One acre.
      2.   Minimum Spacing Of Recreation Vehicles:
         a.   Side to side: Fourteen feet (14'),
         b.   Back to back: Eight feet (8'),
         c.   Boundary to RV: Ten feet (10'),
         d.   Distance to any building: Twenty feet (20'),
         e.   Distance to access road: Fifteen feet (15').
      3.   Site Coverage:
         a.   Minimum open space: Forty percent (40%),
         b.   Maximum coverage of impervious material: Forty percent (40%),
         c.   Minimum required road surfacing: Six inches (6") compacted
gravel, thirty six feet (36') wide.
      4.   Additional Standards: Additionally, all development in an RV park
must meet the standards contained in chapters 17.48, 17.52 and 17.56 of this
title and the permissible and nonpermissible designs contained in appendix A of
the zoning ordinance, which is on file in the office of the village clerk.
      5.   General Design Considerations:
         a.   Recreational vehicle parks shall abut and have access from one of
the following:
            (1)   Major collector street, or
            (2)   Minor collector street.
         b.   Water, sewer and electricity shall be available to each RV in the
RV park.
         c.   Driveways shall meet the standards described in chapters 17.48,
17.52 and 17.56 of this title and the permissible and nonpermissible designs
contained in appendix A of the zoning ordinance, which is on file in the office
of the village clerk.
         d.   The perimeter of a recreational vehicle park shall be screened by
a wall or fence at least six feet (6') tall, or by landscaping.
         e.   All RV spaces must be designed and constructed as "drive- thru".
(Ord. 256 art. III § 4C, 1993)
CHAPTER 17.28
R-O LARGE LOT SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
17.28.010: Purpose
17.28.020: Development Standards
17.28.030: Permitted Uses
17.28.040: Temporary Uses
17.28.050: Conditional Uses
17.28.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide for the development of areas of single-
family detached site built housing and manufactured housing as defined in state
statute 3-21A-2(a) on lots of no less than two (2) acres in size with the
intent of protecting the residential character of those areas. (Ord. 265 § 1
(1A), 1994)
17.28.020: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development standards in the R-O district are:
   A.   Minimum lot size: Two (2) acres;
   B.   Minimum lot width: One hundred twenty feet (120');
   C.   Minimum lot depth: One hundred fifty feet (150');
   D.   Minimum front setback: Fifty feet (50');
   E.   Minimum side setback: Twenty five feet (25');
   F.   Minimum rear setback: Fifty feet (50');
   G.   Maximum height: Thirty five feet (35');
   H.   Minimum off street parking: Two (2) spaces per lot. (Ord. 265 § 1(1B),
1994)
17.28.030: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the R-O district include:
4-H or FFA projects conducted for educational purposes or school credits when
the codes enforcement officer determines that such use will not cause a public
nuisance from sanitation, noise, odor, or traffic and inconvenience to the
general neighborhood.
Accessory buildings or structures meeting minimum setback requirements.
Home occupation permits.
One detached single-family site built dwelling unit per lot.
Private swimming pools and private tennis courts which meet the setback and
fencing requirements of this title.
Residential type satellite dishes and receiving antennas.
Seasonal retail sale of agricultural products (fruit and vegetable stands) for
periods not to exceed ninety (90) days per year, for produce raised on the
premises, provided that the number of stands is limited to one per lot and the
size of the stand does not exceed four hundred (400) square feet of floor area.
Storage of a boat, recreational vehicle, camper or trailer provided they meet
the setback requirements of this zone and provided that they are not lived in.
Yard sales, garage sales or similar uses are allowed at the rate of three (3)
sales per year at a given address. Such sales shall not exceed three (3)
consecutive days. (Ord. 265 § 1(1C), 1994)
17.28.040: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses in the R-O district include:
Contractor's offices, mobile home residences for security guards, and storage
yards on the site of an active construction project.
Religious, patriotic, historic, or similar displays or exhibits within yards,
parking areas or landscaped areas, for not more than twenty (20) consecutive
days of display. (Ord. 265 § 1(1D), 1994)
17.28.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses require a public hearing and approval by the governing body
pursuant to section
17.08.020 of this title:
Childcare and home care centers.
Churches.
Community buildings.
Cottage industries.
Schools. (Ord. 265 § 1(1E), 1994)
CHAPTER 17.32
R-O-M LARGE LOT SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
17.32.010: Purpose
17.32.020: Development Standards
17.32.030: Permitted Uses
17.32.040: Temporary Uses
17.32.050: Conditional Uses
17.32.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide for the development of areas of single-
family detached site built housing and manufactured housing, including mobile
homes, as defined in state statute 3-21A-2(a) on lots of no less than two (2)
acres in size with the intent of protecting the residential character of those
areas. (Ord. 265 § 2(1A), 1994)
17.32.020: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development standards in the R-O-M district are:
   A.   Minimum lot size: Two (2) acres;
   B.   Minimum lot width: One hundred twenty feet (120');
   C.   Minimum lot depth: One hundred fifty feet (150');
   D.   Minimum front setback: Fifty feet (50');
   E.   Minimum side setback: Twenty five feet (25');
   F.   Minimum rear setback: Fifty feet (50');
   G.   Maximum height: Thirty five feet (35');
   H.   Minimum off street parking: Two (2) spaces per lot. (Ord. 265 § 2(1B),
1994)
17.32.030: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the R-O-M district include:
4-H or FFA projects conducted for educational purposes or school credits when
the codes enforcement officer determines that such use will not cause a public
nuisance from sanitation, noise, odor, or traffic and inconvenience to the
general neighborhood.
Accessory buildings or structures meeting minimum setback requirements.
Home occupation permits.
One detached single-family site built dwelling unit per lot.
Private swimming pools and private tennis courts which meet the setback and
fencing requirements of this title.
Residential type satellite dishes and receiving antennas.
Seasonal retail sale of agricultural products (fruit and vegetable stands) for
periods not to exceed ninety (90) days per year, for produce raised on the
premises, provided that the number of stands is limited to one per lot and the
size of the stand does not exceed four hundred (400) square feet of floor area.
Storage of a boat, recreational vehicle, camper or trailer provided they meet
the setback requirements of this zone and provided that they are not lived in.
Yard sales, garage sales or similar uses are allowed at the rate of three (3)
sales per year at a given address. Such sales shall not exceed three (3)
consecutive days. (Ord. 265 § 2(1C), 1994)
17.32.040: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses in the R-O-M district include:
Contractor's offices, mobile home residences for security guards, and storage
yards on the site of an active construction project.
Religious, patriotic, historic, or similar displays or exhibits within yards,
parking areas or landscaped areas, for not more than twenty (20) consecutive
days of display. (Ord. 265 § 2(1D), 1994)
17.32.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses require a public hearing and approval by the governing body
pursuant to section
17.08.020 of this title:
Childcare and home care centers.
Churches.
Community buildings.
Cottage industries.
Schools. (Ord. 265 § 2(1E), 1994)
CHAPTER 17.36
C-1 COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICT
SECTION:
17.36.010: Purpose
17.36.020: Development Standards
17.36.030: Permitted Uses
17.36.040: Temporary Uses
17.36.050: Conditional Uses
17.36.060: Landscaping
17.36.070: Lighting
17.36.080: Commercial/Residential Borders
17.36.090: Parking Requirements
17.36.100: Outdoor Storage And Sales
17.36.110: Accessory Structures
17.36.010: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to provide for commercial and retail uses which serve
both local and transient trade. The district is intended for areas adjoining
major and minor collector streets where a wide range of automobile related
service facilities, convenience goods and personal services are desirable and
appropriate as land uses. (Ord. 256 art. III § 5A, 1993)
17.36.020: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Development standards in the C-1 district are:
      1.   Minimum lot area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet;
      2.   Minimum lot width: Sixty feet (60');
      3.   Minimum lot depth: Seventy feet (70');
      4.   Minimum front setback: Twenty five feet (25');
      5.   Minimum side setback: Seven feet (7');
      6.   Minimum rear setback: Fifteen feet (15');
      7.   Maximum height: Forty five feet (45').
   B.   All development in this zoning district must meet the standards
contained in chapters 17.48, 17.52 and 17.56 of this title and the permissible
and nonpermissible designs contained in appendix A of the zoning ordinance,
which is on file in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 256 art. III § 5B,
1993)
17.36.030: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the C-1 district include:
Banks without drive-through service.
Charitable or school sponsored drop off bins for recycling of cans, newspapers
or similar items, for drop off of clothes and small items. Bins shall be
located in the parking lots of businesses within the C-1 zone or other public
or semipublic property when written permission is granted by the property owner
or business owner. Said bins shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner.
Christmas tree sales lots, Halloween pumpkin sales, and other holiday sales
subject to not more than forty (40) calendar days of site occupation and
operation in any one calendar year.
Eating establishments without drive-through service.
Farmers markets.
Indoor theaters and related entertainment establishments.
Outdoor display and sales located within commercial zoned properties subject to
the appropriate conditions of this code. Items for display and sales are
restricted to regularly stocked merchandise.
Personal item repair shops.
Personal service establishments.
Professional offices.
Retail sales and service establishments.
Studios.
Veterinary and kennel establishments. (Ord. 282, 1996: Ord. 256 art. III § 5C,
1993)
17.36.040: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses in the C-1 district include:
Carnivals, rodeos, parades or similar outdoor entertainment or enterprises,
subject to not more than five (5) calendar days of operation in any calendar
year. Requests exceeding those time limitations will require the submittal and
approval of a conditional use permit.
Contractor's offices and storage yards on the site of an active construction
project.
Mobile home residences for security purposes on the site of an active
construction project.
Outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits, subject to not more than three (3)
calendar days of operation or exhibition in any sixty (60) calendar day period.
(Ord. 282, 1996: Ord. 256 art. III § 5D, 1993)
17.36.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses require a conditional use permit. Conditional uses in the C-
1 district include:
Adult entertainment enterprises.
All enterprises with drive-through service.
Bus terminals and private vehicle service stations.
Clubs and lodges.
Hospitals and clinics.
Hotels or motels.
Liquor sales establishments.
Mortuaries.
Outdoor theaters.
Public and private utility buildings.
Public buildings. (Ord. 256 art. III § 5E, 1993)
17.36.060: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Front and side yards shall be landscaped with native vegetation except
for necessary walks and drives.
   B.   All required landscaping shall be permanently maintained in a healthy
and thriving condition, free from weeds, trash and debris. (Ord. 256 art. III §
5F, 1993)
17.36.070: LIGHTING:
All light sources shall be shielded in such a manner that the light is directed
away from streets and/or adjoining properties. (Ord. 256 art. III § 5G, 1993)
17.36.080: COMMERCIAL/RESIDENTIAL BORDERS:
   A.   Setbacks may be increased by the governing body in situations where
additional distance would help to mitigate or alleviate potential problems or
hazards.
   B.   A minimum setback of twenty five feet (25') shall be required wherever
a lot in the C zone abuts a lot in any residential zone. (Ord. 256 art. III §
5H, 1993)
17.36.090: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
All parking requirements shall conform to chapters 17.48, 17.52 and 17.56 of
this title and the permissible and nonpermissible designs contained in appendix
A of the zoning ordinance, which is on file in the office of the village clerk.
(Ord. 256 art. III § 5I, 1993)
17.36.100: OUTDOOR STORAGE AND SALES:
Outside sales shall be allowed within the village of Hatch limits between the
hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and dusk with the following stipulations:
Any person operating as a vendor/merchant engaging in outdoor sales of food,
beverages, goods or merchandise must first obtain a vendor permit from the
village of Hatch.
   A.   Required: It shall be unlawful for any temporary merchant/vendor to
sell, display or offer for sale any food, beverage, goods or merchandise
without first obtaining a vendor permit from the village of Hatch.
   B.   Application: The application for a vendor permit shall contain all
information relevant and necessary to determine whether a particular permit may
be issued, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Proof of the identity and business address of the applicant;
      2.   A brief description of the nature and character of the food,
beverages, goods or merchandise to be sold;
      3.   A description of the proposed location of the vending business;
      4.   Written permission of the property owner upon which the goods, wares
or merchandise are to be sold;
      5.   Proof of a valid state gross receipts tax identification number;
      6.   A signed copy of an agreement which will indemnify and hold the
village harmless from and against all claims, liabilities, damages, losses and
expenses, including attorney fees arising out of any bodily injury, illness or
death or any other injury, or for property damage caused by the negligent act
or omission of the temporary vendor.
   C.   Fees; Exemptions: Before conducting business or operating within the
village limits, a permit fee shall be paid in advance for each location, in the
following respective amounts:
      1.   Fruit, vegetable and other agricultural produce vendors doing
business at a temporary location with produce purchased for that purpose: Forty
dollars ($40.00) per day;
      2.   Stocks or samples of goods, wares or merchandise and offering the
same for sale at public auction, private sale or house to house, either at the
present or future, shall first purchase a vendor permit from the village office
in the amount of thirty five dollars ($35.00) per day;
      3.   Exemptions from permit fees shall be as follows:
         a.   Residents within the village limits may hold garage sales on
their lots or property no more than three (3) times per year for a maximum of
three (3) days each time so long as the merchandise is from their home or
property;
         b.   Church and civic clubs that hold events to raise money to be used
in the village or traditional fiestas shall be exempt from paying a vendor
permit fee provided that such events are no more than semiannual and shall not
last for more than three (3) consecutive days.
   D.   Vendor Permit To Be Carried; Transfer Prohibited:
      1.   The vendor permit issued to a vendor under this section, shall be
carried with the vendor while he is engaged in the business of vending;
      2.   Vendor permits shall be used only by the person to whom they were
issued and may not be transferred to any other person.
   E.   Suspension Or Revocation:
      1.   Any vendor permit issued under this section may be suspended or
revoked for any of the following reasons:
         a.   Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the permit;
         b.   Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting the
business of vending;
         c.   Conducting the business of vending contrary to the conditions of
the permit;
         d.   Conducting the business of vending in such a manner as to create
a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety or
welfare.
      2.   Upon suspension or revocation of a vendor permit under this section,
the village shall deliver written notice to the permit holder stating the
action taken and the reasons supporting such action. The written notice shall
be delivered to the permit holder's place of business or mailed to the permit
holder's last known address.
   F.   Appeals: Persons who are denied vendor permits under this section or
whose permit has been suspended or revoked may appeal such decision by filing a
written notice of appeal with the governing body. The appeal must be filed
within three (3) working days after receipt of the notice of denial, suspension
or revocation. The governing body shall hear and determine the appeal and the
decision of the governing body thereon shall be final.
   G.   Penalty For Violation: Any person operating as a vendor without first
obtaining a vendor permit as required by this section or otherwise violating
any provision of the section shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance
with section
 5.08.060, "Violation; Penalty", of this code.
   H.   Restriction Applicable To All Vendors:
      1.   Stands: Vendor stands shall not:
         a.   Impede motor vehicle traffic, pedestrian traffic or create any
hazard by obstructing the view of motor vehicle traffic, even if the
merchandise is totally upon the property being used by the permittee;
         b.   Have any apparatus connected to or attached to a building or
stand which hangs over any public right of way or is less than seven feet (7')
above ground level;
         c.   Exceed a total area of one hundred (100) square feet;
         d.   Impede access to the entrance of any adjacent building or
driveway;
         e.   Be located within one hundred feet (100') of a fire station or
police station.
      2.   Removal Of Trash: All trash and debris accumulating on the lot or
within fifty feet (50') of the lot of any vending stand shall be collected by
the vendor and removed from the vicinity.
   I.   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   PUBLIC STREET OR SIDEWALK: Means and includes all areas legally open to
public use as public streets, sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways, alleys
and any other public way.
   STAND: Any newsstand, table, bench, booth, open air tent, rack, handcart,
pushcart or any other fixture or device which is not required to be licensed
and registered by the department of motor vehicles, used for the display,
storage or transportation of article offered for sale by a vendor.
   VENDOR/MERCHANT: Any person, including an employee or agent of another, who
sells or offers to sell food, beverages, goods or merchandise on any public
street, sidewalk or property, from a stand, motor vehicle or from his person,
or one who travels by foot, wagon, motor vehicle, pushcart or any other method
of transportation from house to house or street to street selling or offering
to sell food, beverages, goods or merchandise. (Ord. 337, 2006)
17.36.110: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
   A.   Accessory structures shall be located in the rear of or on the side of
the main building(s) not facing the street.
   B.   Accessory structures shall meet all setback requirements. (Ord. 256
art. III § 5K, 1993)
CHAPTER 17.40
M-1 MANUFACTURING ZONE
SECTION:
17.40.010: Purpose
17.40.020: Development Requirements
17.40.030: Permitted Uses
17.40.040: Temporary Uses
17.40.050: Conditional Uses
17.40.060: Accessory Uses And Structures
17.40.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the M-1 zone is to provide a wide variety of light industry,
fabricating, processing, wholesale distributing and warehousing uses
appropriately located relative to major transportation facilities and separated
from residential zoning districts. The majority of these business activities
will be conducted within enclosed buildings. Land use in this district shall be
constructed and operated to ensure that there is no excessive noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, toxic or noxious matter, humidity, heat or glare at or beyond the
lot line of the parcel on which such an operation is located. In addition, the
manufacturing zone advances the following objectives:
   A.   To reserve potential industrial use areas, protecting them from
intrusion by dwellings and other incompatible uses;
   B.   To provide sufficient open space around industrial structures to
protect the public from hazards and to minimize the impact of industrial
operations on residential and commercial uses;
   C.   To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of
utilities by restricting the construction of buildings of excessive size in
relation to the amount of land around them. (Ord. 256 art. III § 6A, 1993)
17.40.020: DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Development requirements in the M-1 district are:
      1.   Minimum lot area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet;
      2.   Minimum lot width: Sixty feet (60');
      3.   Minimum lot depth: Seventy feet (70');
      4.   Minimum front setback: Twenty five feet (25');
      5.   Minimum side setback: Seven feet (7');
      6.   Minimum rear setback: Fifteen feet (15');
      7.   Maximum height: Forty five feet (45').
   B.   Additionally, all development in this zone shall meet the standards
contained in chapters 17.48, 17.52 and 17.56 of this title and the permissible
and nonpermissible designs contained in appendix A of the zoning ordinance,
which is on file in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 256 art. III § 6B,
1993)
17.40.030: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the M-1 district include:
Bottling, packing and processing plants.
Charitable or school sponsored drop off bins for recycling of cans, newspapers
or similar items, for drop off of clothes and small items. Bins shall be
located in the parking lots of businesses within the M-1 zone on a temporary
basis when written permission is granted by the property owner or business
owner. Said bins shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner.
Christmas tree sales lots, Halloween pumpkin sales, and other holiday sales
subject to not more than forty (40) calendar days of site occupation and
operation in any one calendar year.
Distributors, showrooms and administrative offices.
Dwelling for resident watchmen and caretakers employed on the property.
Garages for the repair of passenger vehicles, light trucks, vans and
motorcycles.
Laboratories: dental, electrical, optical and mechanical.
Manufacturing, compounding or assembly not involving explosive, caustic or
acidic processes.
Ministorage, public storage and storage warehouses.
Paint shops: mixing, preparation and application.
Printing, publishing, lithography and related distribution facilities. (Ord.
256 art. III § 6C, 1993)
17.40.040: TEMPORARY USES:
These uses require a temporary use permit. Temporary uses in the M-1 district
include:
Carnivals, rodeos, parades or similar outdoor entertainment or enterprises,
subject to not more than five (5) calendar days of operation in any calendar
year. Requests exceeding those time limitations will require the submittal and
approval of a conditional use permit.
Contractor's offices and storage yards on the site of an active construction
project.
Mobile home residences for security purposes on the site of an active
construction project.
Outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits, subject to not more than three (3)
calendar days of operation or exhibition in any sixty (60) calendar day period.
Outdoor display and sales located within manufacturing zoned properties not to
exceed more than five (5) calendar days and subject to appropriate conditions
of this code. (Ord. 256 art. III § 6D, 1993)
17.40.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
These uses require a conditional use permit. Conditional uses in the M-
1 district include:
Automobile, truck or bus fleet storage.
Commercial and industrial laundries and dry cleaning establishments.
Garages for repair of semitrucks, buses, and other heavy vehicles and
equipment.
Industries involving milling, bulk grinding or refining.
Manufacturing, compounding or assembly involving explosive, caustic or acidic
processes.
Public and private utility installations.
Slaughtering, processing or rendering of animals or their byproducts.
Storage of wrecked or dismantled vehicles and parts thereof.
Wholesale distribution centers. (Ord. 256 art. III § 6E, 1993)
17.40.060: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Accessory structures shall be located in the rear of or on the side of
the main building(s) not facing the street.
   B.   Accessory structures shall meet all setback requirements. (Ord. 256
art. III § 6F, 1993)
CHAPTER 17.42
RURAL AGRICULTURE DISTRICT AND HOLDING ZONE
SECTION:
17.42.010: Purpose
17.42.020: Development Standards
17.42.030: Permitted Uses
17.42.040: Temporary Uses
17.42.050: Conditional Uses
17.42.010: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to conserve and protect farms and other open land
uses, foster orderly growth in rural and outlying areas, and prevent urban and
agricultural land use conflicts. The district is also intended for property
that is predominantly not developed for the protecting owners who are not ready
to develop their property. Only one dwelling unit and accessory building per
lot are allowed. (Ord. 304, 2001)
17.42.020: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
 
Minimum lot area      10 acres
Minimum lot frontage  120 feet
Minimum lot depth     200 feet
Minimum front setback 50 feet
Minimum side setback  20 feet
Minimum rear setback  50 feet
Maximum height        35 feet
 
(Ord. 304, 2001)
17.42.030: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted by right in the rural agriculture district and
holding zone in accordance with the stated provisions:
4-H or FFA projects: Permitted when conducted for educational purposes or
school credits when the codes enforcement officer determines that such use will
not cause a public nuisance from sanitation, noise, odor, or traffic and
inconvenience to the general neighborhood.
Agricultural buildings.
Commercial and noncommercial raising of crops, provided there is no nuisance to
neighboring property due to odor, dust, fertilizers, herbicides and noise.
Detached single-family dwelling.
Guest dwelling or accessory living quarters.
Home occupation permits.
Keeping of fowl or livestock, provided that such use will not cause a public
nuisance from sanitation, noise, odor, or traffic and inconvenience the
neighborhood.
Mobile home on individual lots, tied down and skirted, and certified under the
national mobile home construction and safety standards act of 1974.
Produce stand: Permitted when products are raised on the premises and provided
there shall be no more than one stand per lot, parcel or tract; and further
provided such stand shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet.
Public or private parks or recreational uses.
Residential type satellite dishes and receiving antenna.
Swimming pools: Permitted only when a protective fence four feet (4') in height
is provided around the yard, lot or pool area. The pool shall be five feet (5')
from any property line and approval from all utilities is required to ensure
overhead safety.
Yard sales, garage sales or similar uses: Permitted at the rate of three (3)
sales per year at a given address. Such sales shall not exceed three (3)
consecutive days. (Ord. 304, 2001)
17.42.040: TEMPORARY USES:
These uses require a temporary use permit. Temporary uses in the rural
agriculture district and holding zone include:
Contractor's offices, mobile home residences for security guards and storage
yards on the site of an active construction project.
Religious, patriotic, historic or similar displays or exhibits within yards,
parking areas or landscaped areas, for not more than twenty (20) consecutive
days of display. (Ord. 304, 2001)
17.42.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses require a conditional use permit. Conditional uses in the
rural agriculture district and holding zone include:
Aboveground storage tanks exceeding five hundred (500) gallons in capacity for
flammable and combustible liquids. Tanks shall be permitted only when meeting
uniform fire code requirements.
Aboveground storage tanks exceeding five hundred (500) gallons in capacity for
liquid petroleum (LP) gas. Tanks shall be permitted only when meeting the
uniform fire code requirements.
Childcare and home care centers.
Churches.
Community buildings. (Ord. 304, 2001)
CHAPTER 17.44
LEGAL NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
SECTION:
17.44.010: Purpose
17.44.020: Date When Use Or Structures Become Legally Nonconforming
17.44.030: Discontinuation Of Nonconforming Uses
17.44.040: Continuation And Maintenance
17.44.050: Alterations And Additions To Legal Nonconforming Uses And Structures
17.44.060: Restoration Of A Damaged Structure
17.44.010: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to limit the enlargement, the reestablishment after
abandonment, and alteration or restoration after destruction of legal
nonconforming uses or structures, including mobile homes. While permitting the
use and maintenance of existing legal nonconforming uses and structures, this
chapter limits the number and extent of such uses and structures by prohibiting
their being moved, altered, replaced or enlarged in a manner that would
increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the standards
prescribed in this title and by prohibiting their restoration after
destruction. (Ord. 285 § 5, 1997: Ord. 256 art. III § 7A, 1993)
17.44.020: DATE WHEN USE OR STRUCTURES BECOME LEGALLY NONCONFORMING:
Any structure or use which meets existing codes and standards becomes legally
nonconforming whenever a change in zone boundaries or a change in regulation
for the zone in which it is located takes effect, which change makes the
previously legally conforming use a nonconforming use. A use or structure
located on a property which conformed to an existing zoning law when commenced
or constructed, but which becomes nonconforming due to a subsequent change in
zoning classification or zoning laws shall be deemed to be legally
nonconforming, and may be continued except as otherwise provided in this title.
(Ord. 256 art. III § 7B, 1993)
17.44.030: DISCONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING USES:
Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued or changed to a conforming
use for a continuous period of one hundred twenty (120) calendar days or more,
the nonconforming use shall not be reestablished. The use of the structure or
site shall thereafter be in conformity with the regulations for the zone in
which it is located. Discontinuation shall include cessation of a use
regardless of the intent to resume the use unless the governing body is
notified in writing of the intent to resume the use and is provided with a
schedule for resumption of the use within one week of its discontinuance and
the governing body has approved in writing a schedule for resumption of said
use. (Ord. 256 art. III § 7C, 1993)
17.44.040: CONTINUATION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   A use lawfully occupying a structure or a site that does not conform to
the performance standards for the zone in which the use is located shall be
deemed to be a nonconforming use and may be continued except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
   B.   A structure, lawfully occupying a site, that does not conform with the
performance standards for front yard, side yard, rear yard, height, coverage or
distances between structures, for the zone in which the structure is located,
shall be deemed a nonconforming structure and may be maintained, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
   C.   Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on a structure or
site, the use of which is nonconforming and on a nonconforming structure. (Ord.
256 art. III § 7D, 1993)
17.44.050: ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS TO LEGAL NONCONFORMING USES AND
STRUCTURES:
   A.   No structure, the use of which is legally nonconforming, shall be
moved, altered or enlarged unless required by law, or unless the moving,
alteration or enlargement will result in the elimination of the nonconformity,
except as permitted in this chapter.
   B.   No legal nonconforming use shall be enlarged or extended in such a way
as to occupy any part of the structure or site or another structure or site
which it did not occupy at the time it became a legal nonconforming use, or in
such a way as to displace any conforming use occupying a structure or site,
except as permitted in this chapter.
   C.   No legal nonconforming structure shall be altered, replaced or
reconstructed in any manner which increases the discrepancy between the use and
the standards of the zone in which the use is located including building
habitability rating and the property development standards for front yard, side
yards and rear yard, height of structures, or unusable open space prescribed in
the zone in which the structure is located. No legal nonconforming structure
shall be moved or enlarged unless the new location or enlargement shall conform
to the property development standards for the zone in which it is located.
(Ord. 256 art. III § 7E, 1993)
17.44.060: RESTORATION OF A DAMAGED STRUCTURE:
   A.   Whenever a structure which does not comply with the property
development standards for front yard, side yards, rear yard, height of
structures, or distances prescribed in the zone in which the structure is
located, or the use of which does not conform with the performance standards
for the zone in which it is located, is destroyed by fire or other calamity, by
act of God, or by public enemy to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or less,
the structure may be restored and the nonconforming use resumed, provided that
restoration is started within one year and diligently pursued to completion.
When the destruction exceeds fifty percent or the structure is voluntarily
razed or is required by law to be razed, the structure shall not be restored
except in full conformity with the property development standards for the zone
in which it is located and the nonconforming use shall not be resumed.
   B.   The extent of damage or partial destruction shall be based upon the
ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the structure to its condition prior
to such damage or partial destruction to the estimated cost of duplicating the
entire structure as it existed prior to the damage. Estimates for this purpose
shall be made by or shall be reviewed and approved by the governing body and
shall be based on the minimum cost of construction in compliance with the
building code. (Ord. 256 art. III § 7F, 1993)
CHAPTER 17.48
PARKING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
17.48.010: Parking And Access Requirements
17.48.020: Residential And Lodging Uses
17.48.030: Office And Personal Service Establishments
17.48.040: Retail Establishments
17.48.050: Restaurants And Entertainment Establishments
17.48.060: Schools, Churches, Community Centers And Hospitals
17.48.070: Industry, Manufacturing, Warehousing And Wholesale Establishments
17.48.080: Parking Plan Approval
17.48.090: Design Of Parking Areas
17.48.100: Permissible And Nonpermissible Designs
17.48.110: Parking Spaces For The Handicapped
17.48.120: Loading Space Requirements
17.48.130: Construction Standards
17.48.140: Enlargement Of Existing Buildings Or Expansion Of Use
17.48.010: PARKING AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
Parking requirements shall be based on the land use or type of business. Uses
not specified herein shall follow the parking requirements within the category
most appropriate to that use as determined by the village planning and zoning
commission. The number of spaces shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.
All parking required for a particular use to meet the requirements of this code
shall be on property under common ownership and control of the use it supports,
and shall be safe and convenient for access to the property on which the
primary structure used in the business is located. Property providing approved
parking for a business shall be considered a part of the activity of the
business and therefore part of the business premises, regardless of whether it
is part of the same property or contiguous to other property used in the
business. All parking areas must have ingress and egress from a public street.
(Ord. 369, 2011)
17.48.020: RESIDENTIAL AND LODGING USES:
Parking requirements for residential and lodging uses are as follows:
 
Boarding houses and similar uses  2 spaces plus 1 space for each person,
                                  resident or member
                                  1 space for each guestroom in addition
Hotels and motels                 to requirements for auxiliary uses such
                                  as restaurants or shops
Multi-family dwellings (3 or more 2 spaces per dwelling unit shall be
units)                            provided
                                  2 off street parking spaces shall be
                                  provided. 1/3 of any part of a front
                                  yard of a dwelling may be used for
One- and two-family dwellings     parking, except in cases of a cul-de-sac
                                  where 2/3 of a front yard is
                                  permissible, and on existing 50 foot
                                  lots where 20 foot width parking is
                                  permissible
Recreation vehicle parks          1 space per RV space
 
(Ord. 256 art. IV § 1A, 1993)
17.48.030: OFFICE AND PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS:
Parking requirements for office and personal service establishments are as
follows:
Childcare center, institutional home,   1 space per employee per shift in
nursery or similar use                  addition to 1 space for each 5 children
                                        of maximum occupancy
                                        1 space for each full time employee
                                        plus stacking lane requirements stated
Drive-in bank                           in "drive- up window service
                                        establishments" for each drive-in
                                        window
                                        Establishments having drive-up window
                                        services shall provide lane(s) 10 feet
Drive-up window service establishments  in width and a total of 180 feet in
                                        length. All traffic and parking shall
                                        be maintained off street
                                        1 space for each 50 square feet of
                                        floor area in funeral service and
Funeral homes                           slumber rooms. Parking lane(s) shall be
                                        15 feet in width, and a total length of
                                        100 feet
Large business offices (banks,          1 space for each company owned vehicle,
telephone, electric companies and other in addition to 1 space for each 300
similar offices)                        square feet of floor area
Professional and personal services      1 space for each 250 feet of gross
(medical and dental offices, barbers,   floor area
hairdressers and similar uses)
Service establishments:                  
  Low volume (dry cleaning, equipment   1 space for each 300 square feet of
 rentals, small and large item repair  floor space
  shops and similar uses)
 High volume (coin operated laundry)   1 space for each 250 square feet of
                                        floor area
Small office establishments (law,       2 spaces plus 1 space for each 300
accounting, engineering and real estate square feet of floor area
offices)
 
(Ord. 256 art. IV § 1B, 1993)
17.48.040: RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS:
Parking requirements for retail establishments are as follows:
 
Large volume retail sales of small
domestic products and groceries, and   1 space for each 200 feet of floor area
shopping centers
Retail sales of vehicles, heavy        1 space for each company vehicle plus 1
equipment, and other large products    space for each 350 square feet of
(automobiles, boats, mobile home and   interior floor space, or 5 spaces plus 1
recreational vehicle sales, farm       for each employee, whichever number is
equipment and similar businesses)      greater
Small volume retail sales of domestic
and specialized products such as
plumbing, electrical and hardware      3 spaces plus 1 space for each 300
supplies, furniture, automotive parts, square feet of floor area
cabinet, carpet, clothing and shoe
stores
                                       When a building used for retail sales
                                       has an area larger than 20 percent of
                                       its gross floor area being used
Storage areas of retail businesses     specifically for storage of products
                                       sold within the store, 80 percent of the
                                       total area used for storage may be
                                       subtracted from the floor area used for
                                       off street parking computations
 
(Ord. 256 art. IV § 1C, 1993)
17.48.050: RESTAURANTS AND ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS:
Parking requirements for restaurants and entertainment establishments are as
follows:
 
Court or alley entertainment (uses
which involve courts or alleys such as  4 spaces for each court or alley, in
tennis courts, handball courts,         addition to 1 space for each employee
basketball courts, bowling alleys or    on the largest shift
similar uses)
Entertainment and amusement enterprises
(auditoriums, theaters, arenas, dance   1 space for each 100 hundred square
halls, private clubs and lodges,        feet of floor area plus 1 space for
meeting halls, skating rinks and        each employee on the largest shift
similar uses)
                                        1 space for each 100 square feet of
                                        floor space plus 1 space for each 2
Food and beverage establishments        employees on the largest shift. 1 space
(restaurants, cafes, bars, lounges,     is required for each 200 square feet of
coffee shops, donut shops and other     outdoor patio area. Drive- up window
similar uses)                           establishments are required to provide
                                        lanes which are at least 10 feet in
                                        width and 180 feet in length
 
(Ord. 256 art. IV § 1D, 1993)
17.48.060: SCHOOLS, CHURCHES, COMMUNITY CENTERS AND HOSPITALS:
Parking requirements for these uses are as follows:
 
Churches                               1 space for each 4 seats of maximum
                                       occupancy in the principal assembly room
Community buildings, libraries,        1 space for each 250 square feet of
museums, administration buildings, art floor area
galleries and centers
                                       1 space for each 2 beds, in addition to
Hospitals and nursing homes            1 space for each employee on the largest
                                       shift
                                       High schools and middle schools must
                                       provide 1 space for each 250 square feet
                                       of floor area including 70 percent of
Schools                                the area used for gymnasiums and
                                       auditoriums. Elementary schools must
                                       provide 1 space for each classroom, plus
                                       1 space for each employee on the largest
                                       shift
 
(Ord. 256 art. IV § 1E, 1993)
17.48.070: INDUSTRY, MANUFACTURING, WAREHOUSING AND WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENTS:
Parking requirements for these uses are as follows:
 
                                       1 space per each employee working on the
Production line industries employing   busiest shift, plus 1 for each company
large numbers of office and production owned truck/vehicle and one visitor's
workers                                space for each 1,000 square feet, up to
                                       20,000 square feet
                                       1 space for each 1,000 square feet of
                                       floor space. In cases of wholesale
                                       establishments where more than 30
Storage areas                          percent of the total floor area is used
                                       for storage, 70 percent of the given
                                       storage area shall be used for parking
                                       computations
Warehouses in which the primary use is 1 space per employee plus 1 space per
storage and which employ fewer than 10 2,000 square feet of floor area up to
employees                              30,000 square feet, plus 1 space for
                                       each company owned vehicle
Wholesale establishments in which the  1 space for each 500 square feet of
primary use is wholesale sales         floor area
 
(Ord. 256 art. IV § 1F, 1993)
17.48.080: PARKING PLAN APPROVAL:
Detailed plans for on street or off street parking and driveway openings for
all uses in the C-1 and M-1 zoning districts shall be submitted to the planning
and zoning commission for approval prior to construction. All curb cuts require
approval from the governing body. (Ord. 256 art. IV § 1G, 1993)
17.48.090: DESIGN OF PARKING AREAS:
Parking areas for all uses except permitted uses in the R-1 and R-1-M zoning
districts shall meet the following criteria:
 
Stall Dimensions                     Width Of Aisle
Parking Angle Stall Width Stall Base Stall Depth One-Way Two-Way Traffic
                                                 Traffic
45            9'          14'        21'         13'     24'
60            9'          12'        22'         18'     24'
90            9'          9'         19'         27'     27'
Parallel      9'          9'         22'         12'     24'
 
(Ord. 256 art. IV § 1H, 1993)
17.48.100: PERMISSIBLE AND NONPERMISSIBLE DESIGNS:
Parking areas must meet the designs shown in appendix A of the zoning
ordinance, which is on file in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 256 art.
IV § 1I, 1993)
17.48.110: PARKING SPACES FOR THE HANDICAPPED:
Handicapped parking spaces except in the R-1 and R-1-M zoning districts shall
meet the following criteria: a) shall be located so as to provide the most
convenient access to entry ways or to the nearest curb; b) designated
handicapped spaces must be clearly designated as being reserved for handicapped
only; c) the minimum number of designated parking spaces is as follows:
 
Total Spaces In Parking Lot Minimum Designated Parking Spaces
0 – 25                     1
26 – 35                    2
36 – 50                    3
51 – 100                   4
101 – 300                  8
More than 300                8 plus 1 for each additional 50 spaces over 300
 
(Ord. 256 art. IV § 1J, 1993)
17.48.120: LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
Off street loading spaces shall be provided and maintained for every building
or part thereof occupied or used for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods
display, retail sales, wholesale marketing, hotels, mortuaries, hospital, or
high volume service industries, or similar uses requiring the receipt or
distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise. Spaces to be provided
shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
   A.   One loading space for the first ten thousand (10,000) square feet or
less of gross floor area;
   B.   One additional loading space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet
of gross floor area in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor
area;
   C.   Minimum dimensions for each loading space is twelve feet by forty five
feet (12' x 45') and overhead clearance of fourteen feet (14') from ground
level;
   D.   Loading and unloading areas shall be so located and designed that the
vehicles intended to use them can maneuver safely and conveniently to and from
a public right of way or from a parking aisle developed for the use requiring
the loading and unloading area;
   E.   Loading and unloading areas may not be used to satisfy the area
requirements for off street parking, nor shall any portion of any off street
parking area be used to satisfy the area requirements for loading and
unloading; and
   F.   Loading and unloading areas may not be used to satisfy the setback
requirements for the proposed use. (Ord. 256 art. IV § 1K, 1993)
17.48.130: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
All parking spaces and areas shall meet the following standards:
   A.   Be paved with asphalt, double penetration chip seal, or other
appropriate durable surface as approved by the governing body;
   B.   Provide adequate drainage. A drainage plan will be required for major
developments, including parking, and said plans must be approved by the
governing body prior to construction;
   C.   Have bumper guards where needed;
   D.   Be provided with necessary space and aisle safety markings;
   E.   Have direct ingress and egress to a public street;
   F.   When it can be established that two (2) businesses located on adjacent
properties operate at different hours, parking requirements may be shared
jointly according to the maximum parking requirements of the two (2)
properties, provided there is a written agreement thereby assuring the
retention for such purposes and starting hours of operation. The agreement
shall be properly executed by the owners of both properties and shall be
approved as to the content and form by the planning and zoning commission.
(Ord. 256 art. IV § 1L, 1993)
17.48.140: ENLARGEMENT OF EXISTING BUILDINGS OR EXPANSION OF USE:
Whenever an existing building or use is enlarged to the extent of thirty
percent (30%) or more of the existing floor area, the entire building shall
then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein.
Whenever a building is enlarged in floor area less than thirty percent (30%) of
the existing floor area, additional spaces shall be provided to meet the
enlargement. (Ord. 256 art. IV § 1M, 1993)
CHAPTER 17.52
FENCE AND WALL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
17.52.010: Maximum Height/Clear Sight Triangle
17.52.020: Exclusion From Public Right Of Way
17.52.030: Walls And Fences Around Swimming Pools
17.52.040: Walls And Fences Around Tennis Courts
17.52.010: MAXIMUM HEIGHT/CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE:
   A.   No freestanding wall over eight feet (8') in height from ground surface
level shall be permitted.
   B.   There shall be no fence, wall or obstruction more than three feet (3')
above street curb level within the clear sight triangle or thirty feet (30') in
both directions on the property line from the corner, or in the clear sight
triangle for entry and exit of off street parking areas. (Ord. 256 art. IV §
2A, 1993)
17.52.020: EXCLUSION FROM PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
No wall or fence will be permitted in a public right of way. (Ord. 256 art. IV
§ 2B, 1993)
17.52.030: WALLS AND FENCES AROUND SWIMMING POOLS:
All swimming pools or yards in which swimming pools are located shall be
completely enclosed by a wall or fence at least six feet (6') in height with
self-closing devices on gates. (Ord. 256 art. IV § 2C, 1993)
17.52.040: WALLS AND FENCES AROUND TENNIS COURTS:
Tennis courts may have walls with a maximum height of eight feet (8') or fences
with a maximum height of sixteen feet (16') provided they shall be located in
the side or rear yard and shall be seven feet (7') or more from the property
line. (Ord. 256 art. IV § 2D, 1993)
CHAPTER 17.56
SIGNS
SECTION:
17.56.010: Location Criteria
17.56.020: Number Of Signs
17.56.030: Size Of Signs
17.56.040: Height And Width Of Signs
17.56.050: Limitations On Illuminated Signs
17.56.060: Portable Signs
17.56.070: Prohibited Signs
17.56.010: LOCATION CRITERIA:
Business signs and advertising signs are permitted on private property in the
C-1 and M-1 zoning districts which advertise, identify, or direct to a use
currently conducted on the same premises. Signs that advertise the name of a
business within the limits of the village of Hatch, which may describe the
general nature of the goods or services offered and the location of the
business, may be located on any C-1 or M-1 property so long as such signs
comply with the limitations in sections
17.56.020,
17.56.030 and
17.56.040 of this chapter. The location of such signs must be such that no part
of any sign overhangs or intrudes into the public right of way. (Ord. 369,
2011)
17.56.020: NUMBER OF SIGNS:
Not more than two (2) signs are permitted for any one business with street
frontage of fifty feet (50') or less. Not more than four (4) signs are
permitted for any one business with more than fifty feet (50') of street
frontage. A composite group of small signs integrated into one framed unit
shall constitute one sign. (Ord. 256 art. IV § 3B, 1993)
17.56.030: SIZE OF SIGNS:
   A.   The total aggregate of all faces of signs or combinations of signs
painted on or attached to a structure and allowed for the property shall not
exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
   B.   The total aggregate of all faces of stand alone signs or combinations
of stand alone signs shall not exceed seventy five (75) square feet per
property. (Ord. 256 art. IV § 3C, 1993)
17.56.040: HEIGHT AND WIDTH OF SIGNS:
   A.   The height of a sign is measured from ground level at the base of the
sign to the top of the highest part of the sign surface. The maximum height of
any sign shall not exceed thirty feet (30'). A sign mounted on, painted on, or
attached to a building may not extend above the height of the building.
   B.   The height of a freestanding sign may not exceed ten feet (10').
   C.   The maximum width of attached signs shall not exceed fifteen feet
(15'). The maximum width of freestanding signs shall not exceed ten feet (10').
(Ord. 256 art. IV § 3D, 1993)
17.56.050: LIMITATIONS ON ILLUMINATED SIGNS:
Illuminated signs, except illuminated clocks, thermometers and illuminated
signs within a building, shall be turned off at ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
Mountain Standard Time (11:00 P.M. Mountain Daylight Saving Time), unless the
business is conducted beyond that time. Illuminated signs for businesses
operating after the times stipulated above shall be turned off no later than
the time of closing of the business each day. No illuminated signs shall be so
located as to shine directly into adjacent residential property. (Ord. 256 art.
IV § 3E, 1993)
17.56.060: PORTABLE SIGNS:
   A.   No more than one portable sign shall be allowed per lot, and only in
the C-1 and M-1 zoning districts.
   B.   Portable signs transported on trailers shall meet all applicable state
and local laws regulating hitch and safety devices.
   C.   Every portable sign not in transit shall be securely anchored to the
ground by ground supports to prevent overturning in high winds.
   D.   Portable signs shall be considered nonmobile, nonportable ground signs
and are subject to all provisions of this chapter, including the structural
requirements, spacing requirements, permitting and fee requirements, and all
other provisions of this chapter applicable to ground signs unless a provision
which applies by its terms to portable signs is in conflict with a provision
applying to ground signs, in which case the provisions applying specifically to
portable signs control.
   E.   Portable signs shall not be placed so as to infringe on the public
right of way or obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic on private property.
(Ord. 256 art. IV § 3F, 1993)
17.56.070: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
No sign shall be constructed which resembles any official marker erected by the
village of Hatch, or the federal, state or county governments. Spectacular
signs are also prohibited. No sign shall be permitted, whether attached or
freestanding, which advertises a particular product, except where that product
is available at a business on the property, or for which the property is part
of the premises of the business. (Ord. 369, 2011)
CHAPTER 17.60
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
17.60.010: Definitions
17.60.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: A subordinate building or use, the use of which is
incidental to and customarily found in connection with the principal building
or use, and located on the same lot with the principal building or use. An
accessory use shall not exceed one-fourth (1/4) of the use or area of the main
business or building. Accessory buildings may be built in a required rear yard
but such accessory building shall not be nearer than ten feet (10') to the main
building nor be located less than five feet (5') from the rear lot line. The
use of an accessory building shall be appropriate, subordinate, and customarily
incidental to the main use of the lot.
ACRE: An area of land consisting of forty three thousand five hundred sixty
(43,560) square feet.
ALLEY: A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting property. An alley is not to be used for through traffic or as primary
access to a property.
AMENDMENT: A change in the wording, context or substance of this code, an
addition or deletion, or a change in the zoning district boundaries or
classifications upon the official zoning map, which imposes any regulation not
heretofore imposed, or removes or modifies any such regulation theretofore
imposed.
APARTMENT: A multi-dwelling unit used exclusively for lease or rent as a
residence.
ATTACHED: Any structure or building having a common wall with another structure
or building.
BILLBOARD: Any sign larger than eight feet by twelve feet (8' x 12') erected
along any street within the boundaries of the municipality.
BLOCK: Property bounded on one side by a street, railroad, right of way,
waterway, unsubdivided areas, or other definite boundaries.
BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling, other than a hotel, motel or tourist facility,
where, for compensation and by prearrangement, food and/or lodging are provided
for five (5) or more persons, eighteen (18) years of age or older, unrelated by
blood or marriage, including sorority and fraternity houses.
BUILDABLE DEPTH: The depth of the lot remaining to be built upon after the
required front and rear yards are provided.
BUILDABLE WIDTH: The width of the lot remaining to be built upon after the
required side yards are provided.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the
shelter or enclosure of persons or property.
BUILDING AREA: That area of a lot that is or may be occupied by buildings or
structures pursuant to the requirement of this code.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the grade to highest point of the
coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average
height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
CHILDCARE CENTER: A commercial or publicly sponsored establishment for the day
or night care of more than six (6) individuals under the age of eighteen (18),
not to include a halfway house.
CHURCH: A building or group of buildings used as a place of common worship or
gathering by or for any religious, nonprofit organization. Any commercial use
associated with a church that involves the sale of merchandise shall be subject
to the requirements of the zoning code pertaining to that use, and shall not be
considered as a church use for the purpose of this code.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE: An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections,
exits, or entrances over three feet (3') above the finished grade of the street
at the street corner which is bounded by:
   A.   The front street and side street lines of a corner lot and a line
connecting points thirty feet (30') distance from the intersection of the
property line of such lot;
   B.   The curb line of an intersection and a line connecting points forty
feet (40') distance from the corner of the intersection.
CLINIC: An establishment where patients are not lodged overnight, but are
admitted for examination or treatment by a physician, chiropractor, dentist,
optometrist, or group that is practicing together. As used in this title,
clinic does not refer to a veterinarian clinic.
CLUB OR LODGE: Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation,
association, person or persons for a social, intellectual, educational or
recreational purpose, but not for profit.
COMMUNITY CENTER: A building or buildings managed and operated by local
residents as a private, nonprofit corporation in the interest of community
development.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A compilation of policy statements, goals and objectives,
standards, maps and statistical data for the physical, social and economic
development, both public and private, of the village of Hatch.
CONDITIONAL USE: A specific land use of unusual character or potentially
incompatible in an area and which requires governing body approval for its use
on one specific parcel of land, such use being subject to a particular set or
conditions as approved in accordance with the provisions of this title, and not
permitted by right in a zoning district.
CONDOMINIUM: A residential, professional, commercial, official or industrial
development, in which each unit is owned individually, whether the unit
includes air space, walls, floors or any combination thereof, and in which
other areas and facilities within the development are owned and maintained
jointly by a group, association or corporate entity. Ground beneath each unit
is owned in common by the group, association or corporate entity.
CONTIGUOUS: Touching; or separated only by a street, alley, channels, canals,
or other public rights of way or railroad rights of way.
CONVENIENCE STORE: A retail sales establishment dealing primarily in groceries
and sundry items which is typically open approximately sixteen (16) hours per
day, seven (7) days per week.
COTTAGE INDUSTRY: A home based business or enterprise employing no more than
two (2) nonresident employees, and no more than four (4) total employees,
engaged in skilled and semiskilled trade, and as further identified in section
17.08.060 of this title.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street serving only those residences which access directly onto
it, and which terminates in a turnaround with a radius of at least forty feet
(40').
DAYCARE CENTER: Any childcare arrangement that provides daycare on a regular
basis for more than four (4) hours per day for more than five (5) children of
preschool age.
DETACHED: A unit, building or structure that is apart or separate from another.
DISTRICT: Any zone of the village within which certain zoning and land use
requirements are specified and are uniform, and which are designated on the
official zoning district map.
DUPLEX: A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by two (2)
families living independently of each other and having separate cooking
facilities in each dwelling unit.
DWELLING: A building or unit thereof designed and used exclusively for
residential occupancy.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: "Single-family dwelling" means a dwelling designed for
and occupied exclusively by one family.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: "Multiple-family dwelling" means a building or
buildings designed for three (3) or more families.
EASEMENT: A nonpossessing interest held by one person, party or entity in land
of another, whereby that person is accorded partial use of such land for a
specific use and enjoyment of his land.
FAMILY: Person(s) related by blood or marriage, or a group of not more than
five (5) persons who need not be related by blood or marriage, living together
as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling.
FARMERS MARKET: An open air market in which spaces are rented or leased for the
purpose of selling home crafts and agricultural products, excluding livestock.
FLOOR AREA: The gross square feet of floor area within a building or portion
thereof. For the purpose of this code, floor area and gross floor area shall be
the same, and shall be based on the outside dimensions of a building as shown
on a plot plan, and shall include interior balconies, mezzanines, stairwells,
storage areas, mechanical equipment areas and basements.
FOWL: Chicken, geese, turkey, guineas and other similarly sized birds.
FRONTAGE: Property on one side of a street measured along the line of the
street.
FREESTANDING WALL: Any wall which is neither load bearing nor contained within
a structure.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: "Public garage" means a building, or portion thereof, other
than a private or storage garage designed or used for servicing, repairing,
equipping, hiring, selling or storing motor driven vehicles.
GASOLINE STATION OR SERVICE STATION: A business where the primary use is to
sell motor vehicle fuels at retail prices.
GOVERNING BODY: The board of village trustees and the mayor of the village of
Hatch.
GRADE: The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground,
paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line
or, when the property line is more than five feet (5') from the building,
between the building and a line five feet (5') from the building.
GRANDFATHERING: The legal acceptance of a nonconforming use, which use was
legal under the applicable zoning in effect prior to adoption of the governing
body. This definition excludes any use that was illegal under any applicable
law, ordinance or regulation prior to the enactment of this title.
GROUND SURFACE LEVEL: That surface of a yard, which directly abuts a wall,
fence, building or structure, or the average grade level, whichever is most
appropriate.
HALFWAY HOUSE: A residential facility located in a structure or dwelling or any
living unit thereof designed, used or intended to be used as human habitation,
the principal use or goal of which is to serve as a place for persons seeking
rehabilitation, recovery or counseling from any physical, mental, emotional,
penal or legal infirmity, in a family setting, as part of a group
rehabilitation or recovery program.
HOME CARE CENTER: A facility which provides nursing and convalescent care under
the direction and supervision of licensed medical personnel for four (4) or
more unrelated recipients.
HOME OCCUPATION: A home based business or enterprise employing only the members
of the family residing on the site of the business or enterprise, engaged in
skilled and semiskilled trade, and as further identified in section
17.08.050 of this title.
HOTEL: A building in which lodging or boarding is offered to the public and in
which room assignments are made for compensation and in which entrance to and
exit from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a
person in charge at all times.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA: That ground area of a lot, tract or parcel, that is
not penetrable by water, to include, but not limited to buildings, structures,
pavement, sidewalks, and certain land covers for landscaping.
INSTITUTION: Building(s) housing an organization dedicated to public or
nonprofit service.
JUNKYARD: A place of any size where scrap, waste, discarded or salvaged
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled
or stored, including auto graveyards and yards for the storage of salvaged
house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment.
KENNEL: Any premises on which four (4) or more dogs, and/or cats, four (4)
months of age or older, are kept; and/or where the business of buying, selling,
breeding, training or boarding of dogs and/or cats is conducted.
LEGAL NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE: Any use or structure which legally
existed prior to a change in zone boundaries or regulation for the zone in
which it is located, which change or changes makes the previously legally
conforming use become nonconforming.
LESS RESTRICTIVE DISTRICT OR ZONE: A district in which the uses, requirements
and development standards are predominantly less intensive or are limited to a
lesser extent than other districts. For example, R-3 is less restrictive than
R-1.
LIVESTOCK: Horses, cows, swine, goats, sheep and similarly sized animals,
regardless of age, as well as fowl.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building
development. It also is a tract of land described by metes and bounds land held
in separate ownership, as shown on the records of the county assessor.
LOT AREA: The total area circumscribed by the boundaries of a lot, except that:
   A.   When the legal instrument creating a lot shows the boundary of the lot
extending into a public street right of way, then the lot boundary for purposes
of computing the lot area shall be the street right of way line, or if the
right of way line cannot be determined, a line parallel to and thirty feet
(30') from the center of the traveled portion of the street, and
   B.   In a residential district, where a private road that serves more than
three (3) dwelling units is located along any lot boundary, then the lot
boundary for purposes of computing the lot area shall be the boundary of the
traveled portion of that road.
LOT, CORNER: "Corner lot" means a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at
their intersection.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: "Double frontage lot" means an interior lot fronting on
two (2) streets. Both frontages shall be constructed front yards.
LOT, INTERIOR: "Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot with only one
frontage of a street other than an alley.
LOT LINE, FRONT: "Front lot line" means the boundary of a lot bordering on a
street. For the purpose of determining setback requirements on corner lot and
double frontage lots, all sides bordering on a street shall be considered the
front.
LOT LINE, REAR: "Rear lot line" means the boundary of a lot which is most
distant from, and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line; except
that in the absence of a rear lot line as is the case of the triangular shaped
lot, the rear lot line may be considered as a line within the lot, parallel to
and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of not less
than ten feet (10').
LOT LINE, SIDE: "Side lot line" means the boundary of a lot which is not a
front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH: The distance between side lot lines measured across the rear of the
required front yard, parallel to the street or street corner.
MAJOR COLLECTOR: Within the village of Hatch, Hall and Franklin Streets are
considered major thoroughfares.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING: A manufactured home or modular home that is a single-
family dwelling with a heated area of at least thirty six by twenty four feet
(36 x 24') and at least eight hundred sixty four (864) square feet, constructed
in a factory to the standards of the United States department of housing and
urban development (HUD), the national manufactured housing construction and
safety standards act of 1974 (42 USC 5401 et seq.) and the housing and urban
development zone code II or the uniform building code (UBC), as amended to the
date of the unit's construction, and installed consistent with the manufactured
housing act 1  and with the regulations made pursuant thereto relating to
ground level installation and ground anchors.
MINI-STORAGE UNIT: A mini-storage unit shall be construed as small storage
units, each used for the sole purpose of domestic storage for individuals and
strictly prohibiting the use for a business activity.
MINOR COLLECTOR: Within the village of Hatch, Canal Road and Railroad Street
are considered minor thoroughfares.
MOBILE HOME: A movable or portable housing structure larger than forty feet
(40') in body length, eight feet (8') in width or eleven feet (11') in overall
height, designed for and occupied by no more than one family for living and
sleeping purposes but does not include structures built to the standards of any
municipal code or other technical codes.
MOBILE HOME NEIGHBORHOOD: All land which is contained within an R-2-M zoning
district but which is not contained within a mobile home park.
MOBILE HOME PARK (MHP): A privately owned tract of land at least four (4) acres
in size in which mobile homes or mobile home spaces may be rented or leased for
residential use; also known as a mobile home court.
MOBILE HOME SPACE (MHSP): A parcel of land within a mobile home park rented or
intended to be rented to prospective renters by the owner.
MORE RESTRICTIVE DISTRICT OR ZONE: A district in which the uses, requirements,
and development standards are predominantly more intensive or are limited to a
greater extent than other districts. For example, an R-1 district is more
restrictive than R-2 district.
MOTEL (MOTOR COURT, MOTOR HOTEL, MOTOR LODGE): A building or buildings in which
lodging and/or boarding are offered to the public for compensation, and which
has separate entrance to the exterior from each unit with at least one parking
space for each unit.
NONCONFORMING: Land or the use of land or a building, or a portion thereof,
which does not conform with the current land use regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located.
NUISANCE: The use of property or land which creates unusual, unnecessary or
undue problems or situations for persons in the vicinity that would not have
occurred if the use were not present.
NURSERY: A place where young trees or other plants are used for transplanting
or for sale, excluding commercial fertilizer yard or processing plant.
OPEN SPACE: That area of a lot, tract or parcel not devoted to any building or
structure.
PARKING LOT: A parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces.
PARKING SPACE: A surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to
store one automobile, together with a surfaced driveway connecting the parking
space with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of an
automobile.
PERMANENT ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building or structure which is permanently
attached to a slab or foundation, the use of which is clearly incidental to the
principal building and which is located on the same lot. An accessory building
shall not be used for a business or dwelling.
PERMITTED USE: A use specifically permitted.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS: Businesses providing health, beauty, medical
or therapeutic services.
PORCH: A roofed patio entrance or exit area, open on at least one side.
PROPERTY LINE: The official boundary of a parcel, lot or tract of land as
designated by either a metes or bounds description or subdivision plat filed in
the records and maps of the county clerk.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Land area deeded, reserved or otherwise acquired by the
village, the county or the state of New Mexico for public use.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV):
   A.   Travel trailers, camping trailers, fifth wheel trailers, and all other
vehicles that are constructed to include a chassis, integral wheels and a
towing hitch, and are primarily designed or constructed to provide temporary,
readily movable living quarters for recreation, camping or travel uses;
   B.   Pickup campers, either mounted or nonmounted, or any structure designed
to be mounted in the bed of a truck and providing living quarters for
recreation, camping or travel uses;
   C.   Chassis mount, motor home, mini-motor home or other recreational
structure or vehicle constructed integrally with a truck or motor van chassis
and incapable of being separated therefrom, designed to be used for movable
living quarters for recreational, camping or travel uses;
   D.   Recreational vans or converted and chopped vans or other vehicles which
are either initially constructed or converted to contain living quarters for
recreational, camping or travel uses.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK (CAMPER PARK): A facility, at least one acre in size,
designed to accommodate residential parking of recreational vehicles, campers
and travel trailers.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE AREA (RVSA): A parcel of land on which
recreational vehicles are stored while not in use.
ROOF: An overhead structure used for protection or shielding from the sun, rain
or other elements of weather.
SCHOOL: An enterprise, operated for profit or not for profit, where the primary
function is instruction or teaching.
SCREENING AND BUFFERING: The use of walls, thick shrubbery or similar materials
to minimize the potentially adverse impact of one land use on another.
SETBACK: The shortest distance between the property line and the foundation,
wall or main frame of a building or structure. Where a site abuts a road or
highway having only a portion of its required right of way width dedicated or
reserved for roadway purposes, setbacks shall be measured from the line
establishing the additional width required for right of way purposes.
Where a site abuts an easement for access or a private access road is located
within the boundary lines of the site, the setback shall be measured from the
easement or from the private road. On a site which is not rectangular or
approximately rectangular in shape, the required setbacks shall be measured in
a manner prescribed by the planning and zoning commission.
SIGN: Any display to public view of letters, words, numerals, figures, devices,
emblems, pictures or any part or combinations thereof used to advertise or
promote merchandise, services or activities, except for the following:
   A.   Advertising within a building;
   B.   Advertising for community or civic events or construction projects on a
temporary basis;
   C.   Real estate signs, under six (6) square feet in area, advertising the
sale of a property;
   D.   Official historic markers;
   E.   Statues or other forms of visual artistic expression, including
containing letters, words, numerals, figures, devices, emblems and pictures
that advertise or promote merchandise, services, or activities, so long as the
advertising does not dominate the work, in its proportion to other aspects of
the statue or other artistic expression, or otherwise.
SIGN AREA: The total aggregate of all faces of signs or combination of signs
computed as follows:
   A.   Square or rectangular sign: the sum of the length times the height of
each face of the sign;
   B.   Irregularly shaped sign: the sum of the area of rectangles, circles,
ovals or triangles, or a combination thereof, necessary to enclose each face of
the sign;
   C.   Sign made of individual cutout letters: the sum of the area of the
rectangles necessary to enclose each letter.
SIGN, ATTACHED: "Attached sign" means a sign which is permanently mounted,
connected to, fastened to, painted on or otherwise made an integral part of a
building.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: "Freestanding sign" means a sign which is self-supporting,
or which is integrally designed and constructed to be freestanding.
SPECTACULAR SIGN: Any blinking, revolving, highly reflective, glittering or
digital sign.
SPOT ZONING: The singling out of a lot or small area for a zoning change which
is out of harmony with the comprehensive plan and surrounding land to secure
special benefits for a particular property owner without regard for the rights
of adjacent landowners.
STREET: A thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting
property, apartments, townhouses, condominiums, offices or businesses.
STREET, CURB LEVEL: "Curb level street" means a level measured from the street
surface or the top of an abutting curb.
STREET LINE: The outermost boundary or property line of a street surface or the
top of an abutting curb.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial
change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected between the ground and sky, the use
of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something
having permanent location on the ground.
SWIMMING POOL: A permanently installed artificial pond, generally with a
sloping bottom, in which the art of swimming is learned, practiced or enjoyed.
TEMPORARY EMERGENCY, CONSTRUCTION, OR REPAIR RESIDENCE: A residence (which may
be a mobile home) that is:
   A.   Located on the same lot as a residence made uninhabitable by fire,
flood, or other natural disaster and occupied by the persons displaced by such
disaster, or
   B.   Located on the same lot as a residence that is under construction or
undergoing substantial repairs or reconstruction and occupied by the persons
intending to live in such permanent residence when the work is completed, or
   C.   Located on a nonresidential construction site and occupied by persons
having construction or security responsibilities over such construction site.
TEMPORARY USE: A use permitted for a limited duration of time.
TOTAL HEIGHT: The distance between the ground surface level of a building or
structure and the highest point of the structure.
TOWNHOUSE: Any single-family dwelling unit, including the land underneath,
designed to be sold (fee simple) as a unit, but forming one of a group or
series of two (2) or more attached dwellings separated from one another by
common property lines, but limited to a maximum of ten (10) attached units in
one group.
USABLE OPEN SPACE: Open space within a lot, tract, parcel or development site
excluding areas devoted to roadways and parking. At least one-half (1/2) of all
areas designated as usable open space must have a slope of less than ten
percent (10%).
USE: The purpose for which land or buildings are arranged, designed, maintained
or occupied.
VARIANCE: A grant of permission by the governing body that authorizes the
recipient to do that which, according to the strict letter of this title, could
not otherwise legally be done.
WAREHOUSE: A building used primarily for storage of products or wares, in
conjunction with retail stores, not including accessory uses, such as
storerooms or stockrooms. Ministorage or self- storage of household goods and
similar uses shall not be construed as a warehouse use.
WHOLESALE SALES: On premises sale of goods primarily to customers engaged in
the business of reselling the goods.
YARD: The space on a lot unobstructed by buildings from the ground to the sky,
including sidewalks, driveways, patios, and other ground level surfaces.
YARD, FRONT: "Front yard" means the required yard between the front property
line and a building or structure.
YARD OR GARAGE SALE: A commercial activity operated for no more than three (3)
consecutive days. The activity shall be located at a private residence,
organized and operated by the property owner on his/her property, and shall not
exceed three (3) sales per year.
YARD, REAR: "Rear yard" means the required yard between a rear property line
and a building or structure.
YARD, SIDE: "Side yard" means the required yard between a side property line
and a building or structure.
ZERO LOT LINE: The construction of a building upon one side property line,
leaving a zero setback or distance from the property line to the structure or
building. (Ord. 382, 2016: Ord. 369, 2011: Ord. 356, 2009: Ord. 256 art. V,
1993)
 
Notes
1 1. NMSA 1978, chapter 60, article 14.
