CITY OF OXFORD, KANSAS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code current through ord. 356 published 9-2-2025
 
 
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Suite 310, Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
CHAPTER I: ADMINISTRATION
   Article
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   GOVERNING BODY
      
3.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
      
4.   PERSONNEL POLICY AND EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
      
5.   OATHS AND BONDS
      
6.   OPEN RECORDS
      
7.   INVESTMENT OF PUBLIC FUNDS
      
8.   LAND BANK
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
1-101   Code designated
   
1-102   Definitions
   
1-103   Existing ordinances
   
1-104   Effect of repeal
   
1-105   Catchlines of sections
   
1-106   Parenthetical and reference matter
   
1-107   Amendments; repeal
   
1-108   Ordinances
   
1-109   Same; subject and title; amendment
   
1-110   Same; publication
   
1-111   Same; ordinance book
   
1-112   Resolutions, motions
   
1-113   City records
   
1-114   Altering code
   
1-115   Scope of application
   
1-116   General penalty
   
1-117   Severability
§ 1-101 CODE DESIGNATED.
   The chapters, articles and sections herein shall constitute and be
designated as “The Code of the City of Oxford, Kansas,” and may be so cited.
The code may also be cited as the “Oxford City Code.”
§ 1-102 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Oxford, Kansas.
   CODE. The code of the City of Oxford, Kansas.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
   COUNTY. The County of Sumner in the State of Kansas.
   DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever a provision appears requiring or
authorizing the head of a department or officer of the city to do some act or
perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required
act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate
otherwise.
   GENDER. Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter.
   GOVERNING BODY. The Mayor and City Council of the city, or those persons
appointed to fill a vacancy in the office of Mayor or the Council as provided
in this code.
   IN THE CITY. Includes all territory in which the city now has or shall
hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other
regulatory powers.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons
or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
persons or officers.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   NUMBER. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the
plural include the singular.
   OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an OATH, and in such cases the word SWEAR is equivalent
to the word AFFIRM.
   OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS AND THE LIKE. Officers, departments, boards,
commissions and employees referred to in this code shall mean officers,
departments, boards, commissions and employees of the city, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
   OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include not only the owner of
the whole but any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or joint tenant of
the whole or a part of such building or land.
   PERSON. Includes a firm, partnership, association of persons, corporation,
organization or any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal and mixed property.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments, and all rights
thereto and interest therein, equitable as well as legal.
   SHALL, MAY. SHALL is mandatory and MAY is permissive.
   SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   SIGNATURE, SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark, when the person cannot write, when
his or her name is written near such mark and is witnessed by a person who
writes his or her own name as a witness.
   STATE. The State of Kansas.
   STREET. Includes public streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads,
alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto, and all other
public thoroughfares in the city.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, shall include any person
holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of,
such building or land, whether alone or with others.
   TENSES. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
   WRITING or WRITTEN. May include printing, engraving, lithography and any
other mode of representing words and letters, except those cases where the
written signature or the mark of any person is required by law.
   YEAR. A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.
§ 1-103 EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are in substance the
same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this
code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
§ 1-104 EFFECT OF REPEAL.
   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive an ordinance previously
repealed, nor shall such repeal affect any right that has accrued, any duty
imposed, any penalty incurred or any proceeding commenced under or by virtue of
the ordinance repealed, except as shall be expressly stated therein.
§ 1-105 CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.
   The catchlines of the sections of this code printed in capital letters are
intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall
not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of any
section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any
section, including its catchline, is amended or reenacted.
§ 1-106 PARENTHETICAL AND REFERENCE MATTER.
   The matter in parentheses at the ends of sections is only for information
purposes and is not a part of the code. Citations indicate only the source, and
the text may or may not be changed by this code. This code is a new enactment
under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-3014 and 12-3015. Reference matter not in
parentheses is only for information purposes and is not a part of this code.
§ 1-107 AMENDMENTS; REPEAL.
   (a)   Any portion of this code may be amended by specific reference to the
section number as follows: “Section _____ of the code of the City of Oxford is
hereby amended to read as follows: (the new provisions shall then be set out in
full)....”
   (b)   A new section not heretofore existing in the code may be added as
follows: “The code of the City of Oxford is hereby amended by adding a section
(or article or chapter) which reads as follows: ...(the new provisions shall be
set out in full)....”
   (c)   All sections or articles or chapters to be repealed shall be repealed
by specific reference as follows: “Section (or article or chapter) __________
of the code of the City of Oxford is hereby repealed.”
§ 1-108 ORDINANCES.
   The governing body shall have the care, management and control of the city
and its finances, and shall pass all ordinances needed for the welfare of the
city. All ordinances shall be valid when a majority of all the members-elect of
the City Council shall vote in favor. Where the number of favorable votes is
one less than required, the Mayor shall have power to cast the deciding vote in
favor of the ordinance.
(K.S.A. 12-3002)
§ 1-109 SAME; SUBJECT AND TITLE; AMENDMENT.
   No ordinance shall contain more than one subject, which shall be clearly
expressed in its title; and no section or sections of an ordinance shall be
amended unless the amending ordinance contains the entire section or sections
as amended, and the section or sections amended shall be repealed.
§ 1-110 SAME; PUBLICATION.
   (a)   No ordinance, except those appropriating money, shall be in force
until published in the official city newspaper by the City Clerk. One
publication of any such ordinance shall be sufficient unless additional
publications are required by statute or ordinance. The publisher of the
newspaper shall prefix such published ordinance by a line in brackets stating
the month, day and year of such publication.
   (b)   In lieu of division (a), the city may opt to publish a summary of an
ordinance so long as:
      (1)   The publication is identified as a “summary” and contains notice
that the complete text of the ordinance may be obtained or viewed free of
charge at the office of the City Clerk;
      (2)   The City Attorney certifies the summary of the ordinance prior to
publication to ensure that the summary is legally accurate and sufficient; and
      (3)   The publication contains the city’s official website address where
a reproduction of the original ordinance is available for a minimum of one week
following the summary publication in the newspaper.
   (c)   If an ordinance is subject to petition pursuant to state law, then the
summary shall contain a statement that the ordinance is subject to petition.
(K.S.A. 12-3007)
§ 1-111 SAME; ORDINANCE BOOK.
   Following final passage and approval of each ordinance, the City Clerk shall
enter the same in the ordinance book of the city as provided by law. Each
ordinance shall have appended thereto the manner in which the ordinance was
passed, the date of passage, the page of the journal containing the record of
the final vote on its passage, the name of the newspaper in which published and
the date of publication.
(K.S.A. 12-3008)
§ 1-112 RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS.
   Except where a state statute or city ordinance specifically requires
otherwise, all resolutions and motions shall be passed if voted upon favorably
by a majority present at a meeting of the City Council.
§ 1-113 CITY RECORDS.
   The City Clerk or any other officer or employee having custody of city
records and documents shall maintain such records and documents in accordance
with K.S.A. 12-120 to 12-121 inclusive, which is incorporated by reference
herein as if set out in full and as provided in the State Open Records Act,
being K.S.A. 45-215 et seq., and the city policy regarding open public records.
(K.S.A. 12-120—12-121)
§ 1-114 ALTERING CODE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend,
by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented
thereby. This restriction shall not apply to amendments or revisions of this
code authorized by ordinance duly adopted by the governing body.
§ 1-115 SCOPE OF APPLICATION.
   Any person convicted of doing any of the acts or things prohibited or made
unlawful, or the failing to do any of the things commanded to be done, as
specified and set forth in this code shall be deemed in violation of this code
and punished in accordance with §
1-116. Each day any violation of this code continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 1-116 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whenever any offense is declared by any provision of this code, absent a
specific or unique punishment prescribed, the offender shall be punished in
accordance with this section:
   (a)   A fine of not more than $1,000;
   (b)   Imprisonment in jail for not more than 179 days; or
   (c)   Both such fine and imprisonment, not to exceed divisions (a) and (b)
above.
§ 1-117 SEVERABILITY.
   If for any reason any chapter, article, section, subsection, sentence,
clause or phrase of this code, or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance, is declared to be unconstitutional or invalid or unenforceable,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
code.
ARTICLE 2: GOVERNING BODY
Section
   
1-201   Governing body
   
1-202   Same; powers generally
   
1-203   Same; meetings
   
1-204   Same; quorum
   
1-205   Powers of the Mayor
   
1-206   President of the Council
   
1-207   Administrative powers
   
1-208   Vacancies in governing body; how filled
   
1-209   Compensation
   
1-210   Expenses
   
1-211   Incorporating Code of Procedure for Kansas cities
   
1-212   Code of Ethics
§ 1-201 GOVERNING BODY.
   The governing body shall consist of a Mayor and five Councilmembers, to be
elected as set out in
Chapter VI of this code.
§ 1-202 SAME; POWERS GENERALLY.
   All powers exercised by cities of the third class, or which shall hereafter
be conferred upon them, shall be exercised by the governing body, subject to
such limitations as prescribed by law. All executive and administrative
authority granted or limited by law shall be vested in the Mayor and Council as
governing body of the city.
(K.S.A. 12-103)
§ 1-203 SAME; MEETINGS.
   (a)   Regular meetings of the governing body shall be held on the first
Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. In the event the regular meeting day shall
fall on any legal holiday or any day observed as a holiday by the city offices,
the governing body shall fix a day not observed as a holiday as a meeting day.
There shall be a regular meeting held at 7:00 p.m. on the second Monday in
January following certification of odd-year elections for the purpose of
allowing newly elected officials to take office.
   (b)   Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or Acting Mayor, on the
written request of any three members of the Council, specifying the object and
purpose of such meeting, which request shall be read at a meeting and entered
at length on the journal.
   (c)   Regular or special meetings of the governing body may be adjourned for
the completion of its business at such subsequent time and place as the
governing body shall determine in its motion.
(K.S.A. 15-106) (Ord. 308, passed 2-2-2016; Ord. 333, passed 9-1-2020)
§ 1-204 SAME; QUORUM.
   In all cases, it shall require a majority of the Councilmembers-elect to
constitute a quorum to do business.
(K.S.A. 15-106)
§ 1-205 POWERS OF THE MAYOR.
   (a)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the governing body. The
Mayor shall have the tie-breaking vote on all questions when the members
present are equally divided.
   (b)   The Mayor shall:
      (1)   Have the superintending control of all officers and affairs of the
city;
      (2)   Take care that the ordinances of the city are complied with;
      (3)   Sign the commissions and appointments of all officers elected or
appointed;
      (4)   Endorse the approval of the governing body on all official bonds;
      (5)   From time to time communicate to the City Council such information
and recommend such measures as he or she may deem advisable;
      (6)   Have the power to approve or veto any ordinance as the laws of the
state shall prescribe; and
      (7)   Sign all orders and drafts drawn upon the City Treasury for money.
§ 1-206 PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall elect one of its own body as President of the
Council. The President of the Council shall preside at all meetings of the
Council in the absence of the Mayor. In the absence of both the Mayor and the
President of the Council, the Council shall elect one of its members as “Acting
President of the Council.” The President and Acting President, when occupying
the place of Mayor, shall have the same privileges as other Councilmembers but
shall exercise no veto.
(K.S.A. 15-310)
§ 1-207 ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS.
   The governing body may designate whether the administration of a policy or
the carrying out of any order shall be performed by a committee, an appointive
officer or the Mayor. If no administrative authority is designated, it shall be
vested in the Mayor.
§ 1-208 VACANCIES IN GOVERNING BODY; HOW FILLED.
   (a)   In case of a vacancy in the Council occurring by reason of
resignation, death or removal from office or from the city, the Mayor, by and
with the advice and consent of the remaining Councilmembers, shall appoint an
elector to fill the vacancy until the next election for that office. In case
any person elected as a Councilmember neglects or refuses to qualify within 30
days after election, the Councilmember shall be deemed to have refused to
accept the office and a vacancy shall exist. The Mayor may, with the consent of
the remaining Councilmembers, appoint a suitable elector to fill the vacancy.
   (b)   In case of a vacancy in the Office of Mayor, the President of the
Council shall become Mayor until the next regular election for that office and
a vacancy shall occur in the office of the Councilmember becoming Mayor.
(C.O. No. 1, passed - -; Ord. 308, passed 2-2-2016)
§ 1-209 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the governing body shall receive as compensation such amounts as
may be fixed by ordinance.
(Ord. 329, passed 4-7-2020)
§ 1-210 EXPENSES.
   Each member of the governing body shall receive for his or her services and
as reimbursement for his or her expenses, compensation as follows:
   (a)   Mileage at the same rate as is established by law by the state for
state employees for each mile traveled by the shortest route upon the
performance of duties assigned by the Mayor and/or Council; and/or
   (b)   Reimbursement for actual food and lodging expenses upon the
performance of duties assigned by the Mayor and/or Council, provided such
expenses shall be documented by proper receipts.
§ 1-211 INCORPORATING CODE OF PROCEDURE FOR KANSAS CITIES.
   There is hereby incorporated by reference, for the purpose of establishing a
code of procedure for the conduct of City Council meetings, that certain code
known as the “Code of Procedure for Kansas Cities,” Fourth Edition, prepared
and published in book form by the League of Kansas Municipalities, Topeka,
Kansas, save and except such articles, sections, parts or portions as are
hereafter omitted, deleted, modified or changed. One copy of said Code of
Procedure for Kansas Cities shall be marked or stamped “Official Copy as
Incorporated by the Code of the City of Oxford, Kansas,” with all sections or
portions thereof intended to be omitted or changed clearly marked to show any
such omission or change and to which shall be attached a copy of this section,
and filed with the City Clerk to be open to inspection and available to the
public at all reasonable hours.
§ 1-212 CODE OF ETHICS.
   (a)   Declaration of policy. The proper operation of our government requires
that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible
to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in the proper
channels; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its
government. In recognition of those goals, there is hereby established a Code
of Ethics for all officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid
or unpaid. The purpose of this code is to establish ethical standards by
setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best
interests of the city.
   (b)   Responsibilities of public office. Public officials and employees are
agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public. They
are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of this state and to carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state and
city, and thus to foster respect for all government. They are bound to observe
in their official acts the highest standards of morality and to discharge
faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal considerations,
recognizing that the long-term public interest must be their primary concern.
Their conduct in both their official and private affairs should be above
reproach.
   (c)   Dedicated service.
      (1)   Responsiveness. All officials and employees of the city should be
responsive to the political objectives expressed by the electorate and the
programs developed to attain those objectives. Appointive officials and
employees should adhere to the rules of work and performance established as the
standard for their positions by the appropriate authority.
      (2)   Exceeding authority. Officials and employees should not exceed
their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so, and they should work
in full cooperation with other public officials and employees unless prohibited
from so doing by law or by officially recognized confidentiality of their work.
   (d)   Fair and equal treatment.
      (1)   Interest in appointments. Canvassing of members of the City
Council, directly or indirectly, in order to obtain preferential consideration
in connection with any appointment to the municipal service shall disqualify
the candidate for appointment except with reference to positions filled by
appointment by the City Council.
      (2)   Use of public property. No official or employee shall request or
permit the use of city- owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for
personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the
public generally or are provided as city policy for the use of such official or
employee in the conduct of official business.
      (3)   Obligations to citizens. No official or employee shall grant any
special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which
is available to every other citizen.
   (e)   Conflict of interest.
      (1)   Financial or personal interests. No elected or appointive city
official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or
transaction or shall have a financial or other personal interest, direct or
indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her duties
in the public interest or would tend to impair his or her independence of
judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties. Personal,
as distinguished from financial, interests includes an interest arising from
blood or marriage relationships or close business or political association.
      (2)   Specific conflicts of interests. Specific conflicts of interest are
enumerated below for the guidance of officials and employees.
      (A)   Incompatible employment. No elected or appointive city official or
employee shall engage in or accept private employment or render services for
private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the
proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair his or
her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her
official duties.
      (B)   Disclosure of confidential information. No elected or appointive
city official or employee shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose
confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the
city. Nor shall he or she use such information to advance the financial or
other private interest of himself, herself or others.
      (3)   Gifts and favors. No elected or appointive city official or
employee shall accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan,
thing or promise, from any person, firm or corporation which to his or her
knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in
business dealings with the city; nor shall any such official or employee accept
any gift, favor or thing of value that may tend to influence him or her in the
discharge of his or her duties or grant in the discharge of his or her duties
any improper favor, service or thing of value. The prohibition against gifts or
favors shall not apply to an occasional non-pecuniary gift of only nominal
value; an award publicly presented in recognition of public service; or any
gift which would have been offered or given to him or her if not an official or
employee.
      (4)   Representing private interest before city agencies or courts. No
elected or appointive city official or employee whose salary is paid in whole
or in part by the city shall appear on behalf of private interest before any
agency of this city. He or she shall not represent private interests in any
action or proceeding against the interest of the city in any litigation to
which the city is a party.
ARTICLE 3: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
   
1-301   Appointment
   
1-302   Employees
   
1-303   Removal
   
1-304   Vacancy in office
   
1-305   City Clerk
   
1-306   Same; fiscal records
   
1-307   Same; seal; oaths
   
1-308   Same; withholding agents
   
1-309   Assistant City Clerk
   
1-310   City Treasurer
   
1-311   City Attorney; office; duties
   
1-312   City Prosecutor; office; duties
   
1-313   City Engineer
   
1-314   Appointment or employment in more than one position
   
1-315   Conflict of interest
§ 1-301 APPOINTMENT.
   At the first regular meeting in May of each year, the Mayor, by and with the
consent of the Council, shall appoint a City Clerk and City Treasurer, and may
appoint a City Attorney, Municipal Judge, Chief of Police and such other
officers as may be deemed necessary for the best interest of the city. Such
officers shall hold their respective offices until their successors have been
appointed and qualified. All such appointments shall be entered on the journal
of proceedings of the governing body. The duties and salaries of all appointed
officers shall be fixed by ordinance.
§ 1-302 EMPLOYEES.
   The Mayor shall have authority to hire all other employees, or such
authority may be delegated to the respective department heads.
§ 1-303 REMOVAL.
   (a)   A majority of all members-elect of the Council may remove any
appointed officer.
   (b)   The Mayor may suspend at any time any appointed officer.
   (c)   Employees, other than appointed officers, may be removed by the Mayor
upon recommendation of the respective department heads.
§ 1-304 VACANCY IN OFFICE.
   Whenever a vacancy occurs in any appointive office for whatever reason, the
vacancy shall be filled by the governing body. Any person appointed to fill
such vacancy shall serve only until the next regular time for appointment.
§ 1-305 CITY CLERK.
   The City Clerk shall:
   (a)   Be custodian of all city records, books, files, papers, documents and
other personal effects belonging to the city and not properly pertaining to any
other office;
   (b)   Carry on all official correspondence of the city;
   (c)   Attend and keep a record of the proceedings of all regular and special
meetings of the governing body;
   (d)   Enter every appointment of office and the date thereof in the journal;
   (e)   Enter or place each ordinance of the city in the ordinance books after
its passage; and
   (f)   Publish all ordinances, except those appropriating money, and such
resolutions, notices and proclamations as may be required by law or ordinance.
§ 1-306 SAME; FISCAL RECORDS.
   The City Clerk shall:
   (a)   Prepare and keep suitable fiscal records according to generally
accepted accounting principles;
   (b)   Assist in preparing the annual budget;
   (c)   Audit all claims against the city for goods or services rendered for
the consideration of the governing body. His or her accounts shall properly
show the amounts paid from any fund of the city and the cash balance existing
in each fund;
   (d)   Keep an accurate account of all bonds issued by the city; and
   (e)   Keep a record of all special assessments.
§ 1-307 SAME; SEAL; OATHS.
   The City Clerk shall:
   (a)   Have custody of the corporate seal of the city and shall affix the
same to the official copy of all ordinances, contracts and other documents
required to be authenticated;
   (b)   Have power to administer oaths for all purposes pertaining to the
business and affairs of the city; and
   (c)   Keep suitable files of all such oaths required to be deposited in his
or her office.
§ 1-308 SAME; WITHHOLDING AGENTS.
   The City Clerk is designated as the withholding agent of the city for the
purposes of the Federal Revenue (Income) Act, and shall perform the duties
required of withholding agents by said Act or any other Act requiring
withholding from the compensation of any city officer or employee. The Clerk
shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the governing body or
the state statutes.
§ 1-309 ASSISTANT CITY CLERK.
   (a)   The office of Assistant City Clerk is hereby established. The Mayor
shall appoint, by and with the consent of the City Council, the Assistant City
Clerk. The person so appointed and confirmed shall hold the office for a term
of one year and until a successor is appointed and confirmed.
   (b)   The Assistant City Clerk shall perform those duties assigned to that
office by the City Clerk.
   (c)   Whenever a vacancy occurs in the position of City Clerk and the city
is without a person appointed, confirmed or qualified to hold that office, the
Assistant City Clerk shall become the acting City Clerk and fulfill the duties
of that office.
   (d)   Compensation of the Assistant City Clerk shall be set by ordinance
passed by the governing body.
§ 1-310 CITY TREASURER.
   The City Treasurer shall:
   (a)   Keep a full and accurate record of all money received and paid out in
a ledger book provided by the governing body;
   (b)   Publish an annual financial statement;
   (c)   Deposit all public monies and sign all checks of the city;
   (d)   Pay out city funds only upon orders or warrants properly signed by the
Mayor and City Clerk; and
   (e)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the governing body
or the state statutes.
(K.S.A. 10-803, 10-804, 12-1608)
§ 1-311 CITY ATTORNEY; OFFICE; DUTIES.
   (a)   There is hereby established the office of City Attorney. No person
shall be eligible for the office of City Attorney who is not an attorney at law
admitted to practice in the Supreme Court of the state. The City Attorney shall
be charged with the general direction and supervision of the legal affairs of
the city.
   (b)   The City Attorney shall:
      (1)   Attend meetings of the City Council when so directed to attend by
the Council;
      (2)   Advise the Mayor and City Council and all officers of the city upon
such legal questions affecting the city and its offices as may be submitted to
him or her;
      (3)   When requested by the City Council, give opinions in writing upon
any such questions;
      (4)   Draft such ordinances, contracts, leases, easements, conveyances
and other instruments in writing as may be submitted to him or her in the
regular transaction of affairs of the city;
      (5)   Approve all ordinances of the city as to form and legality;
      (6)   Attend Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals meetings
when so directed by the Boards;
      (7)   Appear and prosecute all violations of city ordinances in Municipal
Court when his or her services shall be required; and
      (8)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the governing
body and the state statutes.
§ 1-312 CITY PROSECUTOR; OFFICE; DUTIES.
   (a)   There is hereby established the Office of City Prosecutor. No person
shall be eligible for the Office of City Prosecutor who is not an attorney at
law admitted to practice law in the state. The City Prosecutor shall:
      (1)   Attend meetings of the governing body when so directed to attend by
the Mayor or City Attorney;
      (2)   Advise the City Council and all officers of the city upon legal
questions affecting the city and its officers as may be submitted to him or
her;
      (3)   Draft such ordinances and other instruments in writing as may be
submitted to him or her in the regular transactions of the affairs of the city;
      (4)   Appear and prosecute all violations of city ordinances in Municipal
Court; and
      (5)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the governing
body and the state statutes.
   (b)   The governing body may appoint a City Prosecutor in accordance with §
1-301. In the event that there is no City Prosecutor, the City Attorney shall
serve in such capacity.
§ 1-313 CITY ENGINEER.
   (a)   The City Engineer shall be a licensed professional engineer in the
state.
   (b)   He or she shall be responsible for:
      (1)   The design and specifications for all city streets, sewers, water
lines, public buildings and other public facilities;
      (2)   The inspection of all public works projects, including streets,
sewers, water lines and other public facilities; and
      (3)   The general supervision of the maintenance and repair of all public
facilities.
§ 1-314 APPOINTMENT OR EMPLOYMENT IN MORE THAN ONE POSITION.
   The same person may be appointed to more than one appointive office, or
employed in more than one department, except that the same person shall not be
appointed to incompatible offices. Salaries or wages of such persons shall be
prorated between the proper funds of the several offices or departments.
§ 1-315 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   All city officers and employees shall comply with the requirements of K.S.A.
75-4301a et seq. concerning governmental ethics and refrain from making or
participating in the making of a contract when prohibited by state law.
ARTICLE 4: PERSONNEL POLICY AND EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
Section
   
1-401   Personnel policies and guidelines
§ 1-401 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND GUIDELINES.
   There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of establishing
employee personnel rules and regulations the document entitled “Uniform
Personnel Policies and Guidelines for the City of Oxford,” as amended. One copy
of said document shall be marked or stamped “Official Copy as adopted by the
Code of the City of Oxford,” and which there shall be attached a copy of this
section. Said official copy, as amended, shall be filed with the City Clerk and
shall be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable
hours. All departments of the city shall be supplied with copies of such rules
and regulations as may be deemed necessary.
(Res. 382, passed 11-8-2016; Res. 393, passed 11-6-2018)
ARTICLE 5: OATHS AND BONDS
Section
   
1-501   Oath; affirmation
   
1-502   Oaths filed
   
1-503   Bonds required
   
1-504   Same; premiums
   
1-505   Condition of bonds
   
1-506   Approval of bonds
§ 1-501 OATH; AFFIRMATION.
   All officers and employees of the city, whether elected or appointed, either
under the laws of the state or ordinances of the city, shall, before entering
upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe an oath or
affirmation as follows.
   (a)   Oath. “I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will
support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State
of Kansas and faithfully discharge the duties of __________ (here enter name of
office or position). So help me God.”
   (b)   Affirmation. “I do solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm
that I will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of
Kansas and faithfully discharge the duties of ___________ (enter name of office
or position). This I do under the pains and penalties of perjury.”
(K.S.A. 54-104, 54-106, 75-4308)
§ 1-502 OATHS FILED.
   All officers and employees required to take and subscribe or sign an oath or
affirmation shall be supplied the forms for the purpose at the expense of the
city, and upon taking and subscribing or signing any such oath or affirmation,
the same shall be filed by the City Clerk.
§ 1-503 BONDS REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   The city officers in division (a)(2) below shall each, before
entering upon the duties of his or her office, give a good and sufficient
corporate surety bond to the city.
      (2)   The bond shall be in the following amount, to wit:
      (A)   City Treasurer: $10,000;
      (B)   City Clerk: $10,000;
      (C)   Clerk of Municipal Court: $1,000; and
      (D)   Judge of Municipal Court: $1,000.
   (b)   The governing body may provide for the coverage by blanket bond of
such officers and employees and in such amounts as the governing body may, by
resolution, designate.
§ 1-504 SAME; PREMIUMS.
   All premiums on surety bonds shall be paid by the city.
(K.S.A. 78-111)
§ 1-505 CONDITION OF BONDS.
   Each of the bonds required in §
1-503 shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of duty and all acts
required by the laws of the state and of the city, and for the application and
payment over to the proper persons of all monies or property coming into the
hands of each such officer by virtue of his or her office.
§ 1-506 APPROVAL OF BONDS.
   All bonds given to the city shall be approved as to their form by the City
Attorney and as to surety and sufficiency by the governing body, unless
otherwise provided by the laws of the state.
ARTICLE 6: OPEN RECORDS
Section
   
1-601   Policy
   
1-602   Record custodians
   
1-603   Local Freedom of Information Officers
   
1-604   Public request for access
   
1-605   Facilities for public inspection
   
1-606   Procedures for inspection
   
1-607   Appointment of official custodians
   
1-608   Appointment of local Freedom of Information Officer
   
1-609   Designation of additional record custodians
   
1-610   Requests to be directed to custodians
   
1-611   Fee administration
   
1-612   Inspection fee
   
1-613   Copying fee
   
1-614   Prepayment of fees
   
1-615   Payment
§ 1-601 POLICY.
   (a)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that all public
records which are made, maintained or kept by, or are in the possession of, the
city, its officers and employees shall be open for public inspection as
provided by, and subject to the restrictions imposed by, the State Open Records
Act.
   (b)   Any person, upon request, shall have access to such open public
records for the purpose of inspecting, abstracting or copying such records
while they are in the possession, custody and control of the appointed or
designated record custodian thereof, or his or her designated representative.
§ 1-602 RECORD CUSTODIANS.
   (a)   All city officers and employees appointed or designated as record
custodians under this article shall: protect public records from damage and
disorganization; prevent excessive disruption of the essential functions of the
city; provide assistance and information upon request; ensure efficient and
timely action and response to all applications for inspection of public
records; and shall carry out the procedures adopted by this city for inspecting
and copying open public records.
   (b)   The official custodian shall prominently display or distribute or
otherwise make available to the public a brochure in the form prescribed by the
local Freedom of Information Officer that contains basic information about the
rights of a requester, the responsibilities of a public agency and the
procedures for inspecting or obtaining a copy of public records under the State
Open Records Act. The official custodian shall display or distribute or
otherwise make available to the public the brochure at one or more places in
the administrative offices of the city where it is available to members of the
public who request public information in person.
§ 1-603 LOCAL FREEDOM OF INFORMATION OFFICERS.
   The local Freedom of Information Officer shall:
   (a)   Prepare and provide educational materials and information concerning
the State Open Records Act;
   (b)   Be available to assist the city and members of the general public to
resolve disputes relating to the State Open Records Act;
   (c)   Respond to inquiries relating to the State Open Records Act; and
   (d)   Establish the requirements for the content, size, shape and other
physical characteristics of a brochure required to be displayed or distributed
or otherwise made available to the public under the State Open Records Act. In
establishing such requirements for the content of the brochure, the Local
Freedom of Information Officer shall include plainly written basic information
about the rights of a requester, the responsibilities of the city and the
procedures for inspecting and obtaining a copy of public records under the Act.
§ 1-604 PUBLIC REQUEST FOR ACCESS.
   All city offices keeping and maintaining open public records shall establish
office hours during which any person may make a request for access to an open
public record. Such hours shall be no fewer than the hours each business day
the office is regularly open to the public. For any city office not open Monday
through Friday, hours shall be established by the record custodian for each
such day, at which time any person may request access to an open public record.
§ 1-605 FACILITIES FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION.
   All city offices keeping and maintaining open public records shall provide
suitable facilities to be used by any person desiring to inspect and/or copy an
open public record. The office of the City Clerk, being the principal record-
keeper of the city, shall be used as the principal office for providing access
to and providing copies of open records to the maximum extent practicable.
Requesters of records shall be referred to the office of the City Clerk except
when the requested records are not in that office and are available in another
city office.
§ 1-606 PROCEDURES FOR INSPECTION.
   Any person requesting access to an open public record for purposes of
inspecting or copying such record, or obtaining a copy thereof, shall abide by
the procedures adopted by the governing body for record inspection and copying,
including those procedures established by record custodians as authorized by
the governing body. Such procedures shall be posted in each city office keeping
and maintaining open public records.
§ 1-607 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICIAL CUSTODIANS.
   The following city officers are hereby appointed as official custodians for
purposes of the State Open Records Act and are hereby charged with
responsibility for compliance with that Act with respect to the hereinafter-
listed public records:
   (a)   City Clerk. All public records kept and maintained in the City Clerk’s
office and all other public records not provided for elsewhere in this section;
   (b)   City Treasurer. All public records not on file in the office of the
City Clerk and kept and maintained in the City Treasurer’s office;
   (c)   Chief of Police. All public records not on file in the office of the
City Clerk and kept and maintained in the City Police Department;
   (d)   Fire Chief. All public records not on file in the office of the City
Clerk and kept and maintained in the City Fire Department;
   (e)   City Attorney. All public records not on file in the office of the
City Clerk and kept and maintained in the City Attorney’s office; and
   (f)   Clerk of the Municipal Court. All public records not on file in the
office of the City Clerk and kept and maintained in the Municipal Court.
§ 1-608 APPOINTMENT OF LOCAL FREEDOM OF INFORMATION OFFICER.
   The City Clerk is hereby appointed as the local Freedom of Information
Officer and charged with all of the duties as set forth in §
1-603.
§ 1-609 DESIGNATION OF ADDITIONAL RECORD CUSTODIANS.
   (a)   Each of the official custodians appointed in §
1-607 is hereby authorized to designate any subordinate officers or employees
to serve as record custodians. Such record custodians shall have such duties
and powers as are set out in the State Open Records Act.
   (b)   Whenever an official custodian shall appoint another person as a
record custodian, he or she shall notify the City Clerk of such designation and
the City Clerk shall maintain a register of all such designations.
§ 1-610 REQUESTS TO BE DIRECTED TO CUSTODIANS.
   (a)   All members of the public, in seeking access to, or copies of, a
public record in accordance with the provisions of the State Open Records Act,
shall address their requests to the custodian charged with responsibility for
the maintenance of the record sought to be inspected or copied.
   (b)   Whenever any city officer or employee appointed or designated as a
custodian under this article is presented with a request for access to, or copy
of, a public record, which record the custodian does not have in his or her
possession and for which he or she has not been given responsibility to keep
and maintain, the custodian shall so advise the person requesting the record.
Further, the person making the request shall be informed as to which custodian
the request should be addressed to, if such is known by the custodian receiving
the request.
§ 1-611 FEE ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Clerk is hereby authorized to provide the Clerk’s office, and the
office of each record custodian, with sufficient cash to enable the making of
change for record fee purposes. Each custodian shall transmit all record fee
monies collected to the City Treasurer not less than monthly. Each custodian
shall maintain duplicates of all records and copy request forms, completed as
to the amount of fee charged and collected, which amounts shall be periodically
audited by the Clerk-Finance Officer and Treasurer of the city.
§ 1-612 INSPECTION FEE.
   (a)   Where a request has been made for inspection of any open public record
which is readily available to the record custodian, there shall be no
inspection fee charged to the requester.
   (b)   In all cases not covered by division (a) above, a record inspection
fee shall be charged, at the rate of $25 per hour per employee engaged in the
record search. A minimum charge of $5 shall be charged for each such request.
§ 1-613 COPYING FEE.
   (a)   A fee of $0.25 per page shall be charged for photocopying public
records, such fee to cover the cost of labor, materials and equipment.
   (b)   For copying any public records which cannot be reproduced by the
city’s photocopying equipment, the requester shall be charged the actual cost
to the city, including staff time, in reproducing such records.
§ 1-614 PREPAYMENT OF FEES.
   (a)   A record custodian may demand prepayment of the fees established by
this article whenever he or she believes this to be in the best interest of the
city. The prepayment amount shall be an estimate of the inspection and/or
copying charges accrued in fulfilling the record request. Any overage or
underage in the prepayment shall be settled prior to inspection of the
requested record or delivery of the requested copies.
   (b)   Prepayment of inspection and/or copying fees shall be required
whenever, in the best estimate of the record custodian, such fees are estimated
to exceed $5.
   (c)   Where prepayment has been demanded by the record custodian, no record
shall be made available to the requester until such prepayment has been made.
§ 1-615 PAYMENT.
   All fees charged under this article shall be paid to the custodian of the
records inspected and/or copied unless the requester has established an
account, for purposes of billing and payment, with the city.
ARTICLE 7: INVESTMENT OF PUBLIC FUNDS
Section
   
1-701   Purpose and goals
   
1-702   Active funds; designation of depositories; eligible depositories
   
1-703   Definitions
   
1-704   Investment of idle funds
   
1-705   Procedures and restrictions
   
1-706   Custody and safekeeping
   
1-707   Sale or transfer
   
1-708   Interest on time deposits
§ 1-701 PURPOSE AND GOALS.
   (a)   It is the purpose of this statement to set forth the public policies
of the city relating to the investment of public monies and establish
procedural requirements as to investment management practice.
   (b)   The objective of the investment policy and program of the city shall
be as follows.
      (1)   The safeguarding of all public monies shall be of the highest
priority. Public money shall not be invested or managed in any manner which
would jeopardize the safety of the principal.
      (2)   Consistent with the requirement of safety, the objective of the
investment program shall be to aggressively manage and invest all public monies
to maximize net earnings, consistent with the public responsibility to secure
maximum, safe investment return possible from monies assigned to its
stewardship, to relieve demands on the property tax, and to otherwise reduce
the cost of public services.
§ 1-702 ACTIVE FUNDS; DESIGNATION OF DEPOSITORIES; ELIGIBLE DEPOSITORIES.
   (a)   The governing body shall designate the banks, savings and loan
associations and savings banks which shall serve as depositories of its funds.
The Clerk, Treasurer or other city officer or employee having the custody of
city funds shall deposit such funds only at the designated banks, savings and
loan associations and savings banks. Only banks, savings and loan associations
and savings banks that have main or branch offices in Sumner County shall be
designated as official depositories. No such bank, savings bank or savings and
loan association shall be designated as a depository until the city is assured
that it can obtain satisfactory security for its deposits.
   (b)   The Clerk, Treasurer or other city officer or employee depositing
public funds shall deposit all such public funds coming into such person’s
possession in his, her or their name and official title as such officer. If the
governing body fails to designate an official depository or depositories, the
officer thereof having custody of city funds shall deposit such funds with one
or more banks, savings and loan associations or savings banks which have main
or branch offices in the county if satisfactory security can be obtained
therefor, and if not then elsewhere. In such event, the officer or employee
shall serve notice in writing on the governing body showing the names and
locations of such banks, savings and loan associations and savings banks where
such funds are deposited, and upon so doing, the officer or employee having
custody of such funds shall not be liable for the loss of any portion thereof
except for official misconduct or for the misappropriation of such funds by the
officer or employee.
   (c)   If eligible banks, savings and loan associations or savings banks
under divisions (a) or (b) above cannot or will not provide an acceptable bid,
which shall include services for the depositing of public funds under this
section, then banks, savings and loan associations or savings banks that have
main or branch offices in any immediately adjoining county may receive deposits
of the city’s active funds, if such banks, savings and loan associations or
savings banks have been designated as official depositories under division (a)
above and the city can obtain satisfactory security therefor.
§ 1-703 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BANK. Any bank incorporated under the laws of the state or any other state,
or organized under the laws of the United States, and which has a main or
branch office in the state.
   BRANCH. Any office within this state, other than the main office, that is
approved by a federal or state supervisory agency at which deposits are
received, checks paid or money lent. BRANCH does not include an automated
teller machine, remote service unit or similar device or a loan production
office.
   INVESTMENT RATE. A rate which is the equivalent yield for United States
government securities having a maturity date as published in the “Wall Street
Journal,” nearest the maturity date for equivalent maturities. The zero- to 90-
day rate shall be computed on the average effective federal funds rate as
published by the Federal Reserve System for the previous week.
   MAIN OFFICE. The place of business specified in the articles of association,
certificate of authority or similar document, where the business of the
institution is carried on and which is not a branch.
   SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION. Any savings and loan association incorporated
under the laws of the state or any other state, or organized under the laws of
the United States, and which has a main or branch office in the state.
   SAVINGS BANK. Any savings bank organized under the laws of the United States
and which has a main or branch office in the state.
(K.S.A. 12-1675a)
§ 1-704 INVESTMENT OF IDLE FUNDS.
   Temporarily idle monies of the city, not currently needed, may in accordance
with the procedure hereinafter described be invested:
   (a)   In temporary notes or no-fund warrants issued by the city;
   (b)   In savings deposits, demand deposits, time deposit, open accounts,
certificates of deposit or time certificates of deposit with maturities of not
more than two years:
      (1)   In banks, savings and loan associations and savings banks which
have main or branch offices located in the city; or
      (2)   If no main or branch office of a bank, savings and loan association
or savings bank is located in the city, then in banks, savings and loan
associations and savings banks which have main or branch offices in the county
or counties in which all or part of the city is located.
   (c)   In repurchase agreements with:
      (1)   Banks, savings and loan associations and savings banks which have
main or branch offices located in the city, for direct obligations of, or
obligations that are insured as to principal and interest by, the United States
government or any agency thereof;
      (2)   If no main or branch office of a bank, savings and loan association
or savings bank is located in the city: if no such bank, savings and loan
association or savings bank having a main or branch office located in the city
is willing to enter into such an agreement with the city at an interest rate
equal to or greater than the investment rate as defined in K.S.A. 12-1675a(g),
and amendments thereto, then such repurchase agreements may be entered into
with banks, savings and loan associations or savings banks which have main or
branch offices in the county or counties in which all or part of the city is
located; or
      (3)   If no bank, savings and loan association or savings bank having a
main or branch office in such county or counties is willing to enter into such
an agreement with the city at an interest rate equal to or greater than the
investment rate as defined in K.S.A. 12-1675a(g), and amendments thereto, then
such repurchase agreements may be entered into with banks, savings and loan
associations or savings banks located within the state.
   (d)   In direct obligations of or obligations that are insured as to
principal and interest by the United States or any agency thereof, not
including mortgage-backed securities with maturities as the governing body
shall determine, but not exceeding two years. Such investment transactions
shall only be conducted with banks, savings and loan associations and savings
banks; the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Missouri; or with primary
government securities dealers which report to the Market Report Division of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or any broker-dealer engaged in the business
of selling government securities which is registered in compliance with the
requirements of §§ 15 or 15C of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and
registered pursuant to K.S.A. 17-12a401, and amendments thereto;
   (e)   In the Municipal Investment Pool Fund established in K.S.A. 12-1677a,
and amendments thereto;
   (f)   In the investments authorized and in accordance with the conditions
prescribed in K.S.A. 12-1677b, and amendments thereto;
   (g)   In multiple municipal client investment pools managed by the trust
departments of banks which have main or branch offices located in the county or
counties where the city is located or with trust companies incorporated under
the laws of this state which have contracted to provide trust services under
the provisions of K.S.A. 9-2107, and amendments thereto, with banks which have
main or branch offices located in the county or counties in which the city is
located. Public monies invested under this division (g) shall be secured in the
same manner as provided for under K.S.A. 9-1402, and amendments thereto. Pooled
investments of public monies made by trust departments under this division (g)
shall be subject to the same terms, conditions and limitations as are
applicable to the municipal investment pool established by K.S.A. 12-1677a, and
amendments thereto;
   (h)   Municipal bonds or other obligations issued by any municipality of the
state as defined in K.S.A. 10-1101, and amendments thereto, which are general
obligations of the municipality issuing the same;
   (i)   The investments authorized in divisions (d), (e), (f), (g) or (h)
above shall be utilized only if the banks, savings and loan associations and
savings banks eligible for investments authorized in division (b) above cannot
or will not make the investments authorized in division (b) above available to
the city at interest rates equal to or greater than the investment rate, as
defined in K.S.A. 12-1675a(g), and amendments thereto; or
   (j)   In selecting a depository pursuant to division (b) above, if a bank,
savings and loan association or savings bank eligible for an investment deposit
thereunder has an office located in the city and such financial institution
will make such deposits available to the city at interest rates equal to or
greater than the investment rate, as defined in K.S.A. 12-1675a(g), and
amendments thereto, and such financial institution otherwise qualifies for such
deposit, the governing body shall select one or more of such eligible financial
institutions for deposit of funds pursuant to this section. If no such
financial institution qualifies for such deposits, the city shall select for
such deposits one or more eligible banks, savings and loan associations or
savings banks which have offices in the county or counties in which all or a
part of the city is located which will make such deposits available to the city
at interest rates equal to or greater than the investment rate, as defined in
K.S.A. 12-1675a(g), and amendments thereto, and which otherwise qualify for
such deposits.
(K.S.A. 12-1675)
§ 1-705 PROCEDURES AND RESTRICTIONS.
   The City Clerk shall periodically report to the governing body as to the
amount of money available for investment and the period of time such amounts
will be available for investment, and shall submit such recommendations as
deemed necessary for the efficient and safe management of city finances. The
recommendations of the City Clerk shall provide for an investment program which
shall so limit the amounts invested and shall schedule the maturities of
investments so that the city will, at all times, have sufficient monies
available on demand deposit to assure prompt payment of all city obligations.
§ 1-706 CUSTODY AND SAFEKEEPING.
   Securities purchased pursuant to this article shall be under the care of the
City Clerk and Mayor and shall be held in the custody of a state or national
bank or trust company, or shall be kept by such officers in a safety deposit
box of the city in a bank or trust company.
   (a)   Securities in the original or receipt form held in the custody of a
bank or trust company shall be held in the name of the city, and their
redemption, transfer or withdrawal shall be permitted only upon the written
instruction of the city officers.
   (b)   Securities not held in the custody of a bank or trust company shall be
personally deposited by such officer in a safety deposit box in the name of the
city in a bank or trust company, access to which shall be permitted only in the
personal presence and under the signature of two of the abovementioned
officers.
§ 1-707 SALE OR TRANSFER.
   If, in order to maintain sufficient monies on demand deposit in any fund as
provided in §
1-705, it becomes necessary to transfer or sell any securities of such funds,
the officers specified in §
1-706 may transfer said securities to any other fund or funds in which there
are temporarily idle monies, or shall sell such securities, and for such
purpose they shall have authority to make any necessary written direction,
endorsement or assignment for and on behalf of the city.
§ 1-708 INTEREST ON TIME DEPOSITS.
   The City Clerk shall deposit the interest earned on invested idle funds to
the General Fund, unless otherwise required or authorized by law.
ARTICLE 8: LAND BANK
Section
   
1-801   Establishment; purpose
   
1-802   Definitions
   
1-803   Board of Trustees; appointment, terms and dissolution
   
1-804   Board of Trustees; organization
   
1-805   Land Bank Board of Trustees; powers and duties
   
1-806   Land Bank Board of Trustees; operational requirements
§ 1-801 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   There is hereby established a Land Bank of the city pursuant to K.S.A. 12-
5901 et seq. (the “Act”). The Land Bank will be a quasi-governmental entity
with all statutory authority, but with the primary responsibility and authority
for maintaining and selling real property located within the city to help
achieve the city’s goal of returning municipally-owned property to private
ownership, cost effective maintaining of said property, ensuring conformance
with the goals of the city’s Comprehensive Plan, and the encouragement of
economic development. The Land Bank is intended to assist in the elimination of
barriers to returning properties to private ownership and productive use and to
help facilitate the strategic conveyance of property.
(Ord. 332, passed 8-4-2021)
§ 1-802 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. K.S.A. 12-5901 et seq., as amended from time to time.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees of the Land Bank.
   CITY. The City of Oxford, Kansas, unless otherwise specifically stated.
   GOVERNING BODY. The governing body of the city.
   LAND BANK. The Land Bank of the city.
(Ord. 332, passed 8-4-2021)
§ 1-803 BOARD OF TRUSTEES; APPOINTMENT, TERMS AND DISSOLUTION.
   (a)   There is hereby established a Land Bank Board of Trustees. The Board
of Trustees shall be comprised of the entire membership of the governing body
of the city, ex officio, who shall be the voting members, and one additional
member appointed by the Mayor who shall be a non-voting member and who shall be
a city staff member.
   (b)   The term of office of each voting member of the Board of Trustees
shall be coterminous with that member’s term of office on the governing body of
the city. The non-voting member of the Board of Trustees shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor.
   (c)   The Land Bank may be dissolved by ordinance of the governing body of
the city. In such case, all property of the Land Bank shall be transferred to
and held by the city and may be disposed of as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 332, passed 8-4-2021)
§ 1-804 BOARD OF TRUSTEES; ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   The Board of Trustees shall annually elect a Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson and Treasurer. The Treasurer shall be bonded in such amounts as the
governing body may require.
   (b)   The Board of Trustees may appoint such officers, agents and employees
as it may require for the performance of its duties, and shall determine the
qualifications and duties and fix compensation of such officers, agents and
employees.
   (c)   The Board of Trustees shall fix a time and place at which its meetings
shall be held. Meetings shall be subject to the state’s Open Meetings Act,
K.S.A. 75-4317 et seq.
   (d)   The majority of the Board of Trustees shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business. No action of the Board of Trustees shall be
binding unless taken at a meeting with at least a quorum present.
(Ord. 332, passed 8-4-2021)
§ 1-805 LAND BANK BOARD OF TRUSTEES; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Land Bank Board of Trustees shall have the following powers and duties:
   (a)   To sue and be sued;
   (b)   To enter into contracts;
   (c)   To appoint and remove staff and provide compensation thereof;
   (d)   To acquire, by purchase, gift or devise, and to convey any real
property, including easements and reversionary interest, and personal property
subject to the provisions of this article and state law:
      (1)   Any property acquired by the city, county or any other city or
taxing subdivision within the county may be transferred to the bank;
      (2)   The Board of Trustees may accept or refuse to accept any property
authorized to be transferred pursuant to this article or state law;
      (3)   The transfer of any property pursuant to this division (d) shall
not be subject to any bidding requirements and shall be exempt from any
provisions of law requiring a public sale; and
      (4)   The fee simple title to any real estate which is sold to the county
in accordance with the provisions of K.S.A. 79-2803 and 79-2804, and amendments
thereto, and upon acceptance by the Board of Trustees, may be transferred to
the Land Bank by a good and sufficient deed by the County Clerk upon written
order from the County Board or County Commissioner.
   (e)   To rebate all, or any portion thereof, of the taxes on any property
sold or conveyed by the Land Bank;
   (f)   The Board of Trustees shall assume possession and control of any
property acquired by it under this article or state law and shall hold and
administer such property. In the administration of property, the Board of
Trustees shall:
      (1)   Manage, maintain and protect, or temporarily use for public
purpose, such property in the manner the Board of Trustees deems appropriate;
      (2)   Compile and maintain a written inventory of all such property. The
inventory shall be available for public inspection and distribution at all
times;
      (3)   Study, analyze and evaluate potential, present and future uses for
such property which would provide for the effective reutilization of such
property;
      (4)   Plan for and use the Board of Trustee’s best efforts to consummate
the sale or other disposition of such property at such times and upon such
terms and conditions deemed appropriate;
      (5)   Establish and maintain records and accounts reflecting all
transactions, expenditures and revenues in relation to the Land Bank’s
activities, including separate itemizations of all transactions, expenditures
and revenues concerning each individual parcel of property acquired; and
      (6)   Thirty days prior to the sale of any property owned by the Land
Bank, publish a notice in the official city newspaper announcing such sale.
   (g)   To exercise any other power delegated to the Land Bank by the
governing body; and
   (h)   To exercise any other incidental power which is necessary to carry out
the purpose of the Land Bank, this article and state law.
(Ord. 332, passed 8-4-2021)
§ 1-806 LAND BANK BOARD OF TRUSTEES; OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The Land Bank shall be subject to the following requirements.
   (a)   The Land Bank shall be subject to the provisions of the Cash Basis
Law, K.S.A. 10-1101 et seq., and amendments thereto.
   (b)   The budget of the Land Bank shall be prepared, adopted and published
as provided by law for other political subdivisions of the state. No budget
shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees until it has been submitted to,
reviewed and approved by the governing body. If the governing body elects not
to ratify the budget, it must reject the plan in its entirely and remand it
back to the Board of Trustees with specific recommendations for
reconsideration.
   (c)   The Board of Trustees shall keep accurate accounts of all receipts and
disbursements. The receipts and disbursements of the Board of Trustees shall be
audited yearly by a certified or licensed public accountant, and the report of
the audit shall be included in and become part of the annual report of the
Board of Trustees. Such report may be prepared as a component unit of the
city’s audit report.
   (d)   All records and accounts shall be subject to public inspection
pursuant to K.S.A. 45-216 et seq., and amendments thereto.
   (e)   Any monies of the Land Bank which are not immediately required for the
purpose of the Land Bank shall be invested in the manner prescribed by K.S.A.
12-1675, and amendments thereto.
   (f)   The Land Bank shall make an annual report to the governing body on or
before January 31 of each year (commencing January 31, 2021), showing receipts
and disbursements from all funds under its control and showing all property
transactions occurring in the year. Such report shall include an inventory of
all property held by the Land Bank. A copy of such inventory shall also be
published by the Secretary/Treasurer in the official city newspaper on or
before January 31 of each year.
   (g)   The Land Bank shall be subject to statutory requirements for the
deposit of public money as provided in K.S.A. 9-1401 et seq., and amendments
thereto.
   (h)   The Board of Trustees, without competitive bidding, may sell any
property acquired by the Board of Trustees at such times, to such persons and
upon such terms and conditions, and subject to such restrictions and covenants
deemed necessary or appropriate, to assure the property’s effective
utilization.
   (i)   The sale of any real property by the Board of Trustees, under the
provisions of this article or the Act, on which there are delinquent special
assessments to finance public improvements shall be conditioned upon the
approval of the municipality which levied such special assessments.
   (j)   The Board of Trustees, for the purpose of land disposition, may
consolidate, assemble or subdivide individual parcels of property acquired by
the Land Bank.
   (k)   Until sold or otherwise disposed of by the Land Bank, and except for
special assessments levied by a municipality to finance public improvements,
any property acquired by the Land Bank shall be exempt from the payment of ad
valorem taxes levied by the state and any other political or taxing subdivision
of the state.
   (l)   Except for special assessments levied by a municipality to finance
public improvements, when the Board of Trustees acquires property pursuant to
this article and the Act, the appropriate county treasurer shall be notified by
the Board of Trustees to remove from the tax rolls all taxes, assessments,
charges, penalties and interest that are due and payable on the property at the
time of acquisition by the Board of Trustees.
   (m)   Property held by the Land Bank shall remain liable for special
assessments levied by a municipality for public improvements, but no payment
thereof shall be required until such property is sold or otherwise conveyed by
the Land Bank. The Land Bank and the city may enter into any such agreements
regarding collection of special assessments which are lawful.
   (n)   The governing body may abate part or all of any special assessments
which it has levied on property acquired by the Land Bank, and the Land Bank
and the governing body may enter into agreements related thereto. Any special
assessments that are abated shall be removed from the tax rolls by the County
Treasurer as of the effective date of the abatement.
   (o)   Any municipality which has levied special assessments on property
acquired by the Land Bank may enter into an agreement with the Land Bank to
defer or reamortize part or all of the special assessments. The governing body
of such municipality shall provide for such deferral or reamortization by
passage of an ordinance. Any special assessments that are deferred or
reamortized shall be corrected on the tax rolls by the County Treasurer as of
the effective date of the ordinance or resolution providing for such deferral
or reamortization.
   (p)   Any monies derived from the sale of property by the Land Bank shall be
retained by the Land Bank for the purposes and operations thereof; provided,
however, that the Board of Trustees may use all or part of the proceeds from
such sale to reimburse the city for delinquent special assessments due on such
property, or to pay off any debt associated with the acquisition of the
property by either the city or the Land Bank.
(Ord. 332, passed 8-4-2021)
CHAPTER II: ANIMAL CONTROL AND REGULATION
   Article
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   DOGS
      
3.   OTHER ANIMALS
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
2-101   Definitions
   
2-102   Animal Control Officer; duty to impound; citation alternative
   
2-103   Same; capture/destruction
   
2-104   Same; right of entry; unlawful interference
   
2-105   Municipal pound established
   
2-106   Breaking pound
   
2-107   Reserved
   
2-108   Reserved
   
2-109   Keeping animals
   
2-110   Animal traps
   
2-111   Nuisance; animal activities prohibited
   
2-112   Noisy animals
   
2-113   Animal confines; shelters
   
2-113A   Same; stockyards; commercial holding pens
   
2-114   Death of animals
   
2-115   Vicious animals
   
2-116   Running at large
   
2-117   Impoundment; fee; notice; record
   
2-118   Redemption of impounded animals
   
2-119   Impoundment of rabies suspects
   
2-120   Animals bitten by rabid animals
   
2-121   Vehicular accidents involving animals
   
2-122   Emergency; proclamation
§ 2-101 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON. Includes the leaving of an animal by its owner or other person
responsible for its care or custody without making effective provisions for its
proper care over a 48-hour period.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. The facility or facilities operated by the city or its
authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals under the
authority of this chapter or state law.
   ANIMALS. All vertebrate and invertebrate animals, such as, but not limited
to, bovine cattle, horses and other equines, hogs, goats, dogs, cats, rabbits,
sheep, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, pigeons and other fowl or wild animals,
or reptiles, fish, bees or birds that have been tamed, domesticated or
captivated.
   AT LARGE. To be outside of a fence or other enclosure that restrains the
animals to a particular premises or not under the control, by leash or lead, of
the owner or other authorized person capable of restraining the animal. Animals
tethered to a stationary object within range of public thoroughfares are deemed
to be AT LARGE.
   BITE. Any actual or suspected abrasion, scratch, puncture, tear, bruise or
piercing of the skin, caused by any animal, which is actually or suspected of
being contaminated or inoculated with the saliva from the animal, directly or
indirectly, regardless of the health of the animal causing such bite.
   CAT. Any member of the species Felis catus, regardless of sex.
   DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal deemed to be dangerous or vicious
per §
2-115.
   DOG. Any member of the species Canis familiaris, regardless of sex.
   FOWL. All animals that are included in the zoological class Aves, which
shall include, but not be limited to, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas
and pigeons.
   HARBOR. Any person who shall allow any animal to habitually remain or lodge
or to be fed within his or her home, store, yard, enclosure or place of
business or any other premises where he or she resides or controls.
   HUMANE LIVE ANIMAL TRAP. Any cage trap that, upon activation, encloses an
animal without placing any physical restraint upon any part of the body of such
animal.
   HUMANELY EUTHANIZE. The proper injection of a substance that quickly and
painlessly terminates the life of an animal, or any other method approved by
the American Veterinary Medical Association or the American Humane Society.
   IMMEDIATE CONTROL. The regulation and supervision by a competent person so
that an animal is unable to run or get loose at will.
   KENNEL. Any establishment, commercial or otherwise, maintained for breeding,
rearing, grooming, boarding or otherwise harboring in an enclosure in one
location only, three or more dogs or cats.
   LIVESTOCK. Includes, but is not limited to, cattle, horses, goats, sheep or
other animals commonly regarded or used as farm or ranch animals.
   NEUTERED. Any male or female cat or dog that has been permanently rendered
sterile.
   OWN. Includes own, keep, harbor, shelter, manage, possess or have a part
interest in any animal. If a minor OWNS any such animal subject to the
provisions of this chapter, the head of the household of which such minor is a
member shall be deemed to OWN such animal for the purposes of this chapter.
   OWNER. The one who owns, or his or her employee, agent or other competent
person into whose charge an animal has been placed by the actual owner as
described in the definition for “own” above.
   VACCINATION. An injection of a vaccine, approved by the State Board of
Public Health, and administered by a licensed veterinarian for the purpose of
immunizing an animal against rabies.
   VETERINARIAN. A doctor of veterinary medicine licensed by the State of
Kansas.
§ 2-102 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER; DUTY TO IMPOUND; CITATION ALTERNATIVE.
   (a)   There is hereby created the position of Animal Control Officer for the
city, and such officer shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter.
Any person employed by the city as an Animal Control Officer and commissioned
by the City Council of the city shall have such powers and authority as allowed
by law in the enforcement of this chapter. All Animal Control Officers shall be
subject to the supervision and direction of the Mayor of the city.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) below, it shall be the duty of the
Animal Control Officer to take up and impound all animals found in the city in
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   As an alternative to the provisions of division (b) above, any law
enforcement officer or the Animal Control Officer may issue a citation to the
owner, harborer or keeper of an animal in violation of this chapter, and the
person receiving the citation shall, within ten days, appear in the Municipal
Court of the city to answer the charged violation of this chapter.
§ 2-103 SAME; CAPTURE/DESTRUCTION.
   When deemed necessary by law enforcement officers or the Animal Control
Officer for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, such
officers and/or their agents may:
   (a)   Place a humane trap on public, or a requesting resident’s, property
for the purpose of capturing any animal defined in this chapter as creating a
nuisance in the city;
   (b)   Use any tranquilizer guns, humane traps or other suitable devices to
subdue and capture any animal that is deemed by the Animal Control Officer, in
his or her discretion, to be a danger to itself or to the public health and
safety; or
   (c)   Use firearms or other suitable weapons to destroy any rabid animal,
any vicious animal as defined in §
2-115 or any animal creating a nuisance as defined in §
2-111, where such animal is impossible or impractical to catch, capture or
tranquilize.
§ 2-104 SAME; RIGHT OF ENTRY; UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE.
   (a)   The Animal Control Officer or any law enforcement officer shall have
the right of entry upon any private unenclosed lots or lands for the purpose of
collecting any animal whose presence thereupon is a violation of this chapter,
to the extent allowed by law.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the Animal
Control Officer in the exercise of his or her duties.
§ 2-105 MUNICIPAL POUND ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   A municipal pound shall be established to carry out the provisions of
this chapter. Such a pound may be operated by a contractor and all services
required herein may be provided by a contractor.
   (b)   When so contracted, the pound shall have the following services and
facilities as a minimum:
      (1)   Adequate pickup and impounding of all stray and ownerless dogs and
cats and animals otherwise in violation of the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Group holding facilities for stray, ownerless and unvaccinated
animals impounded for violation of the provisions of this chapter;
      (3)   Individual isolation facilities for sick, biting, rabid and
suspected rabid animals; and
      (4)   Facilities for the humane destruction of animals.
§ 2-106 BREAKING POUND.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to open, unlock,
break open or attempt to break open the pound, or to take or let out any animal
placed therein, or take or attempt to take from an authorized officer of this
city any animal taken up by him or her under the provisions of this chapter, or
in any manner interfere with or hinder any authorized officer or employee of
this city in catching, taking up or impounding any animal.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, other than those duly
authorized, to care for, feed, attempt to feed or interfere in any way with the
care of impounded animals.
§ 2-107 RESERVED.
§ 2-108 RESERVED.
§ 2-109 KEEPING ANIMALS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, occupant or person in
charge of any premises in the city to possess and maintain any animal or fowl
within the city or permit to be maintained thereon any stable, shed, pen or
other place where horses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats or swine, or
undomesticated animals, are kept.
   (b)   This provision shall not apply to:
      (1)   The maintaining of a stockyard or sales barn for the loading,
unloading, temporary detention and sale of such livestock, if the location of
such stockyard or sales barn does not otherwise violate the zoning ordinances
of the city;
      (2)   The maintaining of dogs which are regulated by
Article 2 of this chapter;
      (3)   The maintaining of non-poisonous and non-vicious animals and fowl
which are commonly kept as household pets, such as cats, hamsters, rabbits,
parakeets and comparable animals, when kept as household pets and in a safe and
sanitary manner in accordance with §
2-113;
      (4)   The transporting of animals through the city by ordinary and
customary means; and
      (5)   Residential parcels of land that are five acres or more and share a
common border with the city limits shall be allowed not more than one horse per
acre and must be kept in a safe and sanitary manner in accordance with §
2-113.
(Ord. 319, passed 11-7-2017)
§ 2-110 ANIMAL TRAPS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, place, set out or deploy any
animal trap aboveground which makes use of a spring gun, spring jaws, clamping
devices, cutting or stabbing mechanism, or any other devices that will damage
or severely injure any animal when caught or trapped by the device or trap;
except that nothing herein contained shall prohibit the use of animal traps
that are so designed to trap and hold animals without injuring the animals.
§ 2-111 NUISANCE; ANIMAL ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to keep or maintain
such animal in the city so as to constitute a nuisance.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, NUISANCE is defined as any animal
which:
      (1)   Molests or interferes with persons in the public right-of-way;
      (2)   Attacks or injures persons or other domestic animals;
      (3)   Damages public or private property other than that of its owner or
harborer by its activities or with its excrement;
      (4)   Scatters refuse that is bagged or otherwise contained; or
      (5)   Causes any condition that threatens or endangers the health or
well-being of persons or other animals.
   (c)   If a summons is issued charging violation of this provision, a
subpoena shall also be issued to the complainant to testify to the nuisance
under oath.
§ 2-112 NOISY ANIMALS.
   The keeping or harboring of any animal which by loud, frequent and habitual
barking, howling, yelping, mewing, roaring or screeching shall disturb the
peace of any neighborhood is hereby prohibited. It shall be the duty of any
person harboring or keeping such loud or noisy animal or animals to abate the
condition, and if he or she fails to do so, the city may abate it by taking up,
impounding and/or disposing of the animal at the expense of the owner.
§ 2-113 ANIMAL CONFINES; SHELTERS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any animal in
any yard, structure or area that is not clean, dry and sanitary, free from
debris and offensive odors that annoy any neighbor, and devoid of rodents and
vermin.
   (b)   Excrement shall be removed at least once each week from any animal
shelter, pen or yard area where animals are kept, or more often if necessary to
prevent or control odors, fly breeding or rodent infestation. If excrement is
stored on the premises by any animal owner, it shall be stored in adequate
containers with fly-tight lids, and all such stored or accumulated wastes shall
be disposed of at least once each week.
   (c)   All animal shelters, pens and yards shall be so located that adequate
drainage is obtained, normal drying occurs and standing water is not present.
   (d)   All animal shelters and board fences confining animals shall be
maintained in good repair, and all animal shelters and board fences confining
animals subject to residential and commercial classification shall be protected
from deterioration by painting or comparable treatment.
   (e)   Barbed wire fences and electrically charged fences shall not be
permitted for animal confines except on properties in which an agricultural
classification permit is held or where the barbed wire fence or electrically
charged fence is protected by an exterior fence.
   (f)   All premises in which animals are kept shall be subject to inspection
by the Animal Control Officer, duly authorized law enforcement officer or
Public Health Official. If the Officer or Official determines from such
inspection that the premises are not being maintained in a clean and sanitary
manner, he or she shall notify the owner of the animals in writing to correct
the sanitation deficiencies within 24 hours after notice is served on the
owner. Any animal kept under any condition that could endanger the public or
animal health or create a health nuisance may be impounded. Animals shall be
released after fees are paid and the cause for impoundment has been corrected.
§ 2-113A SAME; STOCKYARDS; COMMERCIAL HOLDING PENS.
   Animal shelters owned or operated as a stockyard or commercial holding pen
shall be adequately maintained and cleaned as often as is necessary, as
determined by the Health Officer, to control fly breeding or to control other
conditions adversely affecting the public health, including the following:
   (a)   Collected fecal material and other solid organic waste shall be
disposed of at a sanitary landfill, fertilizer processing plant or by proper
dispersal on land used for agricultural purposes;
   (b)   Grain or protein feed shall be stored in tightly covered rodent-proof
metal containers or rodent-proof bins;
   (c)   Premises subject to the terms of this section shall be maintained free
of rodent harborage and in accordance with Chapter VIII, Article 6 of this
code;
   (d)   Wherever reasonable, use shall be made of anti-coagulant rodenticides
for the control of rodents and organo-phosphorus insecticides for the control
of flies, or any other effective chemical means for the control of rodents and
flies;
   (e)   Wherever reasonable, use shall be made of soil sterilants and
herbicides or other effective means for the control of weeds and grass around
structures and buildings;
   (f)   Enclosures, including fences, where animals such as horses, cows,
sheep and goats are maintained shall be constructed in a manner, using
dimension lumber materials or other effective means, to prevent such animals
from breaking out or causing hazard to persons or property;
   (g)   The solid wastes accumulated from the cleaning of animal shelters and
holding pens maintained by persons subject to a residential classification
permit as herein provided shall be stored in metal containers, with tight-
fitting metal lids, and all such stored or accumulated wastes shall be disposed
of at least once each week;
   (h)   Holding lots, pens and floors of sheds and buildings where animals are
held and which are maintained by persons subject to a commercial, industrial or
agricultural classification permit according to the terms of this chapter shall
be surfaced with concrete or asphaltic materials, and that the drainage system
of such surfaced areas shall include proper retaining walls and traps to
control the waste from draining into watercourses, and such drainage system
shall be subject to the approval of the Health Officer. The Health Officer
shall waive this standard for domestic animal holding operations where such
animal holding is longer than 24 hours for any domestic animal involved or
where dirt lots are more appropriate to the proper care of cattle, horses or
sheep; and
   (i)   Solid wastes accumulated from the cleaning of animal shelters and
holding pens maintained by persons subject to a commercial, industrial or
agricultural permit according to the terms of this chapter shall be stored on
concrete slabs or other facilities, such as dirt lots on which is stockpiled
manure with an exposed perimeter as approved by the Health Officer; provided,
that all solid waste shall be properly disposed of at least once each week or
as may be approved by the Health Officer.
§ 2-114 DEATH OF ANIMALS.
   All dead animals shall be disposed of by the owner or keeper within 24 hours
of the animal’s death by burial, by incineration in a facility approved by the
Animal Control Officer, by rendering or by other lawful means approved by the
Animal Control Officer. No dead animal shall be dumped on any public or private
property.
§ 2-115 VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (a)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, possess or
harbor a vicious animal within the city. Impoundment of animals whose owners
have been cited for violation of this section shall be at the discretion of the
Animal Control Officer. If the animal presents a clear and present danger to
the public health or safety, it shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer
or his or her agent to impound such animal.
   (b)   Defined. For the purpose of this chapter a VICIOUS ANIMAL shall
include:
      (1)   Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or domestic animals;
      (2)   Any animal that attacks a human being or domestic animal without
provocation;
      (3)   Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose
of fighting or any animal trained for fighting; or
      (4)   Any animal that is urged by its owner or harborer to attack, or
whose owner or harborer threatens to provoke such animal to attack, any law
enforcement officer while such officer is engaged in the performance of
official duty.
   (c)   Complaint.
      (1)   Whenever a sworn complaint is filed in the Municipal Court against
the owner of an animal alleging that such animal is vicious and in violation of
this section, the Municipal Judge shall hold a hearing to determine whether or
not the animal is vicious within the meaning of this section and thereby in
violation of this section. The owner of the animal shall be notified in writing
of the time and place of the hearing at least one week before the hearing.
      (2)   In making a determination, the Municipal Judge shall consider the
following:
      (A)   The seriousness of the attack or bite;
      (B)   Past history of attacks or bites;
      (C)   Likelihood of attacks or bites in the future;
      (D)   The condition and circumstances in which the animal is kept or
confined; and
      (E)   Other factors that may reasonably relate to the determination of
whether or not the animal is vicious.
      (3)   The Municipal Judge shall order the impoundment, the muzzling, in
accordance with division (d) below, and/or the confinement of the animal
accused of being in violation of this section in a manner and location that
will ensure that it is no threat to persons or other animals pending the
outcome of the hearing. If such impoundment, muzzling or otherwise safe
confinement is not possible or if prior court orders to restrain such animal
have gone unheeded, the Municipal Judge may order the animal immediately
destroyed.
   (d)   Vicious dogs to be muzzled. It shall be the duty of every owner,
keeper or harborer of any dog in the city, which dog is vicious or has been
known to bite, chase or run after any person or animal in the streets, alleys
or any public place in the city, to keep the same muzzled with a good and
sufficient wire or leather muzzle, securely fastened so as to wholly prevent
such dog from biting any animal or person until such time as a determination
has been made by the court as to whether the dog is vicious or not. Any person
owning, keeping or harboring any dog within the city limits contrary to this
section shall be guilty of a violation of this code.
   (e)   Immediate destruction. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
prevent the Animal Control Officer or any law enforcement officer from taking
whatever action is reasonably necessary to protect himself or herself or
members of the public from injury or danger, including immediate destruction of
any vicious animal without notice to the owner.
   (f)   Release of. If a complaint has been filed in the Municipal Court
against the owner of an impounded animal for a charge under this section, the
animal shall not be released except on the order of the Municipal Judge, who
may also direct the owner to pay all impounding fees in addition to any
penalties for violation of this chapter. The Municipal Judge may, upon making a
finding that an animal is vicious or that it represents a clear and present
danger to the citizens or to other animals in the community, order the animal
to be destroyed in a humane manner by the animal shelter. Surrender of an
animal by the owner thereof to the Animal Control Officer does not relieve or
render the owner immune from the decision of the Court, nor to the fees and
fines which may result from a violation of this section.
§ 2-116 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully allow any animal or fowl
under his or her control to be or to run at large within the city. Any animal
or fowl found at large shall be impounded as provided in §§
2-117 or
2-207 (dogs).
§ 2-117 IMPOUNDMENT; FEE; NOTICE; RECORD.
   (a)   The Animal Control Officer or law enforcement officer shall impound
any animal or fowl found at large in the city, or constituting a nuisance, or
otherwise in violation of this chapter, in a suitable pound or enclosure
provided or contracted for by the city. The impounding officer shall make
diligent inquiry as to the owner of the animal and shall notify the owner
thereof of such impoundment as soon as reasonably possible.
   (b)   The city shall be entitled to receive from such owner an impoundment
fee of $25 per day, plus any boarding fees incurred for the keeping of the
animal, and all other costs for the feeding, maintaining or care of the animal.
   (c)   In case the identity of the owner of the impounded animal or fowl
cannot be ascertained, the Animal Control Officer or police officer shall, upon
taking any such animal into custody and impounding the same, make a record
thereof, with a description of the animal and the date and place taken into
custody and the place of impounding, and shall thereupon immediately post a
public notice stating that the animal, describing the same with the date and
place of taking, has been taken up, and that unless the charges of impounding
the same, together with the license fees due and unpaid, are paid within three
full business days from the date of the notice, that the animal will be
disposed of as provided in this code.
   (d)   The Animal Control Officer shall each month submit a report to the
City Clerk showing the number of animals impounded and disposed of, and the
fees collected pursuant to this article, and shall pay those fees to the City
Clerk for credit to the General Operating Fund.
(Ord. 348, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 2-118 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   At any time before the sale or destruction of any animal impounded under the
provisions of this article, except for animals impounded under §§
2-115 (vicious) and
2-119 (rabid), the owner thereof may redeem the animal by paying the Animal
Control Officer, or any person in charge, the impounding fee and all costs
incurred as a result of such impoundment.
§ 2-119 IMPOUNDMENT OF RABIES SUSPECTS.
   (a)   Any law enforcement officer or local Health Officer may take up, upon
private or public property, any animal that has bitten or scratched a person or
other animal and impound the animal in the city pound, securely penned and
separated from other animals, or in a veterinary hospital or animal care
facility, for a period of not more than 30 days, during which time the local
Health Officer shall determine whether or not such animal is suffering from a
disease and, if not, the local Health Officer shall authorize the release of
the animal upon payment by the owner of the boarding fee therefor. The Health
Officer may authorize the keeping of any such animal on the owner’s premises if
the owner produces a rabies vaccination certificate showing that the animal has
valid rabies vaccination protection. Impoundment costs shall be borne by the
owner. If in the opinion of the local Health Officer symptoms develop
justifying a microscopic examination, then the animal shall be killed and
examination made by the State Board of Health.
   (b)   In lieu of the provisions of division (a) above, the owner of any such
animal may, at his or her own expense, take such animal to any duly qualified
and licensed veterinarian in the city for observation. Such veterinarian shall
report his or her findings in writing to the local Health Officer. If in the
opinion of such veterinarian a microscopic examination is justified, then the
animal shall be turned over to the Animal Control Officer or any law
enforcement officer to be killed and examination made by the State Board of
Health.
   (c)   Any animal desired for observation by the local Health Officer under
this section shall be delivered to the Animal Control Officer or any law
enforcement officer upon demand and shall not be withheld, hidden or harbored.
Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a violation of this code.
Upon refusal of any person to so deliver such animal, the Municipal Judge shall
cause a warrant to be issued for the arrest of such person, which warrant shall
also provide for the surrender of the animal and shall be lawful authority for
the apprehending and forcible taking of such animal.
§ 2-120 ANIMALS BITTEN BY RABID ANIMALS.
   (a)   Whenever a dog, cat or other animal is bitten by a rabid animal or an
animal later proved to have been rabid, it shall be the duty of the owner of
the animal that is bitten to report that fact to the local Health Officer and/
or the Police Department.
   (b)   It shall also be the duty of the owner of the bitten animal to either
destroy or have his or her bitten animal destroyed, unless:
      (1)   The animal that was bitten had been vaccinated against rabies at
least three weeks before being bitten and has a current vaccination;
      (2)   If the bitten animal has a current vaccination, it shall be
confined for 90 days;
      (3)   The bitten animal shall be released from confinement only upon
written order from the local Health Officer, who declares the animal to be free
of rabies; and
      (4)   If the animal is found to have contracted rabies during
confinement, it shall be properly disposed of.
§ 2-121 VEHICULAR ACCIDENTS INVOLVING ANIMALS.
   Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes any animal shall
stop at once and shall immediately report such injury or death to the owner of
such animal, or in the event that the owner cannot be ascertained and located,
the operator shall at once report the accident to the Animal Control Officer or
any law enforcement officer.
§ 2-122 EMERGENCY; PROCLAMATION.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized whenever, in his or her opinion, the danger
to the public safety from rabid animals is made imminent to issue a
proclamation ordering all persons owning any animal in the city to confine the
animal in a good and sufficient enclosure from which the animal cannot escape,
or fasten such animal by means of a chain on the premises where the owner may
reside, for such time as may be specified in such proclamation. Any animal not
confined during such time may be disposed of wherever found by any police
officer or the Animal Control Officer of the city. The owner of such animal
shall be prosecuted for such violation thereof.
ARTICLE 2: DOGS
Section
   
2-201   Registration and vaccination required; fee
   
2-202   Dog tags
   
2-203   Same; counterfeit tag
   
2-204   Evidence of vaccination
   
2-205   Visiting dogs
   
2-206   Running at large; fine
   
2-207   Impoundment; record; notice; redemption; minimum fee
   
2-208   Disposition of unclaimed dogs
   
2-209   Confinement of dogs in heat
   
2-210   Muzzling
   
2-211   Pit bull dogs
   
2-212   Same; penalty
   
2-213   Number of dogs per household
   
2-214   Unlawful tethering
§ 2-201 REGISTRATION AND VACCINATION REQUIRED; FEE.
   (a)   Every owner of any dog over six months of age shall annually register
with the City Clerk his or her name and address with the name, sex and
description of each dog owned and kept within the city. It shall be unlawful
for the owner of any newly acquired dog or any dog brought into the city to
fail to register such animal within 30 days from acquisition or bringing the
dog into the city. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any previously
registered dog to fail to maintain current registration of such dog.
   (b)   Upon registration, the owner shall present a current, completed
certificate of immunization against rabies. No registration shall follow
without evidence of this document, and it shall be unlawful for the owner of
any dog over six months of age to fail to maintain effective rabies
immunization of such dog.
   (c)   The owner or harborer of any dog shall, at the time of registering
such dog, present to the City Clerk a certificate from an accredited
veterinarian showing that a male dog has been neutered or a female dog has been
spayed, if the dog has been neutered or spayed.
   (d)   The City Clerk shall collect an annual registration fee of $5 for each
neutered male dog and for each spayed female dog, and $5 for each unneutered
male dog and for each unspayed female dog.
   (e)   The registration year shall be from January 1 through December 31 of
each year. The fee shall be payable before March 1 of each year without
penalty.
   (f)   The rabies certification provided to the city shall include
certification as to how long the rabies immunization is good for, which shall
be for no longer than a period of three years. Subsequent annual registrations
may be renewed in reliance upon a prior year’s rabies certification that has
not yet expired.
(Ord. 287, passed - -)
§ 2-202 DOG TAGS.
   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk or designated agent, upon a showing
of current rabies immunization and receipt of the registration fee hereinbefore
required, to keep a record of the registration of dogs, the time of the
registration, the name of the owner or keeper, the number of the registration,
and the amount paid therefor, and shall deliver to the owner or keeper of the
dog a certificate in writing, stating that the person has registered the dog
and the number by which the dog is registered, and shall also deliver to the
owner or keeper of the dog a tag with the registration number and the
registration year thereon, which shall be, by the owner or keeper, attached to
the collar to be used on the dog so registered. When any tag has become lost
during a registration period, the owner of the dog may request a duplicate tag
for the remainder of the registration period. When so requested, the City Clerk
shall, upon presentation of the registration certificate, issue a duplicate of
such tag upon the payment of a fee of $1. It shall be unlawful for any person
to take off or remove the city registration tag from any dog belonging to
another, or remove the strap or collar on which the same is fastened.
§ 2-203 SAME; COUNTERFEIT TAG.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place on any dog a tag issued for any
other dog or to make or use any false, forged or counterfeited tag or imitation
thereof.
§ 2-204 EVIDENCE OF VACCINATION.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog kept within the city to fail
to display a current certificate of immunization against rabies issued by an
accredited veterinarian evidencing the vaccination of such dog within one year,
when requested by the Animal Control Officer or any law enforcement officer.
(Ord. 190, passed - -)
§ 2-205 VISITING DOGS.
   The provisions of this article with respect to registration shall not apply
to any dog owned by any person visiting or temporarily remaining within the
city for less than 30 days; however, such dogs shall be kept under restraint by
the owner thereof at all times.
§ 2-206 RUNNING AT LARGE; FINE.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of any dog to permit
such dog, whether intentionally or unintentionally, to run at large within the
city at any time. The owner or harborer shall ensure that all dogs shall be
penned, chained or otherwise tied or kept upon a leash, which shall be either
affixed to a fixed object or held by a person capable of restraining the dog. A
dog tethered to a stationary object within range of a public sidewalk, street
or alley shall be deemed to be at large.
   (b)   Any dog running at large within the city shall be subject to
impoundment as set out in §
2-207.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of any dog to permit
such dog to trespass upon or do injury to public property or the private
property of another, provided that a dog on a leash under the control of a
person capable of restraining said dog shall not be deemed to be trespassing
upon public or private property so long as the person controlling the dog is
not deemed to be trespassing and the premises are not posted so as to prohibit
the presence of dogs.
   (d)   Upon a first conviction of this section, the defendant shall pay a
fine of $25.
   (e)   Upon a second or subsequent conviction of this section within one
year, the defendant shall pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100.
In addition to the foregoing, upon a third or subsequent conviction within one
year, the Court may order the impoundment of the dog at the owner’s expense
until such time that the owner thereof shall present a plan acceptable to the
Court to prevent future violations of this section.
   (f)   If the dog has been impounded or boarded by the city, then the
defendant shall be assessed an impoundment fee of $25 per day plus any boarding
fees incurred for the keeping of the animal and all other costs for the
feeding, maintaining or care of the animal. The fees and costs assessed
pursuant to this division (f) are in addition to the fines assessed by the
Court pursuant to divisions (d) or (e) above.
(Ord. 348, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 2-207 IMPOUNDMENT; RECORD; NOTICE; REDEMPTION; MINIMUM FEE.
   (a)   Any dog found in violation of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to impoundment by the city.
   (b)   A record of all dogs impounded shall be kept by the city containing
the following information: color, sex, weight, height, identifying marks,
registration number (if any) and the date of impoundment.
   (c)   No dog impounded under this section shall be disposed of until after
expiration of a minimum of three full business days of custody, during which
the public has clear access to inspect and recover the dog through time periods
ordinarily accepted as usual business hours. During such time of custody, the
city shall attempt to notify the owner or custodian of any dog impounded by
such facility if the owner or custodian is known or reasonably ascertainable.
Such dog may at any time be released to the legal owner, moved to a veterinary
hospital for treatment or observation, or released in any manner if such dog
was a gift to the animal shelter, or euthanized by a licensed veterinarian if
it appears to the veterinarian that the dog is diseased or disabled beyond
recovery. If within three full business days the owner does not appear to claim
the dog, then the dog may be sold, euthanized or otherwise disposed of.
   (d)   If at any time before the sale or destruction of any dog impounded
under the provisions of this article, the owner of an impounded dog does appear
and redeem the dog, it shall be turned over to the person claiming it upon
payment of the impoundment fee of $25 per day, plus any boarding fees incurred
for the keeping of the animal, and all other costs for the feeding, maintaining
or care of the animal, and shall not apply to any dog alleged as being vicious
under §
2-115 or suspected of rabies under §
2-119 of this code.
   (e)   The minimum impoundment fee shall be $25 per day.
   (f)   Any dog impounded may not be released without a current rabies
vaccination.
   (g)   Impoundment hereunder shall not preclude any court from imposing and
executing any fine which might otherwise be levied under this article for
violation of any of the provisions thereof; nor shall impoundment be a defense
in any prosecution commenced hereunder.
   (h)   The redemption of any dog impounded for a violation of any provision
of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of such
provision by the person redeeming the dog.
(Ord. 348, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 2-208 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED DOGS.
   (a)   If any dog is not redeemed by its owner or harborer within the time
allowed for redemption as specified in §
2-207 thereof, the Animal Control Officer, any authorized law enforcement
officer, any authorized veterinarian or any duly authorized pound personnel may
destroy such dog or sell the same for the costs of impoundment and keeping,
plus any registration fee due for the current year.
   (b)   No dog may be transferred to the permanent custody of a prospective
owner unless:
      (1)   Such dog has been surgically spayed or neutered before the physical
transfer of the dog occurs; or
      (2)   The prospective owner signs an agreement to have the dog spayed or
neutered and deposits with the city not less than the lowest nor more than the
highest cost of spaying or neutering in the community as determined by the
city. Any funds deposited under such an agreement shall be refunded to such
person upon presentation of a written statement signed by a licensed
veterinarian that the dog has been spayed or neutered. If such person does not
reclaim the deposit within six months after receiving custody of the dog, the
city shall keep the deposit and may reclaim the unspayed or unneutered dog.
   (c)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require sterilization of
a dog that is being held by the city and that may be claimed by its rightful
owner within the holding period established in §
2-207.
§ 2-209 CONFINEMENT OF DOGS IN HEAT.
   Any unspayed female dog in the stage of estrus (heat) shall be confined
during such period of time in a house, building or secure enclosure, and the
area of the enclosure shall be so constructed that no other dog or dogs may
gain voluntary access to the confined animal except for purposes of planned
breeding. Any animal that is in the state of estrus (heat) and that is not
properly confined, or any such animal that is creating a neighborhood nuisance,
shall be removed to a boarding kennel, to a veterinary hospital or to the
animal shelter. All expenses incurred as a result of the confinement shall be
paid by the owner. The owner of animals removed to the animal shelter shall be
charged at the rate established from time to time by the animal shelter for
routine confinement.
§ 2-210 MUZZLING.
   Whenever the Mayor shall deem it necessary for the protection and welfare of
the inhabitants of the city, he or she shall issue an order requiring all dogs
kept within the city to be effectively muzzled for such length of time as may
be specified in the order to prevent them from biting or injuring persons or
animals. Such order shall be published in the official newspaper of the city
for such period of time as the Mayor may deem necessary.
§ 2-211 PIT BULL DOGS.
   It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, own or in any way possess within the
corporate limits of the city any pit bull dog, including:
   (a)   The bull terrier breed of dog;
   (b)   Staffordshire bull terrier breed of dog;
   (c)   The American pit bull terrier breed of dog;
   (d)   The American Staffordshire terrier breed of dog;
   (e)   Dogs of mixed breed or of other breeds than above listed, which breed
or mixed breed is known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers; or
   (f)   Any dog which has the appearance and characteristics of being
predominantly of the breeds of bull terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier,
American pit bull terrier, American Staffordshire terrier; any other breed
commonly known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers; or a
combination of any of these breeds.
(Ord. 154, passed - -)
§ 2-212 SAME; PENALTY.
   Any person violating or permitting the violation of §
2-211 shall, upon being found guilty, be fined the sum of not less than $100
and not more than $500; and in addition to the fine imposed, the Court may
sentence the defendant to imprisonment for a period of not to exceed 90 days.
In addition, the Court shall order the dog removed from the city or have it
destroyed. Each day that a violation of §
2-211 continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 154, passed - -)
§ 2-213 NUMBER OF DOGS PER HOUSEHOLD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain more than three dogs at any
one residence except as provided for hereafter.
   (a)   Upon a female dog being kept at a residence having pups, the pups may
be kept at the same residence as the mother dog until the pups are six months
of age, provided that the owner of the pups has registered the mother dog and
provides notice to the City Clerk of the existence of the pups and their date
of birth.
   (b)   The keeping of a visiting dog(s) that stays at the residence for no
more than three days in a six-month period shall not be deemed to violate this
article so long as, upon request, the person in charge of the premises shall
identify the owner of the visiting dog and the duration of the visit.
   (c)   Upon the person in charge of the premises obtaining a permit from the
City Clerk for the keeping of additional dogs on the premises and paying the
permit fee of $60 per additional dog, over three dogs per year may be kept on
the premises provided that no more than a total of five adult dogs may be kept
at any one residence.
   (d)   Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine of up to $500
and/or up to ten days in jail.
(Ord. 287, passed - -)
§ 2-214 UNLAWFUL TETHERING.
   (a) It shall be unlawful for the owner, harborer or keeper of a dog to keep
a dog tethered in place for more than eight hours at a time or more than eight
hours in any 24-hour period except as particularly authorized hereafter.
   (b)   An overhead trolley tethering system wherein the dog is not tethered
to an immovable object but is instead tethered to an overhead cable at least 30
feet in length such that the dog is restrained on a tether at least ten feet
long and attached to the overhead trolley shall be exempt from the time
prohibition on tethering.
   (c)   A dog on a leash which is in the immediate possession of the owner,
harborer or keeper shall not be deemed to be on a tether.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, harborer or keeper of a dog to
keep a dog tethered within the city except in the manner described hereafter.
      (1)   Dogs shall be tethered in such a manner as to prevent injury,
strangulation or entanglement on fences, trees or other objects.
      (2)   Any chain or other tether must be attached to a properly fitting
collar or to a harness that is worn by the dog. Collars shall not be of a choke
type.
      (3)   No tether shall weigh more than 20% of the dog’s body weight.
      (4)   Any tether shall be at least ten feet in length.
      (5)   Any tethering system used shall not allow the dog to leave the
property of the owner, harborer or keeper.
   (e)   Penalties for violation of this section shall be a fine of up to $500
and/or up to ten days in jail. Upon a repeat offense, the court shall have the
discretion to remove the dogs involved and place the dogs with an authorized
humane society. Any dog found to be tethered in violation of this section may,
at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer or other law enforcement
officer, be impounded as if it were running at large as authorized by §
2-206 if said officer deems the tethering system being used to be hazardous to
the health of the tethered dog.
(Ord. 287, passed - -)
ARTICLE 3: OTHER ANIMALS
Section
   
2-301   Exotic animals
   
2-302   Domestic fowl
§ 2-301 EXOTIC ANIMALS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep,
maintain or have in his or her possession or under his or her control within
the city any poisonous reptile or any other dangerous wild animal or reptile;
any vicious or dangerous animal; or any other animal or reptile of wild,
vicious or dangerous propensities.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in his
or her possession or under his or her control within the city any of the
following animals:
      (1)   All poisonous animals, including rear-fang snakes;
      (2)   Apes: chimpanzees; gibbons; gorillas; orangutans and siamangs;
      (3)   Baboons;
      (4)   Badgers;
      (5)   Bears;
      (6)   Bison;
      (7)   Bobcats;
      (8)   Cheetahs;
      (9)   Crocodilians 30 inches in length or more;
      (10)   Constrictor snakes six feet in length or more;
      (11)   Coyotes;
      (12)   Deer; includes all members of the deer family, for example, white-
tailed deer, elk, antelopes and moose;
      (13)   Elephants;
      (14)   Game cocks and other fighting birds;
      (15)   Hippopotami;
      (16)   Hyenas;
      (17)   Jaguars;
      (18)   Leopards;
      (19)   Lions;
      (20)   Lynxes;
      (21)   Monkeys;
      (22)   Ostriches;
      (23)   Pumas; also known as cougars, mountain lions and panthers;
      (24)   Raccoons;
      (25)   Rhinoceroses;
      (26)   Skunks;
      (27)   Tigers; and
      (28)   Wolves.
   (c)   The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to bona fide pet
shops, zoos, circuses, carnivals, educational institutions or medical
institutions, if:
      (1)   Their location conforms to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
of the city;
      (2)   All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors; and
      (3)   Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent
their escape.
   (d)   The Municipal Judge shall have the authority to order any animal
deemed vicious confined, destroyed or removed from the city.
§ 2-302 DOMESTIC FOWL.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to keep any kind of domestic fowl except chickens
within the city. The keeping of chickens shall be prohibited, except as
provided in this section.
   (b)   No more than five female chickens may be kept at any occupied
residence within the city. They must be kept in accordance with the provisions
of this section and applicable zoning regulations, restricted to “R–1” zoning.
   (c)   No male chickens shall be kept within the city.
   (d)   Chickens must be kept in a clean, safe, fenced, healthy environment.
Chicken coops and chicken tractors are required by permit and may only be
located in the rear of the premises, located no closer than ten feet from any
adjacent dwelling, church, school or place of business, except from the
dwelling located on the property. Permit inspection will consist of inspection
ensuring the premises is free of any other code violations and proper placement
of the chicken coop and/or tractor.
   (e)   Odor from the maintaining of chickens shall not be perceptible at or
beyond the property boundaries; perceptible noise from chickens shall not be
loud enough at the property boundaries to disturb persons of reason
sensibilities.
   (f)   Any violation of this section that constitutes a health hazard or that
interferes with the use or enjoyment of neighboring property is a nuisance and
may be abated under the general abatement provisions of this code. In addition,
any violation of this section may be cited as a code violation in Municipal
Court punishable by a fine and court costs, and each day such violation
continues shall be a separate offense.
   (g)   Chicken waste is the responsibility of the owner and shall be removed
to prevent or control odors, fly breeding or rodent infestation. The coop and
surrounding area must be kept free from trash and accumulated droppings.
   (h)   Chickens shall be provided with access to feed and clean water at all
times. All feed and other items associated with the keeping of chickens shall
be protected from or to prevent rats, mice or other rodents from gaining access
to or coming into contact with the feed.
   (i)   The chicken owner shall take necessary action to reduce the attraction
of predators and rodents and the potential infestation of insects and
parasites.
   (j)   Chickens are not to be kept for profit. Commercial chicken operations
are prohibited.
(Ord. 322, passed 7-3-2018)
CHAPTER III: BEVERAGES
   Article
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   CEREAL MALT BEVERAGES
      
3.   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
      
4.   PRIVATE CLUBS
      
5.   DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
      
6.   CATERERS
      
7.   TEMPORARY PERMITS
      
8.   SPECIAL EVENT CMB PERMITS
      
9.   KEG REGISTRATION
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
3-101   Definitions
   
3-102   Restriction on location
   
3-103   Minors on premises
   
3-104   Reserved
   
3-105   Public sale; consumption
   
3-106   Common consumption areas
   
3-107   Consumption while driving
   
3-108   Identification card
§ 3-101 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl
alcohol, but does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC CANDY.
      (1)   For the purposes of manufacturing, any candy or other confectionary
product with an alcohol content greater than 0.5% alcohol by volume; and
      (2)   For the purposes of sale at retail, any candy or other
confectionary product with an alcohol content greater than 1% alcohol by
volume.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, alcoholic candy and every
liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being, but shall not include
any cereal malt beverage.
   CATERER. An individual, partnership or corporation which sells alcoholic
liquor or cereal malt beverage by the individual drink, and provides services
related to the serving thereof, on unlicensed premises which may be open to the
public, but does not include a holder of a temporary permit selling alcoholic
liquor or cereal malt beverage in accordance with the terms of such permit.
   CLASS A CLUB. A premises which is owned or leased by a corporation,
partnership, business trust or association and which is operated thereby as a
bona fide nonprofit social, fraternal or war veterans’ club, as determined by
the state, for the exclusive use of the corporate stockholders, partners, trust
beneficiaries or associates (hereinafter referred to as members), and their
families and guests accompanying them as provided in K.S.A. 41-2637.
   CLASS B CLUB. A premises operated for profit by a corporation, partnership
or individual, to which members of such club may resort for the consumption of
food or alcoholic beverages and for entertainment.
   CLUB. A Class A or Class B club.
   COMMON CONSUMPTION AREA. A defined indoor or outdoor area not otherwise
subject to a license issued pursuant to the Kansas Liquor Control Act or the
Club and Drinking Establishment Act where the possession and consumption of
alcoholic liquor is allowed pursuant to a common consumption area permit. The
boundaries of any COMMON CONSUMPTION AREA must be clearly marked using a
physical barrier or any apparent line of demarcation.
   DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT. Premises which may be open to the general public
where alcoholic liquor by the individual drink is sold. The term DRINKING
ESTABLISHMENT includes a railway car.
   ENHANCED CEREAL MALT BEVERAGE. “Cereal malt beverage” as that term is
defined in K.S.A. 41-2701, and amendments thereto, and such term shall include
beer containing not more than 6% alcohol by volume when such beer is sold by a
retailer licensed under the Kansas Cereal Malt Beverage Act.
   GENERAL RETAILER. A person who has a license to sell cereal malt beverages
and beer containing not more than 6% alcohol by volume at retail.
   LIMITED RETAILER. A person who has a license to sell cereal malt beverages
and beer containing not more than 6% alcohol by volume at retail only in
original and unopened containers and not for consumption on the premises.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any place at which cereal malt beverages, or alcoholic
beverages, or both, are sold.
   TEMPORARY PERMIT. A permit, issued in accordance with the laws of the state,
which allows the permit holder to offer for sale, sell and serve alcoholic
liquor or cereal malt beverage for consumption on unlicensed premises open to
the public.
   WHOLESALER or DISTRIBUTOR. Any individuals, firms, co-partnerships,
corporations and associations which sell or offer for sale any beverage
referred to in this chapter to persons, co-partnerships, corporations and
associations authorized by this chapter to sell cereal malt beverages and beer
containing not more than 6% alcohol by volume at retail.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-102 RESTRICTION ON LOCATION.
   (a)   No alcoholic liquor shall be sold or served by a person holding a
license or permit from the city whose place of business or other premises are
located within 200 feet of any church, school, college, nursing home, library
or hospital, said distance to be measured from the nearest property line of
such church, school, nursing home, library or hospital to the nearest portion
of the building occupied by the premises.
   (b)   The distance location of division (a) above shall not apply to a club,
drinking establishment, caterer or temporary permit holder when the license or
permit applicant petitions for and receives a waiver of the distance limitation
from the governing body. The governing body shall grant such a waiver only
following public notice and hearing and a finding by the governing body that
the proximity of the establishment is not adverse to the public welfare or
safety.
   (c)   No license or permit shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic liquor
if the building or use does not meet the zoning ordinance requirements of the
city or conflicts with other city laws, including building and health codes.
§ 3-103 MINORS ON PREMISES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
remain on any premises where the sale of alcoholic liquor is licensed for on-
premises consumption, or where a caterer or temporary permit holder is serving
alcoholic liquor.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the operator, person in charge or licensee of
any premises licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic liquor or a
caterer or temporary permit holder who is serving alcoholic liquor to permit
any person under the age of 21 years to remain on the premises.
   (c)   This section shall not apply if the person under the age of 21 years
is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or if the licensed or
permitted premises derives not more than 30% of its gross receipts in each
calendar year from the sale of alcoholic liquor for on-premises consumption.
§ 3-104 RESERVED.
§ 3-105 PUBLIC SALE; CONSUMPTION.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or dispense any
cereal malt beverage or alcoholic liquor in any public place not licensed to
sell, serve or dispense such beverage at such public place within or under the
jurisdiction of the city.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any cereal
malt beverage or alcoholic liquor in any public place not licensed to sell and
serve such beverage for public consumption at such public place within or under
the jurisdiction of the city.
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, the term PUBLIC PLACE shall include
upon any street, public thoroughfare, public parking lot or any privately owned
parking area made available to the public generally; within any parked or
driven motor vehicle situated in any of the aforesaid places; or upon any
property owned by the state, or any governmental subdivision thereof, unless
such property is leased to others under K.S.A. 12-1740 et seq. if the property
is being used for hotel or motel purposes or purposes incidental thereto or is
owned or operated by an airport authority created pursuant to K.S.A. Chapter
27.
(K.S.A. 41-719)
§ 3-106 COMMON CONSUMPTION AREAS.
   (a)   At the discretion of the governing body, the city may establish one or
more common consumption areas within the limits of the city by ordinance and
authorize the possession and consumption of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt
beverage within the common consumption area. The ordinance shall designate the
boundaries of any common consumption area and prescribe the times during which
alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage may be consumed therein. The ordinance
shall require that any public street or roadway that lies within a common
consumption area be blocked from motorized traffic during the hours in which
alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage is consumed.
   (b)   Applications for the establishment of common consumption areas shall
be submitted to the City Clerk, subject to the following.
      (1)   The application shall describe the proposed boundaries, including a
description of the physical barrier or other apparent demarcation to be used,
of any common consumption area and the proposed times during which alcoholic
liquor may be consumed therein.
      (2)   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee of $25.
      (3)   Each application shall be accompanied by an acknowledgment that
each common consumption area permit holder shall be liable for violations of
all liquor laws that occur off the licensee’s premises but within the common
consumption area identified in the ordinance, and that no permit holder shall
permit any person to remove any open container of alcoholic liquor from the
boundaries of the common consumption area.
   (c)   The City Clerk shall immediately notify the Director of the Division
of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the establishment of a common consumption area
within the city and submit a copy of the ordinance along with such notice.
   (d)   In order to participate in the common consumption area, licensees must
apply for and receive a permit from the Director of the Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control.
(K.S.A. 41-2659)
§ 3-107 CONSUMPTION WHILE DRIVING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any cereal malt beverage or
alcoholic liquor while operating any vehicle upon any street or highway.
(K.S.A. 8-1599, 41-719)
§ 3-108 IDENTIFICATION CARD.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Display, cause or permit to be displayed, or have in possession,
any fictitious, fraudulently altered or fraudulently obtained identification
card for purposes relating to the sale, purchase or consumption of either
cereal malt beverage or alcoholic liquor;
      (2)   Display or represent any identification card not issued to such
person as being his or her card for purposes relating to the sale, purchase or
consumption of either cereal malt beverage or alcoholic liquor;
      (3)   Permit any unlawful use of an identification card issued to a
person for purposes relating to the sale, purchase or consumption of either
cereal malt beverage or alcoholic liquor; and
      (4)   Photograph, photostat, duplicate or in any way reproduce any
identification card or facsimile thereof in such a manner that it could be
mistaken for a valid identification card, or display or have in possession any
such photograph, photostat, duplicate, reproduction or facsimile, for purposes
relating to the sale, purchase or consumption of either cereal malt beverage or
alcoholic liquor.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to lend any identification card to
or knowingly permit the use of any identification card by any person under 21
years of age for use in the sale, purchase or consumption of any cereal malt
beverage or alcoholic liquor.
ARTICLE 2: CEREAL MALT BEVERAGES
Section
   
3-201   License issued by city
   
3-202   License required of retailer
   
3-203   Application
   
3-204   License application procedures
   
3-205   License granted; denied
   
3-206   License to be posted
   
3-207   License, disqualification
   
3-208   Restriction upon location
   
3-209   License fee
   
3-210   Suspension of license
   
3-211   License suspension/revocation by governing body
   
3-212   Same; appeal
   
3-213   Change of location
   
3-214   Wholesalers and/or distributors
   
3-215   Business regulations
   
3-216   Prohibited conduct on premises
   
3-217   Sanitary conditions required
§ 3-201 LICENSE ISSUED BY CITY.
   The “Cereal Malt Beverage License” issued by the city pursuant to this
article authorizes the sale of enhanced cereal malt beverage, as defined in §
3-101, by those retailers in compliance with this ordinance and other laws and
regulations that may apply.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-202 LICENSE REQUIRED OF RETAILER.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any enhanced cereal malt
beverage at retail without a license for each place of business where enhanced
cereal malt beverages are to be sold at retail.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person having a license to sell enhanced
cereal malt beverages at retail only in the original and unopened containers,
and not for consumption on the premises, to sell any enhanced cereal malt
beverage in any other manner.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-203 APPLICATION.
   (a)   Any person desiring a license shall make an application to the
governing body of the city and accompany the application by the required
license fee for each place of business for which the person desires the
license. The application shall be verified, and upon a form prepared by the
Attorney General of the state, and shall contain:
      (1)   The name and residence of the applicant and how long he or she has
resided within the state;
      (2)   The particular place for which a license is desired;
      (3)   The name of the owner of the premises upon which the place of
business is located;
      (4)   The names and addresses of all persons who hold any financial
interest in the particular place of business for which a license is desired;
      (5)   A statement that the applicant is a citizen of the United States
and not less than 21 years of age and that he or she has not within the two
years immediately preceding the date of making application been convicted of a
felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, or been adjudged guilty of
drunkenness, or driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, or the violation of any other intoxicating liquor law of
any state or of the United States;
      (6)   Each application for a general retailer’s license shall be
accompanied by a certificate from the City Health Officer certifying that he or
she has inspected the premises to be licensed; and
      (7)   Each application for a general retailer’s license must be
accompanied by a certificate from the City Fire Chief certifying that he or she
has inspected the premises to be licensed.
   (b)   The application shall be accompanied by a statement, signed by the
applicant, authorizing any governmental agency to provide the city with any
information pertinent to the application. One copy of such application shall
immediately be transmitted to the Chief of Police of the city for investigation
of the applicant. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to investigate
such applicant to determine whether he or she is qualified as a licensee under
the provisions of this chapter. The Chief shall report to the City Clerk not
later than five working days subsequent to the receipt of such application. The
application shall be scheduled for consideration by the governing body at the
earliest meeting consistent with current notification requirements.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-204 LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   All applications for a new and a renewed enhanced cereal malt beverage
license shall be submitted to the City Clerk ten days in advance of the
governing body meeting at which they will be considered.
   (b)   The City Clerk’s office shall notify the applicant of an existing
license 30 days in advance of its expiration.
   (c)   The Clerk’s office shall provide copies of all applications to the
Police Department, to the Fire Department and to the City-County Health
Department when they are received. The Police Department will run a record
check on all applicants and the Fire Department and Health Department will
inspect the premises. The departments will then recommend approval, or
disapproval, of applications within five working days of the department’s
receipt of the application.
   (d)   The governing body will not consider any application for a new or
renewed license that has not been submitted ten days in advance and been
reviewed by the above city departments.
   (e)   An applicant who has not had an enhanced cereal malt beverage license
in the city shall attend the governing body meeting when the application for a
new license will be considered.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-205 LICENSE GRANTED; DENIED.
   (a)   The journal of the governing body shall show the action taken on the
application.
   (b)   If the license is granted, the City Clerk shall issue the license,
which shall show the name of the licensee and the year for which issued.
   (c)   No license shall be transferred to another licensee.
   (d)   If the license shall be denied, the license fee shall be immediately
returned to the person who has made application.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-206 LICENSE TO BE POSTED.
   Each license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business
for which the license is issued.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-207 LICENSE, DISQUALIFICATION.
   No license shall be issued to:
   (a)   A person who has not been a resident in good faith of the state for at
least one year immediately preceding application and a resident of the county
for at least six months prior to the filing of such application;
   (b)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (c)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he or she resides;
   (d)   A person who, within two years immediately preceding the date of
making application, has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral
turpitude, or has been adjudged guilty of drunkenness or driving a motor
vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or the violation of
any other intoxicating liquor law of any state or of the United States;
   (e)   A partnership, unless all the members of the partnership shall
otherwise be qualified to obtain a license;
   (f)   A corporation if any manager, officer or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 25% of the stock of such
corporation, would be ineligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason
other than nonresidence within the city or county;
   (g)   A corporation, if any manager, officer or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 25% of the stock of such
corporation, has been an officer, manager or director, or a stockholder owning
in the aggregate more than 25% of the stock, of a corporation which:
      (1)   Has had a retailer’s license revoked under K.S.A. 41-2708, and
amendments thereto; or
      (2)   Has been convicted of a violation of the Drinking Establishment
Act, being K.S.A. 41-2601 et seq., or the cereal malt beverage laws of this
state.
   (h)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee; and
   (i)   A person whose spouse would be ineligible to receive a retailer’s
license for any reason other than citizenship, retailer residency requirements
or age, except that this division (i) shall not apply in determining
eligibility for a renewal license.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-208 RESTRICTION UPON LOCATION.
   (a)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any enhanced
cereal malt beverage on premises which are located in areas not zoned for such
purpose.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to sell or dispense at retail any enhanced cereal
malt beverage at any place within the city limits that is within a 200-foot
radius of any church, school or library.
   (c)   Provisions shall not apply to any establishment holding a private club
license issued by the state.
   (d)   The distance limitation of division (b) above shall not apply to any
establishment holding an enhanced cereal malt beverage license issued by the
city when the licensee has petitioned for and received a waiver of the distance
limitation. The governing body shall grant such a waiver only following public
notice and hearing.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-209 LICENSE FEE.
   (a)   The rules and regulations regarding license fees shall be as follows:
      (1)   General retailer. For each place of business selling enhanced
cereal malt beverages at retail: $75 per calendar year; and
      (2)   Limited retailer. For each place of business selling only at retail
enhanced cereal malt beverages in original and unopened containers and not for
consumption on the premises: $50 per calendar year.
   (b)   The full amount of the license fee shall be required regardless of the
time of the year in which the application is made, and the licensee shall only
be authorized to operate under the license for the remainder of the calendar
year in which the license is issued.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-210 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   The Chief of Police, upon five days’ written notice, shall have the
authority to suspend such license for a period not to exceed 30 days for any
violation of the provisions of this article or other laws pertaining to
enhanced cereal malt beverages, which violation does not in his or her judgment
justify a recommendation of revocation. The licensee may appeal such order of
suspension to the governing body within seven days from the date of such order.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-211 LICENSE SUSPENSION/REVOCATION BY GOVERNING BODY.
   The governing body of the city, upon five days’ written notice to a person
holding a license to sell enhanced cereal malt beverages, shall permanently
revoke or cause to be suspended for a period of not more than 30 days such
license for any of the following reasons:
   (a)   If a licensee has fraudulently obtained the license by giving false
information in the application therefor;
   (b)   If the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this section or
has become ineligible to obtain a license under this section;
   (c)   Drunkenness of a person holding such license, drunkenness of a
licensee’s manager or employee while on duty and while on the premises for
which the license is issued, or for a licensee, his or her manager or employee
permitting any intoxicated person to remain in such place selling enhanced
cereal malt beverages;
   (d)   The sale of enhanced cereal malt beverages to any person under 21
years of age;
   (e)   For permitting any gambling in or upon any premises licensed;
   (f)   For permitting any person to mix drinks with materials purchased in
any premises licensed or brought into the premises for this purpose;
   (g)   For the employment of any person under the age established by the
state for employment involving dispensing enhanced cereal malt beverages;
   (h)   For the employment of persons adjudged guilty of a felony or of a
violation of any law relating to intoxicating liquor;
   (i)   For the sale or possession of, or for permitting the use or
consumption of, alcoholic liquor within or upon any premises licensed;
   (j)   The nonpayment of any license fees;
   (k)   If the licensee has become ineligible to obtain a license; and
   (l)   The provisions of divisions (f) and (i) above shall not apply if such
place of business is also currently licensed as a private club.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-212 SAME; APPEAL.
   The licensee, within 20 days after the order of the governing body revoking
any license, may appeal to the County District Court, and the District Court
shall proceed to hear such appeal as though such Court had original
jurisdiction in the matter. Any appeal taken shall not suspend the order of
revocation of the license of any licensee, nor shall any new license be issued
to such person, or any person acting for or on his or her behalf, for a period
of six months thereafter.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-213 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   If a licensee desires to change the location of his or her place of
business, he or she shall make an application to the governing body showing the
same information relating to the proposed location as in the case of an
original application. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee of $25. If
the application is in proper form and the location is not in a prohibited zone
and all other requirements relating to such place of business are met, a new
license shall be issued for the new location for the balance of the year for
which a current license is held by the licensee.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-214 WHOLESALERS AND/OR DISTRIBUTORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler and/or distributor, his, her or its
agents or employees, to sell and/or deliver enhanced cereal malt beverages
within the city to persons authorized to sell the same within this city unless
such wholesaler and/or distributor has first secured a license from the
Director of Revenue, State Commission of Revenue and Taxation, of this state
authorizing such sales.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-215 BUSINESS REGULATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of every licensee to observe the following regulations.
   (a)   The place of business licensed and operating shall at all times have a
front and rear exit unlocked when open for business.
   (b)   The premises and all equipment used in connection with such business
shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition and shall at all times be open
to the inspection of the police and health officers of the city, county and
state.
   (c)   Except as provided by division (d) below, no enhanced cereal malt
beverages may be sold or dispensed:
      (1)   Between the hours of 12:00 a.m. midnight and 6:00 a.m.;
      (2)   In the original package before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on
Sunday, Memorial Day, Independence Day and Labor Day;
      (3)   On Easter Sunday; or
      (4)   For consumption on the licensed premises on Sunday, except in a
place of business which is licensed to sell enhanced cereal malt beverage for
consumption on the premises, which derives not less than 30% of its gross
receipts from the sale of food for consumption on the licensed premises.
   (d)   Enhanced cereal malt beverages may be sold at any time alcoholic
liquor is allowed by law to be served on premises which are licensed pursuant
to K.S.A. 41-2601 et seq. and amendments thereto, and licensed as a club by the
State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
   (e)   The place of business shall be open to the public and to the police at
all times during business hours, except that premises licensed as a club under
a license issued by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control shall be
open to the police and not to the public.
   (f)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of the
licensee to become intoxicated in the place of business for which such license
has been issued.
   (g)   No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any
intoxicated person to remain in the place of business for which such license
has been issued.
   (h)   No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall sell or permit
the sale of enhanced cereal malt beverage to any person under 21 years of age.
   (i)   No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any
gambling in the place of business for which such license has been issued.
   (j)   No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any
person to mix alcoholic drinks with materials purchased in said place of
business or brought in for such purpose.
   (k)   No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall employ any
person under 18 years of age in dispensing enhanced cereal malt beverages. No
licensee shall employ any person who has been judged guilty of a felony.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019; Ord. 341, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 3-216 PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON PREMISES.
   The following conduct by an enhanced cereal malt beverage licensee, manager
or employee of any licensed enhanced cereal malt beverage establishment is
deemed contrary to public welfare and is prohibited:
   (a)   Remaining or permitting any person to remain in or upon the premises
who exposes to view any portion of the female breasts below the top of the
areola or any portion of a males/female’s pubic hair, anus, buttocks or
genitals;
   (b)   Permitting any employee on the licensed premises to touch, caress or
fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus, vulva or genitals of any other employee or
any patron;
   (c)   Encouraging or permitting any patron on the licensed premises to
touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus, vulva or genitals of any
employee;
   (d)   Performing or permitting any person to perform on the licensed
premises acts of or acts which simulate:
      (1)   Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy or any other sexual act
which is prohibited by law; or
      (2)   Touching, caressing or fondling such person’s breasts, buttocks,
anus or genitals.
   (e)   Using or permitting any person to use on the licensed premises any
artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the acts prohibited by
division (d) above;
   (f)   Showing or permitting any person to show on the licensed premises any
motion picture, film, photograph, electronic reproduction or other visual
reproduction depicting:
      (1)   Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy
or any sexual act which is prohibited by law;
      (2)   The touching, caressing or fondling of the buttocks, anus, genitals
or the female breasts; or
      (3)   Scenes in which a person displays the buttocks, anus, genitals or
the female breasts.
   (g)   The term PREMISES means the premises licensed by the city as an
enhanced cereal malt beverage establishment and such other areas under the
control of the licensee or his or her employee or employees that are in such
close proximity to the licensed premises that activities and conduct of persons
within such other areas may be viewed by persons on or within the licensed
premises.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 3-217 SANITARY CONDITIONS REQUIRED.
   All parts of the licensed premises, including furnishings and equipment,
shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition, free from flies, rodents and
vermin at all times. The licensed premises shall have at least one restroom for
each sex easily accessible at all times to its patrons and employees. The
restroom shall be equipped with at least one lavatory with hot and cold running
water, be well lighted, and be furnished at all times with paper towels or
other mechanical means of drying hands and face. Each restroom shall be
provided with adequate toilet facilities, which shall be of sanitary design and
readily cleanable. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self-closing, and
toilet paper at all times shall be provided. Easily cleanable receptacles shall
be provided for waste material, and such receptacles in toilet rooms for women
shall be covered. The restrooms shall at all times be kept in a sanitary
condition and free of offensive odors and shall be at all times subject to
inspection by the City Health Officer or designee.
(Ord. 324, passed 3-5-2019)
ARTICLE 3: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
Section
   
3-301   State license required
   
3-302   Occupational tax
   
3-303   Posting of receipt
   
3-304   Hours of sale
   
3-305   Business regulations
§ 3-301 STATE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep for sale, offer for sale
or expose for sale or sell any alcoholic liquor as defined by the State Liquor
Control Act without first having obtained a state license to do so.
   (b)   The holder of a license for the retail sale in the city of alcoholic
liquors by the package issued by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage
Control shall present such license to the City Clerk when applying to pay the
occupation tax levied in §
3-302, and the tax shall be received and a receipt shall be issued for the
period covered by the state license.
§ 3-302 OCCUPATIONAL TAX.
   There is hereby levied a biennial occupation tax of $300 on any person
holding a license issued by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control
for retail sale within the city of alcoholic liquors for consumption off the
premises. Such tax shall be paid by the retailer to the City Clerk before
business is begun under an original state license and shall be paid within five
days after any renewal of a state license.
(K.S.A. 41-310)
§ 3-303 POSTING OF RECEIPT.
   Every licensee under this article shall cause the city alcoholic liquor
retailer’s occupation tax receipt to be placed in plain view, next to or below
the state license, in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
§ 3-304 HOURS OF SALE.
   No person shall sell at retail in the original packaging any alcoholic
liquor:
   (a)   On Sunday, Memorial Day, Independence Day and Labor Day before 9:00
a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.;
   (b)   On Easter Sunday, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day; or
   (c)   Before 9:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. on any day when the sale thereof
is permitted.
(Ord. 341, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 3-305 BUSINESS REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for a retailer of alcoholic liquor to:
   (a)   Permit any person to mix drinks in or on the licensed premises unless
the person is preparing or mixing samples for the purposes of conducting wine,
beer or distilled spirit tastings, or any combination thereof, as authorized by
K.S.A. 41-308d, and amendments thereto;
   (b)   Employ any person under the age of 21 years in connection with the
operation of the retail establishment;
   (c)   Employ any person in connection with the operation of the retail
establishment who has been adjudged guilty of a felony; and
   (d)   Sell, give away, dispose of, exchange or deliver, or permit the sale,
gift or procuring of, any alcoholic liquor to or for any person under 21 years
of age.
(K.S.A. 41-713, 41-715)
ARTICLE 4: PRIVATE CLUBS
Section
   
3-401   License required
   
3-402   License fee
   
3-403   Business regulations
§ 3-401 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person granted a private club license by the
state to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage authorized
by such license within the city without first obtaining a local license from
the City Clerk.
§ 3-402 LICENSE FEE.
   (a)   (1)   There is hereby levied a biennial license fee on each private
club located in the city which has a private club license issued by the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control, which fee shall be paid before business
is begun under an original state license and within five days before the
license expires.
      (2)   The city license fee for a Class A club shall be $250 and the city
license fee for a Class B club shall be $250.
   (b)   All applications for new or renewal city licenses shall be submitted
to the City Clerk. Upon presentation of a state license, payment of the city
license fee and the license application, the City Clerk shall issue a city
license for the period covered by the state license, if there are no conflicts
with any zoning or alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city.
   (c)   The license period shall extend for the period covered by the state
license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason.
   (d)   Every licensee shall cause the city club license to be placed in plain
view next to or below the state license in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises.
§ 3-403 BUSINESS REGULATIONS.
   (a)   No club licensed hereunder shall allow the serving, mixing or
consumption of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages on its premises
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day.
   (b)   No club membership shall be sold to any person under 21 years of age,
nor shall alcoholic beverages or cereal malt beverages be given, sold or traded
to any person under 21 years of age.
(K.S.A. 41-2614)
ARTICLE 5: DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
3-501   License required
   
3-502   License fee
   
3-503   Business regulations
§ 3-501 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person granted a drinking establishment license
by the state to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage
authorized by such license within the city without first obtaining a city
license from the City Clerk.
§ 3-502 LICENSE FEE.
   (a)   There is hereby levied a biennial license fee in the amount of $250 on
each drinking establishment located in the city which has a drinking
establishment license issued by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage
Control, which fee shall be paid before business is begun under an original
state license and within five days after any renewal of a state license.
   (b)   (1)   All applications for new or renewal city licenses shall be
submitted to the City Clerk.
      (2)   Upon presentation of a state license, payment of the city license
fee and the license application, the City Clerk shall issue a city license for
the period covered by the state license if there are no conflicts with any
zoning or alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city.
   (c)   The license period shall extend for the period covered by the state
license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason.
   (d)   Every licensee shall cause the city drinking establishment license to
be placed in plain view next to or below the state license in a conspicuous
place on the licensed premises.
§ 3-503 BUSINESS REGULATIONS.
   (a)   No drinking establishment licensed hereunder shall allow the serving,
mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage on its
premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day.
   (b)   No alcoholic beverages or cereal malt beverages shall be given, sold
or traded to any person under 21 years of age.
(K.S.A. 41-2614)
ARTICLE 6: CATERERS
Section
   
3-601   License required
   
3-602   License fee
   
3-603   Business regulations
   
3-604   Notice to Chief of Police
§ 3-601 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person licensed by the state as a caterer to
offer for sale, to sell or to serve any alcoholic liquor or cereal malt
beverage by the drink within the city without obtaining a local caterer’s
license from the City Clerk.
§ 3-602 LICENSE FEE.
   (a)   There is hereby levied an annual license fee in the amount of $250 on
each caterer doing business in the city who has a caterer’s license issued by
the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control, which fee shall be paid
before business is begun under an original state license and within five days
after any renewal of a state license.
   (b)   (1)   All applications for new or renewal city licenses shall be
submitted to the City Clerk.
      (2)   Upon presentation of a state license, payment of the city license
fee and the license application, the City Clerk shall issue a city license for
the period covered by the state license if there are no conflicts with any
zoning or alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city.
   (c)   The license period shall extend for the period covered by the state
license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason.
   (d)   Every licensee shall cause the caterer license to be placed in plain
view on any premises within the city where the caterer is serving or mixing
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises.
§ 3-603 BUSINESS REGULATIONS.
   (a)   No caterer licensed hereunder shall allow the serving, mixing or
consumption of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage between the hours of 2:
00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day.
   (b)   No alcoholic beverages or cereal malt beverages shall be given, sold
or traded to any person under 21 years of age.
(K.S.A. 41-2614)
§ 3-604 NOTICE TO CHIEF OF POLICE.
   Prior to any event at which a caterer will sell or serve alcoholic liquor by
the individual drink, the caterer shall provide written notice to the Chief of
Police at least 60 days prior to the event if the event will take place within
the city. The notice shall contain the location, name of the group sponsoring
the event and the exact date and times the caterer will be serving.
ARTICLE 7: TEMPORARY PERMITS
Section
   
3-701   Permit required
   
3-702   Permit fee
   
3-703   City temporary permit
   
3-704   Permit regulations
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see K.S.A. 41-1201
§ 3-701 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person granted a temporary permit by the state
to sell or to serve any alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage within the
city without first obtaining a local temporary permit from the City Clerk.
§ 3-702 PERMIT FEE.
   (a)   There is hereby levied a temporary permit fee in the amount of $100 on
each group or individual holding a temporary permit issued by the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control authorizing sales within the city, which
fee shall be paid before the event is begun under the state permit.
   (b)   Every temporary permit holder shall cause the temporary permit receipt
to be placed in plain view on any premises within the city where the holder of
the temporary permit is serving or mixing alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises.
§ 3-703 CITY TEMPORARY PERMIT.
   (a)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an event under a
state-issued temporary permit without first applying for a local temporary
permit at least 60 days before the event.
      (2)   Written application for the local temporary permit shall be made to
the City Clerk and shall clearly state:
      (A)   The name of the applicant;
      (B)   The group for which the event is planned;
      (C)   The location of the event;
      (D)   The date and time of the event; and
      (E)   Any anticipated need for police, fire or other municipal services.
   (b)   Upon presentation of a state temporary permit, payment of the city’s
temporary permit fee and a written application as provided for in division (a)
above, the City Clerk shall issue a local temporary permit to the applicant if
there are no conflicts with any zoning or other ordinances of the city.
   (c)   The City Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police whenever a temporary
permit has been issued and forward a copy of the permit and application to the
Chief of Police.
§ 3-704 PERMIT REGULATIONS.
   (a)   No temporary permit holder shall allow the serving, mixing or
consumption of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage between the hours of 2:
00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. at any event for which a temporary permit has been
issued.
(K.A.R. 14-23-5)
   (b)   No alcoholic beverages shall be given, sold or traded to any person
under 21 years of age.
ARTICLE 8: SPECIAL EVENT CMB PERMITS
Section
   
3-801   Special event CMB permits; permit required
   
3-802   Same; permit fee
   
3-803   Same; city special event permit
   
3-804   Same; permit regulations
§ 3-801 SPECIAL EVENT CMB PERMITS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or serve any cereal malt
beverage at any special event within the city without first obtaining a local
special event permit from the City Clerk.
(K.S.A. 41-2703)
§ 3-802 SAME; PERMIT FEE.
   (a)   There is hereby levied a special event permit fee in the amount of $25
on each group or individual, which fee shall be paid before the event begins.
Such fee shall be in addition to the $25 fee to be remitted to the Division of
Alcohol Beverage Control.
   (b)   Every special event permit holder shall cause the permit receipt to be
placed in plain view on any premises within the city where the holder of the
special event permit is serving CMB for consumption on the premises.
(K.S.A. 41-2702)
§ 3-803 SAME; CITY SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT.
   (a)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or serve cereal malt
beverages at a special event without first applying for a local special event
permit at least 30 days before the event. Written application for the local
special event permit shall be made to the City Clerk on the form used for
annual cereal malt beverage sales or, when available, the special event CMB
permit application approved by the Attorney General, as directed by the City
Clerk.
      (2)   In addition to any other information required, the applicant shall
provide the following:
      (A)   The name of the applicant;
      (B)   The group for which the event is planned;
      (C)   The location of the event;
      (D)   The date and time of the event; and
      (E)   Any anticipated need for police, fire or other municipal services.
   (b)   Upon meeting the requirements to obtain a special event permit, the
City Clerk shall issue a local special event permit to the applicant if there
are no conflicts with any zoning or other ordinances of the city.
   (c)   The City Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police whenever a special
event permit has been issued and forward a copy of the permit and application
to the Chief of Police.
§ 3-804 SAME; PERMIT REGULATIONS.
   (a)   No special event permit holder shall allow the serving of cereal malt
beverage between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. at any event for which a
special event permit has been issued.
   (b)   No cereal malt beverage shall be given, sold or traded to any person
under 21 years of age.
   (c)   Not more than four special event permits may be issued in a calendar
year to the same applicant.
   (d)   No special event permit issued hereunder may be transferred or
assigned to any other vendor.
   (e)   All local ordinances and state statutes for the sale and consumption
of cereal malt beverage apply to holders of special event permits.
(K.S.A. 41-2703)
ARTICLE 9: KEG REGISTRATION
Section
   
3-901   Definitions
   
3-902   Retailer duties
   
3-903   Purchaser requirements
   
3-904   Identification requirements
   
3-905   Deposit refund
   
3-906   Violations
§ 3-901 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEER. A beverage containing more than 3.2% alcohol by weight obtained by
alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, or other grain,
malt and hops, in water, and includes beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and
similar beverages having such alcoholic content.
   CEREAL MALT BEVERAGE. Any fermented but undistilled liquor brewed or made
from malt or from a mixture of malt or malt substitute, but does not include
any such liquor which is more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.
   KEG. A reusable container of beer or cereal malt beverage having a liquid
capacity of four or more gallons.
   LEGAL AGE FOR CONSUMPTION. Twenty-one years of age.
   PERSON. Any natural person, corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, trust or association.
   PROPER PROOF OF IDENTIFICATION. A photographic motor vehicle operator’s
license, a valid passport, a United States military identification card, a
state photographic non-driver’s identification card, or other official or
apparently official document, containing a photograph, signature and birth date
of the person.
   RETAILER. A person who sells at retail, or offers for sale at retail, beer
or cereal malt beverage for use or consumption and not for resale in any form,
and includes sales of beer or cereal malt beverage in a keg returnable to the
seller. Such terms shall not refer to or mean sales by a distributor or sales
by one retailer to another.
   SELL or SELL AT RETAIL. Sales of beer or cereal malt beverage for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form, and includes sales of beer or
cereal malt beverage in a keg returnable to the seller. Such terms shall not
refer to or mean sales by a distributor or sales by one retailer to another.
§ 3-902 RETAILER DUTIES.
   A retailer, or retailer’s employee or agent, prior to or at the time of any
sale at retail of a keg, shall:
   (a)   Affix or cause to be affixed to the keg a keg identification tag, in
accordance with the provisions of §
3-904;
   (b)   Require the purchaser to exhibit proper proof of identification. If
the purchaser fails to provide such proof of identification, the retailer shall
refuse to sell the keg to such person;
   (c)   Require the purchaser to sign a declaration and receipt for the keg in
the form provided for in §
3-904;
   (d)   Record on the declaration the keg identification tag number, the date
of sale, the purchaser’s name and address, and the type, number and expiration
date of the purchaser’s identification;
   (e)   Inform the purchaser that any deposit paid by the purchaser for the
keg, if required, shall be forfeited if the keg is returned without the
original keg identification tag intact and readable;
   (f)   Require each purchaser of any such keg to acknowledge as part of the
declaration that persons under 21 are not of legal age for consumption of beer
or cereal malt beverage and that the declaration is subject to inspection by
law enforcement personnel; and
   (g)   Provide a copy of the declaration and receipt to the purchaser.
§ 3-903 PURCHASER REQUIREMENTS.
   Any person who purchases a keg or the contents thereof shall:
   (a)   Be of legal age to purchase, possess or use beer and cereal malt
beverage;
   (b)   Provide proof of identification and such other information as the
retailer may require in accordance with §
3-902;
   (c)   Sign a declaration and receipt in the form required by §
3-902;
   (d)   Not allow any person under the age of 21 to consume the keg contacts
except as allowed by law;
   (e)   Not remove, obliterate or allow to be removed or obliterated the keg
identification tag required by § 3-902; and
   (f)   Maintain a copy of the declaration and receipt with the keg during the
time the keg is in the purchaser’s possession or control.
§ 3-904 IDENTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The keg identification tag required under this article shall be in the
form of a uniquely numbered and coded tag or label, prescribed and furnished by
the City Clerk. Such tag or label is used for a single sale of the marked keg
and is to be removed from the keg by the retailer upon return of the keg to the
retail seller and maintained with the records of the sale. Such tags shall be
fabricated and made attachable in such a manner as to make the tag removable
for the purpose of the cleaning and reusing of the keg by a manufacturer.
   (b)   The declaration and receipt required shall be on a form prescribed and
furnished by the City Clerk and shall include the information as required by §§
3-902 and
3-903 thereof, and may include such other identifying information as the City
Clerk may deem necessary and appropriate.
   (c)   Retailers may apply for and receive keg identification tags and
declaration and receipt forms from the City Clerk upon submittal of an
application on a form as prescribed by the City Clerk and such proof as may be
required by the City Clerk that the applicant is duly licensed to sell beer or
cereal malt beverages in a keg. The City Clerk may charge a reasonable fee for
furnishing the tags and forms required by this article, not to exceed the
actual cost of furnishing such tags and forms.
   (d)   The retailer shall retain a copy of all such declarations and receipts
required on the retailer’s licensed premises for a period of six months. Such
declarations and receipts shall be available for inspection and copying by any
law enforcement officer during normal business hours for the purpose of
identifying persons suspected of a violation of law.
   (e)   Falsifying any information on a declaration and receipt shall be a
violation of this section.
§ 3-905 DEPOSIT REFUND.
   No retailer may refund any deposit upon return of a keg that:
   (a)   Does not have the required identification tag; or
   (b)   Has an identification tag that has been defaced to the extent that the
information contained on the tag cannot be read.
§ 3-906 VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Remove from a keg all or part of a keg identification tag required
pursuant to this article;
      (2)   Deface a keg identification tag to the extent the information
contained on the tag cannot be read;
      (3)   Fail to return a keg within ten days of the due date; or
      (4)   Possess a keg that does not have the keg identification tag.
   (b)   Provided, the provisions of this section shall not apply to a
manufacturer, distributor or retailer, and division (a)(4) above shall not
apply to any person who finds a discarded keg on such person’s property.
CHAPTER IV: BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
   Article
      
1.   FIRE LIMITS
      
2.   BUILDING CODE
      
3.   ELECTRICAL CODE
      
4.   PLUMBING AND GAS-FITTING CODE
      
5.   MOVING BUILDINGS
      
6.   DANGEROUS AND UNFIT STRUCTURES
      
7.   NUMBERING BUSINESSES, DWELLINGS AND CERTAIN OTHER PLACES
      
8.   INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE
      
9.   VACANT BUILDINGS
ARTICLE 1: FIRE LIMITS
Section
   
4-101   Fire limits established
§ 4-101 FIRE LIMITS ESTABLISHED.
   Fire limits are set by the county and township.
ARTICLE 2: BUILDING CODE
Section
   
4-201   Definitions
   
4-202   International Residential Code incorporated
   
4-203   Additional provisions
   
4-204   Building Official; powers; duties
   
4-205   Building Inspector; appointment
   
4-206   Same; duties
   
4-207   Same; powers
   
4-208   Same; right of entry
   
4-209   Clarification; modification
   
4-210   Building permit required; application; approval
   
4-211   Same; application information required
   
4-212   Same; plans and specifications
   
4-213   Same; fees
   
4-214   Same; posting
   
4-215   Certificate of approval
   
4-216   Inspections of building; layout of building; foundations and footings;
notice to Inspector
   
4-217   Request for inspection
   
4-218   Reserved
   
4-219   Builder or building contractor defined
   
4-220   Builder’s or building contractor’s license required; building permits;
unlawful acts
   
4-221   Same; application; granting
   
4-222   Same; license fees; conditions; renewal; unlawful acts
   
4-223   Builder’s or building contractor’s bond required; conditions; approval;
rights reserved
   
4-224   Insurance
   
4-225   License suspension; revocation; appeal; unlawful acts
   
4-226   Work by property owners
   
4-227   Erection of fence without permit
   
4-228   Liability
   
4-229   Severability
§ 4-201 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Inspector or his or her authorized designee.
   CORPORATION COUNSEL. The City Attorney of the City of Oxford.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Oxford, Kansas.
§ 4-202 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE INCORPORATED.
   (a)   There is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, for the purpose
of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration,
removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of
buildings and structures, the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, as
recommended by the International Conference of Building Officials, such code
being made as a part of the ordinances and code of the city as if the same had
been set out in full herein, all as authorized and in the manner prescribed by
K.S.A. 12-3009 to 12-3012, including any amendments thereto. One copy of the
International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, shall be marked or stamped
“Official Copy as Incorporated by the Code of the City of Oxford,” and shall be
filed with the City Clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public
at all reasonable hours of business.
   (b)   Any person violating any provision of such code shall be punished as
provided in §
1-116 of this code.
(Ord. 336, passed 10-6-2020)
§ 4-203 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   The following sections of this article are in addition to the provisions of
the standard code incorporated by reference in §
4-202.
§ 4-204 BUILDING OFFICIAL; POWERS; DUTIES.
   (a)   This and other articles of the city relating generally to building and
structures shall be administered and enforced by the Building Inspector. The
Building Inspector shall act as Chief Building Official and may assume the
responsibilities of, or with the consent and approval of the governing body
appoint, a Building Inspector and such other assistants as may be advisable for
the issuance of building permits and the inspection of building work.
   (b)   The Building Inspector shall prepare such application, permit,
inspection and record forms as may be required for the purposes of the article.
The Building Inspector may make and promulgate the necessary rules and
regulations to obtain conformity with this article pertaining to the making of
applications for building permits, issuing of building permits and inspecting
of buildings and building works.
§ 4-205 BUILDING INSPECTOR; APPOINTMENT.
   The Mayor may assume the responsibilities of or appoint some qualified
officer or employee of the city to be and perform the duties of Building
Inspector as may be required, subject to the consent and approval of the
governing body.
§ 4-206 SAME; DUTIES.
   The Building Inspector shall have the following duties:
   (a)   To enforce all regulations relating to construction, alteration,
repair, removal and demolition of buildings and structures;
   (b)   May permit, with the approval of the governing body, on the basis of
duly authenticated reports from recognized sources, the use of new materials or
modes of construction not provided for in this article and may, for the purpose
of carrying out the intent of this article, adopt an accepted standard of
material or workmanlike practices of federal or state bureaus, national,
technical organizations or fire underwriters;
   (c)   To examine all buildings in the process of erection, construction,
alteration or relocation in the city for the purpose of determining whether the
work is in compliance with the permit given and in compliance with the
regulations of the city pertaining to such work, including zoning regulations;
and
   (d)   To keep comprehensive records of applications, of permits or
certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered and of notices or
orders issued. All such records shall be open to public inspection during
stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the Building
Official without his or her written consent.
§ 4-207 SAME; POWERS.
   The Building Inspector shall have the following powers:
   (a)   To enter any building or structure or premises at any reasonable hour,
whether complete or in the process of erection, to perform the duties contained
in this article;
   (b)   To adopt and enforce all such prudent emergency measures as he or she
may deem necessary and expedient for the public safety under the laws of the
city; and
   (c)   May cause any work done in violation of this article to be
discontinued until he or she shall have satisfactory evidence that the work
will be done in accordance with the building regulations of the city, subject
to the right of any builder or owner to appeal to the governing body.
§ 4-208 SAME; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Building Inspector, or his or her agent, upon proper identification,
shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any
reasonable hour to perform his or her duties as set out in this article.
§ 4-209 CLARIFICATION; MODIFICATION.
   (a)   The governing body shall be the final determiner of the scope and
meaning of all provisions of the Building Code which may be unclear, ambiguous
or requiring interpretation.
   (b)   The Building Inspector shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the Building Code, upon application in writing by the owner or
lessee or his or her authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in
the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code. In approving
modifications, the Building Inspector shall see that the spirit of the code is
observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars
of a modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the Inspector
thereon shall be entered upon the records of the Building Inspector and a
signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
§ 4-210 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; APPROVAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or authorized agent who intends to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a
building or structure; or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove,
convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system the
installation of which is regulated by this code; or to cause any such work to
be done within the city without a building permit being first obtained therefor
from the City Clerk, after approval by the Chief Building Official or his or
her duly authorized assistant. The application for such permit shall be made
and the permit obtained before work is commenced upon any building or structure
or the foundation thereof, or before the removal of any building begins.
§ 4-211 SAME; APPLICATION INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   A building permit shall be issued upon an application in writing
to the office of the City Clerk on a form or forms provided for the purpose.
      (2)   This application shall, among other things, disclose the following:
      (A)   The name of the owner of the lot or tract of ground;
      (B)   The location of the building or structure;
      (C)   The building work proposed;
      (D)   The outside dimensions of the building by floors and dimensions of
the basement (if any);
      (E)   The class of occupancy;
      (F)   The class of construction;
      (G)   The kind of materials to be used for walls, floors, ceilings, roofs
and foundations;
      (H)   The estimated cost of the work;
      (I)   The date work will commence;
      (J)   Expected date of completion;
      (K)   Name and address of contractor or contractors doing the work; and
      (L)   Such other information as may be pertinent to the issuance of the
required permit.
   (b)   (1)   An application for a building permit shall be signed by the
owner or his or her duly authorized agent, or a building contractor licensed by
the city. If the application is made by the owner or his or her agent, it shall
contain the name or names of the licensed contractor or contractors doing the
work described, or a building permit may be issued to the owner upon his or her
application disclosing satisfactory evidence that the proposed work will be
performed by the owner himself or herself and not by a licensed contractor, and
likewise subject to the final approval of the Building Inspector for work
performed.
      (2)   If an application for a building permit indicates that it is for
commercial or residential roofing services, including construction,
installation, renovation, repair, maintenance, alteration or water-proofing,
the application shall include the contractor’s name, the contractor’s place of
business within the city (and home office if not a resident), the contractor’s
state registration number as issued under the State Roofing Registration Act
(K.S.A. 50-6,121 et seq.), and shall also be signed by the roofing contractor
or contractor’s authorized agent; provided, however, that this division (b)(2)
shall not apply to:
      (A)   An actual owner of commercial or residential property who
physically performs, or has employees who perform, roofing services on such
owner’s own dwelling or other structures located on the residential property
without the assistance of a registered roofing contractor;
      (B)   To those persons identified in K.S.A. 50-6,129(a)(1) to (a)(8), and
amendments thereto; or
      (C)   To an “exempt general contractor,” as defined in K.S.A. 50-6,122,
and amendments thereto.
      (3)   If the application for a building permit indicates that it involves
renovation, repairing or painting of a home or child-occupied facility,
including day care centers and schools, built before 1978 and will disturb six
square feet of painted interior surfaces or 20 square feet of painted exterior
surfaces, the contractor performing the services must furnish proof of state
certification as a licensed renovation firm or renovator; provided, however,
that this division (b)(3) does not apply to a home owner performing work on an
owner-occupied residence. In addition, this division (b)(3) does not apply to
any other exception or exemption set forth in the State Department of Health
and Environment Residential Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program, as
described in K.A.R. 28-72-1:54 and in 40 C.F.R. part 745, and amendments
thereto.
   (c)   Upon approval of the completed application, including, if required,
the verification of state roofer registration or other state certification, and
a determination that a permit should be issued, the Chief Building Official or
his or her assistant shall issue a permit to the owner or contractor
authorizing the building work covered by the application. If applicable, the
permit shall include the roofer registration number or any other certification
or license number issued by the state.
   (d)   Any permit issued under this section shall be valid and subsisting for
a period of not more than six months from the date of issuance unless the
permittee shall have commenced, within the period so limited, the building work
authorized by such permit. BUILDING WORK COMMENCED, for the purpose of this
section, shall mean the beginning of building work other than the preparation
of plans or the staking out of the building location or the letting of a
building contract.
§ 4-212 SAME; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   Whenever an application for a building permit is made, the Chief Building
Official may, if he or she finds it necessary to determine whether building
work described in the application will comply with the laws pertaining to such
work, require that the applicant file a written description or drawing of the
proposed building as may be prepared for the purpose. If such drawing or
description is insufficient for the purposes of determining whether a permit
should be issued, the Building Official may require the applicant to file
complete architectural and engineering plans and specifications for such
building, or any part thereof, as may be necessary for the Inspector to
determine compliance with this article. The filing of such plans and
specifications and the approval thereof in connection with an application for a
permit shall not in any way affect the authority of the city to deny or issue a
permit, or to inspect any building work for conformity with this article.
§ 4-213 SAME; FEES.
   The fee for a building permit shall be $25; however, no fee shall be
required to obtain a permit where the total estimated cost, the reasonable
value of all services, labor and materials required, is under $100. The fee
herein shall be paid to the City Clerk upon obtaining a building permit and the
same shall be credited to the General Operating Fund of the city.
§ 4-214 SAME; POSTING.
   (a)   A copy of the building permit shall be kept on the premises for public
inspection during the performance of the work and until the completion of the
same.
   (b)   The Building Inspector may require a certified copy of the approved
plans to be kept on the premises at all times from the commencement of the work
to the completion thereof.
§ 4-215 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL.
   (a)   Upon the completion of any work under a building permit, the Chief
Building Official or the Building Inspector, or his or her designee, is
authorized to issue a certificate of approval for the occupancy and use of the
building or structure.
   (b)   The certificate shall show the number of inspections made and the
orders and corrections required during the course of the work.
   (c)   A copy of such certificate shall be given to the owner.
§ 4-216 INSPECTIONS OF BUILDING; LAYOUT OF BUILDING; FOUNDATIONS AND FOOTINGS;
NOTICE TO INSPECTOR.
   (a)   The contractor or builder having a permit for new construction, or
additions to existing buildings, shall notify the Chief Building Official or
Building Inspector immediately upon the marking or laying out of the site and
foundation for such work. The Official or Inspector shall inspect the layout
for conformity with this article and with respect to lot lines, setbacks and
location of the proposed buildings to determine conformity with the city zoning
regulations. In case of doubt respecting the required location, the Chief
Building Official may require an official survey of the lot lines to determine
conformity, at the expense of the permit holder.
   (b)   Upon completion of the excavation for the building foundation and
footings and the construction of the necessary forms thereof, and before the
foundation and footings are poured or laid, the Official or Inspector shall be
notified as in the first case, and it shall be his or her duty to inspect all
such work for conformity with laws respecting location of the building
foundations and footings.
   (c)   The Building Inspector shall, during the course of all building, make
such other inspections as may be directed by the Chief Building Official to be
made during any successive stage of the construction or other work covered by a
permit in order to secure compliance with laws pertaining thereto.
§ 4-217 REQUEST FOR INSPECTION.
   Upon the completion of any building construction work covered by this
article, it shall be the duty of the person doing such work to notify the
Building Inspector and request that it be inspected, after which, such work
shall be inspected promptly as hereinafter provided.
§ 4-218 RESERVED.
§ 4-219 BUILDER OR BUILDING CONTRACTOR DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDER or BUILDING CONTRACTOR.
      (1)   Any person, firm, co-partnership, corporation, association or any
combination thereof, whether a resident or not of the city:
      (A)   Who or which undertakes with or for another, for a fixed sum,
price, fee or any compensation other than wages, to build, construct, alter,
repair, add to, wreck or move any building or structure (or any portion
thereof), or any sidewalk, driveway entrance or structure in any street, or any
advertising sign, panel poster or billboard, or any other structure, in the
city for which a building or construction permit may now or hereafter be
required by the laws of the city;
      (B)   Who or which advertises or represents himself, herself or itself to
the public to have the capacity or the ability to undertake or to submit a bid
or offer to build, construct, alter, repair, add to or wreck, remove, restore
or replace any building, structure or construction work or any portion thereof;
or
      (C)   Who or which builds, constructs, alters, adds to or wrecks any
buildings or structures either on his or her own or other property for purposes
of sale or speculation.
      (2)   A BUILDER or BUILDING CONTRACTOR shall not mean or include:
      (A)   Any subcontractor, except for a roofing contractor, working under
the supervision of a general contractor;
      (B)   Any plumbers, gasfitters, electricians or other specialized
occupation for which special licenses or bonds are required by other city laws;
      (C)   Any owner or his or her authorized agents or employees making
ordinary repairs to his, her or its own building or structure not involving the
structural parts of the building for which a permit is not required or on which
a contractor, as defined, is not required, employed or engaged to perform;
      (D)   Any property owner personally performing any improvements,
alterations or building construction within or upon his or her own residence
and intended for his or her own personal use and permanent occupancy; provided,
the owner shall satisfy the Building Official as to his or her ability to
perform such work, secure a permit, pay required fees, do work in accordance
with this article and apply for an inspection and receive approval. Personal
building construction by an owner under this section shall be by himself,
herself, for himself or herself on his or her own residence without
compensation, and no person shall be employed to assist him or her in any way
on such work except a builder or building contractor licensed by the city; or
      (E)   Any person engaged in construction work not involving a total cost
of greater than $100, exclusive of labor.
§ 4-220 BUILDER’S OR BUILDING CONTRACTOR’S LICENSE REQUIRED; BUILDING PERMITS;
UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (a)   Each builder or building contractor shall, before entering upon any
building or construction work subject to regulation by city laws, apply to the
City Clerk for a builder’s or building contractor’s license and receive the
same as hereinafter provided and have in his or her possession a valid license
authorizing him, her or it to engage in the trade or occupation of a builder or
building contractor in the city.
   (b)   No permit for any building or construction work shall be issued for
any such work to be performed by a builder or building contractor, as defined,
who has not first obtained a license upon making a proper application and
payment of the license fee as required.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, association or
corporation to enter into a contract or agreement with another so as to bring
himself, herself or itself under the definition of builder or building
contractor herein, or to perform any work as a builder or building contractor
or any work under a contract for any work involving the construction, wrecking
or moving of any building, without first having obtained a builder’s or
building contractor’s license issued by the city.
§ 4-221 SAME; APPLICATION; GRANTING.
   (a)   Application for a builder’s or building contractor’s license shall be
made upon a form to be supplied by the city, which shall disclose the name of
the applicant, his or her place of business in the city (and home office if a
nonresident), the kind of contracting work engaged in (as general contracting,
roofing, siding, masonry, plastering, lathing, excavating, water-proofing,
metal work, foundation work, sign hanging, cement work and painting and paper
hanging, house wrecking or moving and the like), the length of time engaged in
such work and places where work has been performed within the past two years.
The application shall be signed by the builder or building contractor or his or
her authorized agent. The applications shall be submitted to the City Clerk.
Such license shall be issued by the City Clerk upon approval of their
application and payment of the fees hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 312, passed 12-6-2016)
   (b)   If the applicant is in the business of a roofing contractor, as
defined by the Kansas Roofing Registration Act (KRRA), K.S.A. 50-6,121 et seq.,
and amendments thereto, the applicant shall be required to have a valid state
registration as required under the KRRA and shall present such certificate to
the City Clerk when applying for a builder's or building contractor's license.
No such license shall be issued until it is verified that the roofing
contractor is in good standing pursuant to the KRRA; provided, however, that
this division (b) does not apply to an "exempt general contractor" as defined
in K.S.A. 50-6,122, and amendments thereto.
§ 4-222 SAME; LICENSE FEES; CONDITIONS; RENEWAL; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (a)   (1)   The following license fees shall be paid for the calendar year
or major fraction thereof:
      (A)   General builders or building contractors, who shall qualify to
engage in more than one kind of contract work, except house moving, the sum of
$35;
      (B)   Limited builders or building contractors, who shall qualify to
engage in not more than one kind of contract work, the sum of $25;
      (C)   House wreckers or movers, the sum of $15;
      (D)   Sign hangers and panel posters, the sum of $10; and
      (E)   Roofing contractors, the sum of $25.
      (2)   Any license issued on or after July 1 of each year shall be issued
upon payment of one-half the annual license fee.
   (b)   Each such license shall set forth the kind of contract work in which
the licensee may engage. The licensee shall display his or her license at any
place where he or she may be engaged in contract work or produce the same on
demand of any city officer. All licenses shall be renewable annually as in the
case of an original license on or before January 1 of the year for which
issued.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to contract
for any kind of work covered by this article without having a valid license
issued by the city to perform such contracts.
§ 4-223 BUILDER’S OR BUILDING CONTRACTOR’S BOND REQUIRED; CONDITIONS; APPROVAL;
RIGHTS RESERVED.
   (a)   Before any license shall be issued to any builder or building
contractor required by this article to obtain a license and pay a fee to the
city, the builder or building contractor shall secure and file with the City
Clerk a good and sufficient corporate surety bond in the principal sum of
$5,000, conditioned that the principal named therein shall faithfully and fully
observe all laws of the city relating to the business or occupation for which a
license is desired and further conditioned to hold and save the city harmless
and free of claims for loss or damage to persons or property, or from damage,
injury or destruction of property belonging to the city, resulting from, or
arising out of, the negligence or failure of the principal or any of his, her
or its employees, agents or servants to use due care or diligence respecting
any opening or excavation made in or adjacent to any street, alley or public
ground in the city, or any materials stored, placed or used in any such places,
or the operation or use of any vehicle, machinery or equipment in the streets,
alleys or public grounds in connection with the business or occupation
licensed. Each such bond shall be issued by a company authorized to do business
in the state and shall be executed by an agent of the company residing in the
county, and further conditioned that in the event of cancellation or expiration
that the company or agent will give ten days’ notice of such fact to the City
Clerk. Each such bond shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney and
approved as to surety by the City Treasurer, and the approval thereof shall be
endorsed on the bond by the City Attorney and by the Mayor over their
signatures.
   (b)   Each bond shall be dated to run from the first day of any license
issued by the city to the principal and may cover a period of not to exceed two
years. No bond shall be renewed by an extension certificate, but a new bond
shall be filed by the principal for each successive period following the
renewal thereof. The city reserves the right to furnish the form of all surety
bonds as may be required by this article.
§ 4-224 INSURANCE.
   (a)   In addition to obtaining a corporate surety bond as required by §
4-223, a builder or building contractor must procure and maintain a liability
insurance policy in the amount of $100,000 for the death or injury of any one
person, and $300,000 for the death or injury of any number of persons in any
one accident, and $50,000 for property damage in any one accident. Such
policies of insurance shall be issued by some insurance company authorized to
do business in the state.
   (b)   A builder or building contractor may qualify as to the insurance
requirements by filing a certificate with the City Clerk, executed by the
resident agent of such company, stating that the required policy of insurance
has been issued by such company for the purpose required by this article and
that such insurer will not cancel the policy except upon giving 30 days’ notice
in writing to the city; and that the certificate shall be filed for an annual
period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of such year.
§ 4-225 LICENSE SUSPENSION; REVOCATION; APPEAL; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (a)   (1)   The license of any builder or building contractor may be
suspended temporarily, for a period of not to exceed 30 days at any one time,
by the Chief Building Official upon his or her own motion or upon a complaint
of the City Building Inspector.
      (2)   Notice shall be given in writing to such builder or building
contractor giving reasonable notice of a time of hearing of the complaint or
the matter alleged against such builder or building contractor involving any
one or more of the following:
      (A)   Misrepresentation of a material fact by applicant in obtaining a
license;
      (B)   Use of license to obtain a building permit for another;
      (C)   Failure or neglect to observe conditions of permit authorizing the
encumbering of streets or sidewalks for the safety of the public;
      (D)   Performance of any building or construction work without a permit
where one is required by law; or
      (E)   Willful disregard of any violation of the building and construction
laws, or failure to comply with any lawful order of the City Building
Inspector.
   (b)   Any licensee may, within 15 days, appeal in writing to the governing
body from any order of the Chief Building Official suspending his or her
license for its final decision thereon. The governing body may upon such
hearing terminate such suspension within not more than 30 days thereafter, or
may revoke such license. If any license shall be revoked, the builder or
building contractor shall not be eligible for a new license during a period of
six months thereafter. No fee shall be refunded in the event of the suspension
or revocation of any contractor’s license.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful to engage in the occupation or trade of builder
or building contractor during the time any license of such builder or building
contractor has been suspended or revoked.
§ 4-226 WORK BY PROPERTY OWNERS.
   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any property owner from personally
performing any building or construction work within and upon his or her own
residence and intended for his or her personal use and permanent occupancy;
provided, the owner shall satisfy the Building Inspector as to his or her
ability to perform such work, secure a permit, pay required fees, do work in
accordance with this article and apply for an inspection and receive a
certificate of approval. Personal building or construction performed by an
owner under this section shall be by himself or herself, for himself or
herself, on his or her own residence without compensation, and no person shall
be employed to assist him or her in any way on such work except a builder or
building contractor licensed by the city.
§ 4-227 ERECTION OF FENCE WITHOUT PERMIT.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect a fence or obtain the
erection of a fence within the city without first obtaining a permit
authorizing said construction from the City Clerk, after approval of the Chief
Building Inspector or his or her duly authorized assistant. The application for
said permit shall be on a form adopted by the Building Inspector and shall be
accompanied by a $10 application fee.
   (b)   The fence permit shall be issued only after the Building Inspector or
authorized agent has been satisfied that the proposed fence complies with § 1-
2402 of the Zoning and Planning Code of the city and is being constructed on
property with the consent of the owner of the property where the fence is
located. When necessary, the Building Inspector may visit the site for the
location of the fence prior to the issuance of the permit, or the Building
Inspector may require sufficient information to satisfy this requirement be
provided by the applicant upon the permit application. The time for the
issuance or rejection of the fence permit shall be within ten days of the
payment of the application fee. The fence erected shall be in compliance with
the terms of the permit issued.
   (c)   A permit authorizing a fence may be issued after the fence has already
been constructed at the discretion of the Building Inspector, but the fee for
such a permit shall be double the fee that would be required for an advance
permit, and the subsequent issuance of a fence permit after construction of the
fence has commenced will not be a defense to a charge in Municipal Court of
constructing a fence without a permit.
   (d)   Anyone violating the provisions of this section shall be, upon
conviction, subject to the payment of a fine of not less than $40 nor more than
$200 and up to ten days in the County Jail. The Municipal Court shall also have
authority to require the demolition or removal of a fence for which a permit
has not been issued at the time the Court imposes sentence.
(Ord. 260, passed 4-2-2005)
§ 4-228 LIABILITY.
   This article shall not be construed to relieve from any liability or lessen
the liability of any person performing any activity connected herewith, nor
shall the city be held as assuming any liability by reason of any inspection
authorized herein, by reason of any certificate of inspection issued by it or
by reason of any permit or license granted herein.
§ 4-229 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section of the International Residential Code or of this article
shall be held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, then such section shall be considered separate and apart from the
remaining sections, the section to be completely severable from the remaining
provisions which shall continue in full force and effect.
ARTICLE 3: ELECTRICAL CODE
Section
   
4-301   Definitions
   
4-302   Adoption of International Residential Code by reference
   
4-303   Additional provisions
   
4-304   Building Official; authority
   
4-305   Electrical Inspector; appointment
   
4-306   Same; duties
   
4-307   Same; powers
   
4-308   Same; right of entry
   
4-309   Clarification; modification
   
4-310   Electrical permit required; application; approval
   
4-311   Same; application information required
   
4-312   Same; plans and specifications
   
4-313   Same; fees
   
4-314   Same; posting
   
4-315   Request for inspection
   
4-316   Inspection; concealment of prior work
   
4-317   Inspection fee
   
4-318   Certificate of approval
   
4-319   Connection to installations
   
4-320   Reinspection
   
4-321   Condemnation; appeal
   
4-322   Interference by unauthorized person
   
4-323   Electrician or electrical contractors defined
   
4-324   Electrician’s or electrical contractor’s license required; electrical
permits; unlawful acts
   
4-325   Same; application; granting
   
4-326   Same; license fees; conditions; renewal; unlawful acts
   
4-327   Electrician’s or electrical contractor’s bond required; conditions;
approval; rights reserved
   
4-328   Insurance
   
4-329   License suspension; revocation; appeal; unlawful acts
   
4-330   Work by property owners
   
4-331   Approved materials
   
4-332   Liability
   
4-333   Severability
§ 4-301 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Approved by the Chief Building Official, the Electrical Inspector
or his or her designee.
   AUTHORIZED PERSON. Any individual, firm or corporation who or which is
licensed under the provisions of this article to do the work as permitted under
the specified provisions of this article.
   CITY. The territory within the corporate limits of this city.
   CONDUCTOR. A wire or cable or other form of metal suitable for carrying the
electric current or potential.
   ELECTRICAL CONSTRUCTION OR INSTALLATION.
      (1)   Includes all work and materials used in installing, maintaining or
extending a system of electrical wiring and all appurtenances, apparatus or
equipment used in connection therewith, inside or attached to any building,
structure, lot or premises, except industrial plants where full-time
maintenance is provided and other agencies providing inspections of
installations and facilities.
      (2)   ELECTRICAL CONSTRUCTION shall not be held to mean or include any of
the following:
      (A)   The replacement of lamps, fuses or bulbs or the connection of
portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles,
and replacement of receptacles and switches, lighting fixtures and apparatus,
where no changes or alterations are made to the wiring;
      (B)   Any work involved in the manufacturing, repair or testing of any
electrical equipment or apparatus, but not including any permanent wiring; or
      (C)   Any work in industrial establishments where inspections come under
the scope of other inspection agencies.
   EQUIPMENT. Conductors, materials, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures,
apparatus, motors and the like used as a part of or in connection with an
electrical installation.
   INSPECTOR. The Chief Building Official or any individual who has been
appointed by the city as Electrical Inspector.
   PERSON. A natural person, or his or her heirs, executors, administrators or
assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, or its or their
successors, assigns or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
   SPECIAL PERMISSION. The written consent of the Chief Building Official or
the Electrical Inspector.
   SPECIAL RULING. A written ruling filed in the office of the Chief Building
Official or the Electrical Inspector.
§ 4-302 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE BY REFERENCE.
   (a)   The standard code known as the International Residential Code, 2015
Edition, the same being a standard code for the installation of electrical
wiring and apparatus and available in book and pamphlet form, is hereby
incorporated by reference herein and made a part of this article as authorized
and in the manner prescribed by K.S.A. 12-3009 to 12-3012. One copy shall be
marked or stamped “Official Copy as Incorporated by the Code of the City of
Oxford,” and shall be filed with the City Clerk and be open to inspection and
be available to the public at all reasonable hours of business.
   (b)   Any person violating any provision of such code shall be punished as
provided in §
1-116 of this code.
(Ord. 336, passed 10-6-2020)
§ 4-303 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   The following sections of this article are in addition to the provisions of
the standard code incorporated by reference in §
4-302.
§ 4-304 BUILDING OFFICIAL; AUTHORITY.
   The Mayor or his or her authorized designee shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this article and appointment of an Electrical
Inspector in accordance with §
4-204, which shall apply in a like manner to this article.
§ 4-305 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; APPOINTMENT.
   The Mayor may assume the responsibilities of, or appoint some qualified
officer or employee of the city to be and perform the duties of, Electrical
Inspector as may be required, subject to the consent and approval of the
governing body.
§ 4-306 SAME; DUTIES.
   The Electrical Inspector shall have the following duties:
   (a)   To enforce all regulations relating to electrical construction,
alteration, repair or removal;
   (b)   May permit, with the approval of the governing body, on the basis of
duly authenticated reports from recognized sources, the use of new materials or
modes of electrical construction not provided for in this article, and may, for
the purpose of carrying out the intent of this article, adopt an accepted
standard of material or workmanlike practices of federal or state bureaus,
national, technical organizations or fire underwriters;
   (c)   To examine all buildings requiring electrical construction in the
process of erection, construction, alteration or relocation in the city for the
purpose of determining whether the work is in compliance with the permit given
and in compliance with the regulations of the city pertaining to such work,
including zoning regulations; and
   (d)   To keep comprehensive records of applications, of permits or
certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered and of notices or
orders issued. All such records shall be open to public inspection during
stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the Building
Official or Electrical Inspector without his or her written consent.
§ 4-307 SAME; POWERS.
   The Electrical Inspector shall have the following powers:
   (a)   To enter any building or structure or premises at any reasonable hour,
whether complete or in the process of erection, to perform the duties contained
in this article;
   (b)   To adopt and enforce all such prudent emergency measures as he or she
may deem necessary and expedient for the public safety under the laws of the
city; and
   (c)   May cause any work done in violation of this article to be
discontinued until he or she shall have satisfactory evidence that the work
will be done in accordance with the electrical regulations of the city, subject
to the right of any installer or owner to appeal to the governing body.
§ 4-308 SAME; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Electrical Inspector, or his or her agent, upon proper identification,
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any
reasonable hour to perform his or her duties as set out in this article.
§ 4-309 CLARIFICATION; MODIFICATION.
   (a)   The governing body shall be the final determiner of the scope and
meaning of all provisions of the Electrical Code which may be unclear,
ambiguous or requiring interpretation.
   (b)   (1)   The Electrical Inspector shall have the power to modify any of
the provisions of the Electrical Code, upon application in writing by the owner
or lessee or his or her authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties
in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code. In approving
modifications, the Electrical Inspector shall see that the spirit of the code
is observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done.
      (2)   The particulars of a modification when granted or allowed and the
decision of the Inspector thereon shall be entered upon the records of the
Electrical Inspector and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
§ 4-310 ELECTRICAL PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; APPROVAL.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) below, it shall be unlawful for any
person to engage in any electrical construction, as defined in §
4-301, within the city without an electrical permit being first obtained
therefor from the City Clerk, after approval by the Chief Building Official or
his or her duly authorized assistant. The application for such permit shall be
made and the permit obtained before any electrical construction work is
commenced.
   (b)   No electrical permit shall be required for any of the following:
      (1)   The replacement of lamps, fuses or bulbs, or the connection of
portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles,
and replacement of receptacles and switches, lighting fixtures and apparatus
where no changes or alterations are made to the wiring;
      (2)   Any work involved in the manufacturing, repair or testing of any
electrical equipment or apparatus, but not including any permanent wiring; or
      (3)   Any work in industrial establishments where the issuance of
electrical permits comes under the scope of other agencies.
§ 4-311 SAME; APPLICATION INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   An electrical permit shall be issued upon an application in
writing to the office of City Clerk on a form or forms provided for the
purpose.
      (2)   This application shall, among other things, disclose the following:
      (A)   The name of the owner of the lot or tract of ground;
      (B)   The location of the building or structure;
      (C)   The electrical construction work proposed;
      (D)   The class of occupancy;
      (E)   The class of electrical construction;
      (F)   The kind of materials to be used;
      (G)   The estimated cost of the work;
      (H)   The date work will commence;
      (I)   Expected date of completion;
      (J)   Name and address of electrical contractor or contractors doing the
work; and
      (K)   Such other information as may be pertinent to the issuance of the
required permit.
   (b)   An application for an electrical permit shall be signed by the owner
or his or her duly authorized agent or an electrician or electrical contractor
licensed by the city. If the application is made by the owner or his or her
agent, it shall contain the name or names of the licensed electrician or
electrical contractor or contractors doing the work described, or an electrical
permit may be issued to the owner upon his or her application disclosing
satisfactory evidence that the proposed work will be performed by the owner
himself or herself and not by a licensed electrical contractor, and likewise
subject to the final approval of the Electrical Inspector for work performed.
   (c)   Upon approval of the completed application and a determination that a
permit should be issued, the Chief Building Official or his or her assistant
shall issue a permit to the owner, electrician or electrical contractor
authorizing the electrical construction work covered by the application.
   (d)   Any permit issued under this section shall be valid and subsisting for
a period of not more than six months from the date of issuance unless the
permittee shall have commenced, within the period so limited, the electrical
construction work authorized by such permit. ELECTRICAL CONSTRUCTION WORK
COMMENCED, for the purpose of this section, shall mean the beginning of
electrical construction work other than the preparation of plans or the letting
of an electrical contract.
§ 4-312 SAME; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   Whenever an application for a electrical permit is made, the Chief
Building Official or the Electrical Inspector may, if he or she finds it
necessary to determine whether electrical construction work described in the
application will comply with the laws pertaining to such work, require that the
applicant file a written description or drawing of the proposed electrical
construction as may be prepared for the purpose. If such drawing or description
is insufficient for the purposes of determining whether a permit should be
issued, the Building Official may require the applicant to file complete
electrical and engineering plans and specifications for such electrical
construction, or any part thereof, as may be necessary for the Inspector to
determine compliance with this article.
   (b)   The filing of such plans and specifications and the approval thereof
in connection with an application for a permit shall not in any way affect the
authority of the city to deny or issue a permit, or to inspect any electrical
construction work for conformity with this article.
§ 4-313 SAME; FEES.
   The fee for an electrical permit shall be $10; however, no fee shall be
required to obtain a permit where the total estimated cost, the reasonable
value of all services, labor and materials required, is under $50. The fee
herein shall be paid to the City Clerk upon obtaining an electrical permit and
the same shall be credited to the General Operating Fund of the city.
§ 4-314 SAME; POSTING.
   A copy of the electrical permit shall be kept on the premises for public
inspection during the performance of the work and until the completion of the
same. The Electrical Inspector may require a certified copy of the approved
plans to be kept on the premises at all times from the commencement of the work
to the completion thereof.
§ 4-315 REQUEST FOR INSPECTION.
   Upon the completion of any electrical work covered by this article, it shall
be the duty of the person doing such work to notify the Electrical Inspector
and request that it be inspected, after which, such work shall be inspected
promptly as hereinafter provided.
§ 4-316 INSPECTION; CONCEALMENT OF PRIOR WORK.
   (a)   When any electric equipment is to be hidden from view by the permanent
placement of parts of the building, the person, firm or corporation installing
the equipment shall notify the Building Inspector, and such equipment shall not
be concealed until it has been inspected, approved or authorized by the
Electrical Inspector or until 24 hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays, shall have elapsed from the time of such notification. On large
installations where the concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the
person, firm or corporation installing the electrical equipment shall give the
Electrical Inspector due notice, and inspections shall be made periodically
during the progress of the work.
   (b)   The Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to require building
contractors to open such work which in any manner conceals electrical wiring
that has been closed without his or her knowledge or permission, and in no case
shall the Inspector issue a certificate of approval until satisfied that the
work is in accordance with the provisions of this article. The Inspector shall
also have the right to refuse to issue a certificate of approval on any wiring
that is concealed in such manner that it cannot be fully determined that it has
been done in accordance with this article.
§ 4-317 INSPECTION FEE.
   An initial inspection fee of $10, and an inspection fee of $5 for subsequent
inspections required, shall be paid before any electrical installation will be
approved or a certificate of approval issued.
§ 4-318 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL.
   (a)   When the Electrical Inspector finds an electrical construction or
installation to be in conformity with the provisions of this article, he or she
shall issue to the person, firm or corporation performing the electrical
construction work, or making the installation, a certificate of approval, with
duplicate copy for delivery to the owner, authorizing the use of the
installation and connection to the supply of electricity.
   (b)   When a certificate of approval is issued authorizing the connection
and use of a temporary installation, the certificate shall expire at a time to
be stated therein and shall be revocable for cause by the Electrical Inspector.
   (c)   In no case shall certificates of approval be issued on electrical
construction, installations or parts of installations where the work installed
does not conform to the requirements of this article.
   (d)   If, upon inspection, the installation is not found to be fully in
conformity with the provisions of this article, the Electrical Inspector shall
immediately notify the person, firm or corporation performing the electrical
construction work or making the installation of the existing defects.
   (e)   No certificate of approval shall be issued unless the electric
conductor or equipment has been installed in strict conformity with the
provisions of this article and unless the electrical construction or
installation is made in compliance with nationally approved methods of
construction for safety to life and property as herein set forth.
   (f)   The Electrical Inspector shall be deemed the judge of whether the
installation of electric conductors and equipment has been made in accordance
with the requirements of this article.
   (g)   No certificate of approval shall be required for any of the following:
      (1)   The replacement of lamps, fuses or bulbs, or the connection of
portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles,
and replacement of receptacles and switches, lighting fixtures and apparatus
where no changes or alterations are made to the wiring;
      (2)   Any work involved in the manufacturing, repair or testing of any
electrical equipment or apparatus, but not including any permanent wiring; or
      (3)   Any work in industrial establishments where inspections come under
the scope of other inspection agencies.
§ 4-319 CONNECTION TO INSTALLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make connection
to a supply of electricity to any building or electrical equipment for which an
inspection is required, or which has been disconnected by the order of the
Electrical Inspector, until a certificate of approval has been issued by the
Electrical Inspector authorizing the connection and use of such electric
supply. The Electrical Inspector may, at his or her discretion, authorize a
temporary connection.
§ 4-320 REINSPECTION.
   The Electrical Inspector shall periodically re-inspect existing
installations of electrical conductors and equipment. When the installation of
any conductors or equipment is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition,
the person, firm or corporation owning, using or operating the installation
shall be notified in writing and shall make the necessary repairs or changes
required to place the conductors or equipment in safe condition and have the
work completed within the period specified by the Electrical Inspector.
§ 4-321 CONDEMNATION; APPEAL.
   (a)   If, in the judgment of the Electrical Inspector, after an inspection
any electrical conductors, appliances or equipment in any building are unsafe
or dangerous to persons or property, the Inspector shall have the power to
cause the wires or appliances to be disconnected from the source of electrical
energy supplying these conductors or equipment, and may, at his or her
discretion, seal the control switches for the same in an open or disconnected
position, whereupon he or she shall give notice to the owner or his or her
agent or by posting such notice at the site, and shall also notify the
utilities serving the premises. Thereafter, it shall be unlawful for any person
to cause or permit electric current to be supplied to the electrical
conductors, appliances or equipment so sealed until they shall have been made
safe and the Inspector shall have issued a certificate of approval to that
effect.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to cause all dead
wires, unused poles or electric apparatus on the outside of the buildings or in
streets or alleys to be removed at the expense of the owners thereof by giving
the owners written notice.
   (c)   When the Electrical Inspector condemns all or part of any electrical
installation, the owner may, within ten days after receiving written notice
thereof, file a petition in writing for review of the action of the Building
Inspector by the governing body, upon the receipt of which the governing body
shall at once proceed to determine the facts, and within ten days from
receiving the petition make a decision in accordance with its findings.
§ 4-322 INTERFERENCE BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSON.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to, in any manner, change
or alter electrical conductors or equipment in or on any building. If, in the
course of the erection of a building or structure, electrical conductors or
equipment are in such position as to interfere with the erection or completion
of the structure, notice shall be immediately given to the authorized person or
firm installing the electrical conductors or equipment, and the needed change
shall be made by such authorized person or firm.
§ 4-323 ELECTRICIAN OR ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELECTRICIAN or ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR.
      (1)   Any person, firm, co-partnership, corporation, association or any
combination thereof, whether a resident or not of the city:
      (A)   Who or which undertakes with or for another, for a fixed sum,
price, fee or any other compensation, to install, construct, alter, repair, add
to or move any electrical installation or performs any electrical construction
work in the city for which an electrical construction permit may now or
hereafter be required by the laws of the city;
      (B)   Who or which advertises or represents himself, herself or itself to
the public to have the capacity or ability to undertake or submit a bid or
offer to install, construct, alter, repair, add to, remove, restore or replace
any electrical installation or perform any electrical construction work; or
      (C)   Who or which installs, constructs, alters, adds to or removes any
electrical installation or performs any electrical construction work either on
his or her own or other property for purposes of sale or speculation.
      (2)   An ELECTRICIAN or ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR as defined shall not mean
or include:
      (A)   Any owner or his or her authorized agents or employees making
ordinary repairs to his, her or its own building or structure not involving
electrical construction and for which a permit is not required or on which an
electrician or electrical contractor, as defined, is not required, employed or
engaged to perform; or
      (B)   Any property owner personally performing any improvements,
alterations or electrical construction within or upon his or her own residence
and intended for his or her own personal use and permanent occupancy; provided,
the owner shall satisfy the Electrical Inspector as to his or her ability to
perform such work, secure a permit, pay required fees, do work in accordance
with this article, and apply for an inspection and receive approval. Personal
electrical construction by an owner under this section shall be by himself or
herself, for himself or herself, on his or her own residence without
compensation, and no person shall be employed to assist him or her in any way
on such work except an electrician or electrical contractor licensed by the
city.
§ 4-324 ELECTRICIAN’S OR ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR’S LICENSE REQUIRED; ELECTRICAL
PERMITS; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (a)   Each electrician or electrical contractor shall, before entering upon
any electrical construction work subject to regulation by city laws, apply to
the City Clerk for an electrician’s or electrical contractor’s license and
receive the same as hereinafter provided, and have in his or her possession a
valid license authorizing him, her or it to engage in the trade or occupation
of electrician or electrical contractor in the city.
   (b)   No permit for any electrical construction work shall be issued for any
such work to be performed by an electrician or electrical contractor, as
defined, who has not first obtained a license upon making a proper application
and payment of the license fee as required.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, association or
corporation to enter into a contract or agreement with another so as to bring
himself, herself or itself under the definition of an electrician or electrical
contractor herein, or to perform any work as an electrician or electrical
contractor or any work under a contract for any work involving electrical
construction, without first having obtained an electrician’s or electrical
contractor’s license issued by the city.
§ 4-325 SAME; APPLICATION; GRANTING.
   Application for an electrician’s or electrical contractor’s license shall be
made upon a form to be supplied by the city, which shall disclose the name of
the applicant, his or her place of business in the city (and home office if a
nonresident), the kind of contracting work engaged in, the length of time
engaged in such work and places where work has been performed within the past
two years. The application shall be signed by the electrician or electrical
contractor or his or her authorized agent. The applications shall be submitted
to the City Clerk. Such license shall be issued by the City Clerk upon approval
of their application and payment of the fees hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 312, passed 12-6-2016)
§ 4-326 SAME; LICENSE FEES; CONDITIONS; RENEWAL; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (a)   (1)   The following license fees shall be paid for the calendar year
or major fraction thereof:
      (A)   General electrician or electrical contractor, who shall qualify to
engage in more than one kind of electrical construction work, the sum of $25;
and
      (B)   Limited electrician or electrical contractor, who shall qualify to
engage in not more than one kind of electrical construction work, the sum of
$25.
      (2)   Any license issued on or after July 1 of each year shall be issued
upon payment of one-half the annual license fee.
   (b)   Each such license shall set forth the kind of electrical construction
work in which the licensee may engage. The licensee shall display his or her
license at any place where he or she may be engaged in contract work or produce
the same on the demand of any city officer. All licenses shall be renewable
annually as in the case of an original license on or before January 1 of the
year for which issued.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to contract
for any kind of work covered by this article without having a valid license
issued by the city to perform such contracts.
§ 4-327 ELECTRICIAN’S OR ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR’S BOND REQUIRED; CONDITIONS;
APPROVAL; RIGHTS RESERVED.
   (a)   Before any license shall be issued to any electrician or electrical
contractor required by this article to obtain a license and pay a fee to the
city, the electrician or electrical contractor shall secure and file with the
City Clerk a good and sufficient corporate surety bond in the principal sum of
$5,000, conditioned that the principal named therein shall faithfully and fully
observe all laws of the city relating to the business or occupation for which a
license is desired and further conditioned to hold and save the city harmless
and free of claims for loss or damage to persons or property, or from damage,
injury or destruction of property belonging to the city, resulting from, or
arising out of, the negligence or failure of the principal or any of his, her
or its employees, agents or servants to use due care or diligence respecting
any opening or excavation made in or adjacent to any street, alley or public
ground in the city, or any materials stored, placed or used in any such places,
or the operation or use of any vehicle, machinery or equipment in the streets,
alleys or public grounds in connection with the business or occupation
licensed. Each such bond shall be issued by a company authorized to do business
in the state and shall be executed by an agent of the company residing in the
county, and further conditioned that in the event of cancellation or
expiration, the company or agent will give ten days’ notice of such fact to the
City Clerk. Each such bond shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney
and approved as to surety by the City Clerk, and the approval thereof shall be
endorsed on the bond by the City Attorney and by the Chairperson of the Council
over their signatures.
   (b)   Each bond shall be dated to run from the first day of any license
issued by the city to the principal and may cover the period of not to exceed
two years. No bond shall be renewed by an extension certificate, but a new bond
shall be filed by the principal for each successive period following the
renewal thereof. The city reserves the right to furnish the form of all surety
bonds as may be required by this article.
(Ord. 163, passed - -)
§ 4-328 INSURANCE.
   In addition to obtaining a corporate surety bond as required by §
4-327, an electrician or electrical contractor must procure and maintain a
liability insurance policy in the amount of $100,000 for the death or injury of
any one person, and $300,000 for the death or injury of any number of persons
in any one accident, and $50,000 for property damage in any one accident. Such
policies of insurance shall be issued by some insurance company authorized to
do business in the state. An electrician or electrical contractor may qualify
as to the insurance requirements by filing a certificate with the City Clerk
executed by the resident agent of such company stating that the required policy
of insurance has been issued by such company for the purpose required by this
article and that such insurer will not cancel the policy except upon giving 30
days’ notice in writing to the city; and that the certificate shall be filed
for an annual period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of such year.
§ 4-329 LICENSE SUSPENSION; REVOCATION; APPEAL; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (a)   (1)   The license of any electrician or electrical contractor may be
suspended temporarily, for a period of not to exceed 30 days at any one time,
by the Chief Building Official upon his or her own motion or upon a complaint
of the City Electrical Inspector.
      (2)   Notice shall be given in writing to such electrician or electrical
contractor giving reasonable notice of a time of hearing of the complaint or
the matter alleged against such electrician or electrical contractor involving
any one or more of the following:
      (A)   Misrepresentation of a material fact by applicant in obtaining a
license;
      (B)   Use of license to obtain an electrical permit for another;
      (C)   Failure or neglect to observe conditions of permit authorizing the
encumbering of streets or sidewalks for the safety of the public;
      (D)   Performance of any electrical construction work without a permit
where one is required by law; or
      (E)   Willful disregard of any violation of the electrical construction
laws, or failure to comply with any lawful order of the City Electrical
Inspector.
   (b)   (1)   Any licensee may, within 15 days, appeal in writing to the
governing body from any order of the Chief Building Official suspending his or
her license for its final decision thereon. The governing body may upon such
hearing terminate such suspension within not more than 30 days thereafter, or
may revoke such license.
      (2)   If any license shall be revoked, the electrician or electrical
contractor shall not be eligible for a new license during a period of six
months thereafter. No fee shall be refunded in the event of the suspension or
revocation of any electricians or electrical contractor’s license.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful to engage in the occupation or trade of
electrician or electrical contractor during the time any license of such
electrician or electrical contractor has been suspended or revoked.
§ 4-330 WORK BY PROPERTY OWNERS.
   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any property owner from personally
performing any electrical construction or installing electrical wiring or
equipment within and upon his or her own residence and intended for his or her
personal use and permanent occupancy; provided, the owner shall satisfy the
Electrical Inspector as to his or her ability to perform such work or install
such electrical wiring, secure a permit, pay required fees, do work in
accordance with this article and apply for an inspection and receive a
certificate of approval. Personal electrical construction or installation
performed by an owner under this section shall be by himself or herself, for
himself or herself, on his or her own residence without compensation, and no
person shall be employed to assist him or her in any way on such work except an
electrician or electrical contractor licensed by the city.
§ 4-331 APPROVED MATERIALS.
   No electric materials for the wiring of appliances or equipment shall be
installed in the city unless they are in conformity with the provisions of this
article and with the approved standards of construction for safety to life and
property. Conformity of materials for wiring appliances and equipment to the
standards of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. shall be prima facie evidence
that the materials, devices, appliances and equipment comply with the
requirements of this article.
§ 4-332 LIABILITY.
   This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or
installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons or property caused
by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such
liability by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein, or the
certificate of approval of any work or equipment authorized herein, or by
reason of any permit or license granted herein.
§ 4-333 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section of the International Residential Code or of this article
shall be held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, then such section shall be considered separate and apart from the
remaining provisions of the International Residential Code or of this article.
The section is to be completely severable from the remaining provisions, which
shall continue in full force and effect.
ARTICLE 4: PLUMBING AND GAS-FITTING CODE
Section
   
4-401   Definition
   
4-402   International Residential Code incorporated
   
4-403   Additional provisions
   
4-404   Building Official; authority
   
4-405   Plumbing Inspector; appointment
   
4-406   Same; duties
   
4-407   Same; powers
   
4-408   Same; right of entry
   
4-409   Clarification; modification
   
4-410   Plumbing permit required; exception
   
4-411   Same; application information required
   
4-412   Same; plans and specifications
   
4-413   Same; fees
   
4-414   Same; posting
   
4-415   Request for inspection
   
4-416   Inspection; concealment of prior work
   
4-417   Reserved
   
4-418   Certificate of approval
   
4-419   Connection to gas or water supply
   
4-420   Condemnation; appeal
   
4-421   Plumber or plumbing contractor; defined
   
4-422   Plumber’s or plumbing contractor’s license required; plumbing permits;
unlawful acts
   
4-423   Same; application; granting
   
4-424   Same; license fees; conditions; renewal; unlawful acts
   
4-425   Plumber’s or plumbing contractor’s bond required; conditions; approval;
rights reserved
   
4-426   Insurance
   
4-427   License suspension; revocation; appeal; unlawful acts
   
4-428   Excavations
   
4-429   Work by property owners
   
4-430   Approved materials
   
4-431   Liability
   
4-432   Severability
§ 4-401 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PLUMBING. The installation of gas or water pipes, fixtures, apparatus and
the necessary connections either for supplying gas or water to premises or for
the removing of liquid and water-borne wastes from premises in the city, or
both such purposes, and shall also denote installed fixtures, drainage and vent
systems and gas or water distribution systems, as the case may be.
§ 4-402 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE INCORPORATED.
   (a)   There is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, for the purpose
of establishing rules and regulations for the practice of plumbing and gas-
fitting, including the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of
all pipes, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with sanitary
sewers and public and private water and fuel gas systems, the International
Residential Code, 2015 Edition, as recommended by the International Association
of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, such code being made as a part of the
ordinances and code of the city as if the same had been set out in full herein,
all as authorized and in the manner prescribed by K.S.A. 12-3009 to 12-3012,
including any amendments thereto. One copy of the uniform code shall be marked
or stamped “Official Copy as Incorporated by the Code of the City of Oxford,”
and shall be filed with the City Clerk to be open to inspection and available
to the public at all reasonable hours of business.
   (b)   Any person violating any provisions of such code shall be punished as
provided in §
1-116 of this code.
(Ord. 336, passed 10-6-2020)
§ 4-403 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   The following sections of this article are in addition to the provisions of
the standard code incorporated by reference in §
4-402.
§ 4-404 BUILDING OFFICIAL; AUTHORITY.
   The Mayor or his or her authorized designee shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this article and appointment of a Plumbing
Inspector in accordance with §
4-204, which apply in a like manner to this article.
§ 4-405 PLUMBING INSPECTOR; APPOINTMENT.
   The Mayor may assume the responsibilities of or appoint some qualified
officer or employee of the city to be and perform the duties of Plumbing
Inspector as may be required, subject to the consent and approval of the
governing body.
§ 4-406 SAME; DUTIES.
   The Plumbing Inspector shall have the following duties:
   (a)   To enforce all regulations relating to plumbing construction,
alteration, repair or removal;
   (b)   May permit, with the approval of the governing body, on the basis of
duly authenticated reports from recognized sources, the use of new materials or
modes of construction not provided for in this article and may, for the purpose
of carrying out the intent of this article, adopt an accepted standard of
material or workmanlike practices of federal or state bureaus, national,
technical organizations or fire underwriters;
   (c)   To examine all buildings in the process of erection, construction,
alteration or relocation in the city for the purpose of determining whether the
work is in compliance with the plumbing permit given and in compliance with the
regulations of the city pertaining to such work, including zoning regulations;
and
   (d)   To keep comprehensive records of applications, of permits or
certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered and of notices or
orders issued. All such records shall be open to public inspection during
stated office hours but shall not be removed from the office of the Building
Official or Plumbing Inspector without his or her written consent.
§ 4-407 SAME; POWERS.
   The Plumbing Inspector shall have the following powers:
   (a)   To enter any building or structure or premises at any reasonable hour,
whether complete or in the process of erection, to perform the duties contained
in this article;
   (b)   To adopt and enforce all such prudent emergency measures as he or she
may deem necessary and expedient for the public safety under the laws of the
city; and
   (c)   May cause any work done in violation of this article to be
discontinued until he or she shall have satisfactory evidence that the work
will be done in accordance with the plumbing regulations of the city, subject
to the right of any plumber, plumbing contractor or owner to appeal to the
governing body.
§ 4-408 SAME; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Plumbing Inspector or his or her agent, upon proper identification,
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any
reasonable hour to perform his or her duties as set out in this article.
§ 4-409 CLARIFICATION; MODIFICATION.
   (a)   The governing body shall be the final determiner of the scope and
meaning of all provisions of the Plumbing Code which may be unclear, ambiguous
or requiring interpretation.
   (b)   (1)   The Plumbing Inspector shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the Plumbing Code upon application in writing by the owner or
lessee or his or her authorized agent when there are practical difficulties in
the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code. In approving
modifications, the Plumbing Inspector shall see that the spirit of the code is
observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done.
      (2)   The particulars of a modification when granted or allowed and the
decision of the Inspector thereon shall be entered upon the records of the
Plumbing Inspector and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
§ 4-410 PLUMBING PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to install, alter or reconstruct any plumbing or
plumbing system, as defined by the International Residential Code and §
4-401, in any building in the city without first making application to and
receiving a permit therefor from the City Clerk, after approval by the Chief
Building Official or his or her authorized assistant. The application for such
permit shall be made and the permit obtained before any plumbing work is
commenced.
   (b)   No permit shall be required for making minor repairs of any plumbing,
including repair of leaks in water pipes, traps or cocks, opening up stoppage
in waste or supply pipes, traps or drains, replacing fixtures when waste pipes
are not disturbed or replacing frozen pipes inside the building, and like
repair work not involving original installation or reconstruction.
§ 4-411 SAME; APPLICATION INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   A plumbing permit shall be issued upon an application in writing
to the office of the City Clerk on a form or forms provided for the purpose.
      (2)   This application shall, among other things, disclose the following:
      (A)   The name of the owner of the lot or tract of ground;
      (B)   The location of the building or structure;
      (C)   The plumbing work proposed;
      (D)   The class of occupancy;
      (E)   The class of construction;
      (F)   The kind of materials to be used;
      (G)   The estimated cost of the work;
      (H)   The date work will commence;
      (I)   Expected date of completion;
      (J)   Name and address of plumber, plumbing contractor or contractors
doing the work; and
      (K)   Such other information as may be pertinent to the issuance of the
required permit.
   (b)   An application for a plumbing permit shall be signed by the owner or
his or her duly authorized agent, or a plumber or plumbing contractor licensed
by the city. If the application is made by the owner or his or her agent, it
shall contain the name or names of the licensed plumber, plumbing contractor or
contractors doing the work described, or a plumbing permit may be issued to the
owner upon his or her application disclosing satisfactory evidence that the
proposed work will be performed by the owner himself or herself and not by a
licensed plumber or plumbing contractor, and likewise be subject to the final
approval of the Plumbing Inspector for work performed.
   (c)   Upon approval of the completed application and a determination that a
permit should be issued, the Chief Building Official or his or her assistant
shall issue a permit to the owner or contractor authorizing the plumbing work
covered by the application.
   (d)   Any permit issued under this section shall be valid and subsisting for
a period of not more than six months from the date of issuance unless the
permittee shall have commenced, within the period so limited, the plumbing work
authorized by such permit. Plumbing work commenced for the purpose of this
section shall mean the beginning of plumbing work other than the preparation of
plans or the letting of a plumbing contract.
§ 4-412 SAME; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   Whenever an application for a plumbing permit is made, the Chief Building
Official or the Plumbing Inspector may, if he or she finds it necessary to
determine whether work described in the application will comply with the laws
pertaining to such work, require that the applicant file a written description
or drawing of the proposed plumbing construction as may be prepared for the
purpose. If such drawing or description is insufficient for the purposes of
determining whether a permit should be issued, the Chief Building Official or
the Plumbing Inspector may require the applicant to file complete architectural
and engineering plans and specifications for such building or construction, or
any part thereof, as may be necessary for the Inspector to determine compliance
with this article. The filing of such plans and specifications and the approval
thereof in connection with an application for a permit shall not in any way
affect the authority of the city to deny or issue a permit, or to inspect any
plumbing work for conformity with this article.
§ 4-413 SAME; FEES.
   The fee for a plumbing permit shall be $10; however, no fee shall be
required to obtain a permit where the total estimated cost, the reasonable
value of all services, labor and materials required, is under $50. The fee
herein shall be paid to the City Clerk upon obtaining a plumbing permit and the
same shall be credited to the General Operating Fund of the city.
§ 4-414 SAME; POSTING.
   A copy of the plumbing permit shall be kept on the premises for public
inspection during the performance of the work and until the completion of the
same. The Plumbing Inspector may require a certified copy of the approved plans
to be kept on the premises at all times from the commencement of the work to
the completion thereof.
§ 4-415 REQUEST FOR INSPECTION.
   Upon the completion of any plumbing work covered by this article, it shall
be the duty of the person doing such work to notify the Plumbing Inspector and
request that it be inspected; after which such work shall be inspected promptly
as hereinafter provided.
§ 4-416 INSPECTION; CONCEALMENT OF PRIOR WORK.
   (a)   When any plumbing is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement
of parts of the building, the person, firm or corporation installing the
plumbing shall notify the Plumbing Inspector and such equipment shall not be
concealed until it has been inspected, approved or authorized by the Plumbing
Inspector or until 24 hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays,
shall have elapsed from the time of such notification. On large installations
where the concealment of plumbing proceeds continuously, the person, firm or
corporation installing the plumbing shall give the Plumbing Inspector due
notice, and inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the
work.
   (b)   The Plumbing Inspector shall have the authority to require owners or
contractors to open such work which in any manner conceals plumbing that has
been closed without his or her knowledge or permission, and in no case shall
the Inspector issue a certificate of approval until satisfied that the work is
in accordance with the provisions of this article. The Inspector shall also
have the right to refuse to issue a certificate of approval on any plumbing
that is concealed in such manner that it cannot be fully determined that it has
been done in accordance with this article.
§ 4-417 RESERVED.
§ 4-418 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL.
   (a)   When the Plumbing Inspector finds plumbing construction to be in
conformity with the provisions of this article, he or she shall issue to the
person, firm or corporation performing the plumbing construction a certificate
of approval, with duplicate copy for delivery to the owner, authorizing the use
of the plumbing system and connection to the supply of gas or water, as the
case may be.
   (b)   When a certificate of approval is issued authorizing the connection
and use of a temporary gas or water supply, the certificate shall expire at a
time to be stated therein and shall be revocable for cause by the Plumbing
Inspector.
   (c)   In no case shall certificates of approval be issued on plumbing or
plumbing systems or parts of systems where the work installed does not conform
to the requirements of this article.
   (d)   If, upon inspection, the plumbing or plumbing system is not found to
be fully in conformity with the provisions of this article, the Plumbing
Inspector shall immediately notify the person, firm or corporation making the
installation of the existing defects.
   (e)   No certificate of approval shall be issued unless the plumbing or
plumbing system has been installed in strict conformity with the provisions of
this article and unless the plumbing or plumbing system is made in compliance
with nationally approved methods of construction for safety to life and
property as herein set forth.
   (f)   The Plumbing Inspector shall be deemed the judge of whether the
plumbing or plumbing system has been made in accordance with the requirements
of this article.
   (g)   No certificate of approval shall be required for making minor repairs
of any plumbing, including the repair of leaks in water pipes, traps or cocks,
opening up stoppage in waste or supply pipes, traps or drains, replacing
fixtures when waste pipes are not disturbed, or replacing frozen pipes inside
the building, and like repair work not involving original installation or
reconstruction.
§ 4-419 CONNECTION TO GAS OR WATER SUPPLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make connection
to a supply of gas or water for which an inspection is required, or which has
been disconnected by the order of the Plumbing Inspector, until a certificate
of approval has been issued by the Plumbing Inspector authorizing the
connection and use of such plumbing or plumbing system. The Plumbing Inspector
may, at his or her discretion, authorize a temporary connection.
§ 4-420 CONDEMNATION; APPEAL.
   (a)   If, in the judgment of the Plumbing Inspector, after inspection the
plumbing or plumbing system in any building is unsafe or dangerous to persons
or property, the Inspector shall have the power to cause the plumbing or
plumbing system to be disconnected from the supply of gas or water and may, at
his or her discretion, seal the control valves for the same in a closed or
disconnected position, whereupon he or she shall give notice to the owner, or
his or her agent, or by posting such notice at the site, and shall also notify
the utilities serving the premises. Thereafter, it shall be unlawful for any
person to cause or permit gas or water to be supplied to the plumbing or
plumbing system so sealed until they shall have been made safe and the
Inspector shall have issued a certificate of approval to that effect.
   (b)   When the Plumbing Inspector condemns all or part of any plumbing
system, the owner may, within ten days after receiving written notice thereof,
file a petition in writing for review of the action of the Plumbing Inspector
by the governing body, upon the receipt of which the governing body shall at
once proceed to determine the facts, and within ten days from receiving the
petition make a decision in accordance with their findings.
§ 4-421 PLUMBER OR PLUMBING CONTRACTOR; DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PLUMBER or PLUMBING CONTRACTOR.
      (1)   (A)   Any person engaged in the business of installing, altering,
maintaining or repairing plumbing, which shall include all materials and
plumbing fixtures, water pipes, portable water treatment equipment, traps,
drainage and vent piping and building drains, including their respective
points, connections, devices, receptacles and appurtenances located within the
property lines of any premises or in any building; and
      (B)   Any gas-fitter or person engaged in the business of installing,
altering or repairing fuel gas piping, gas systems or fixtures.
      (2)   A PLUMBER or PLUMBING CONTRACTOR as defined in division (1) above
shall not mean or include the owner of a residence who personally installs
plumbing piping or equipment within and upon his or her own residence and
intended for his or her own personal use and permanent occupancy; provided, the
owner shall satisfy the Plumbing Inspector as to his or her ability to install
such piping or equipment, secure a permit, pay required fees, do work in
accordance with this article and apply for an inspection and receive approval.
Personal installation by an owner under this section shall be by himself or
herself, for himself or herself, on his or her own residence without
compensation, and no person shall be employed to assist him or her in any way
on such work except a plumber or plumbing contractor licensed by the city.
§ 4-422 PLUMBER’S OR PLUMBING CONTRACTOR’S LICENSE REQUIRED; PLUMBING PERMITS;
UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (a)   Each plumber or plumbing contractor shall, before entering upon any
plumbing work, subject to regulation by city laws, apply to the City Clerk for
a plumber’s or plumbing contractor’s license and receive the same as
hereinafter provided and have in his or her possession a valid license
authorizing him, her or it to engage in the trade or occupation of a plumber or
plumbing contractor in the city.
   (b)   No permit for any plumbing work shall be issued for any such work to
be performed by a plumber or plumbing contractor, as defined, who has not first
obtained a license upon making a proper application and payment of the license
fee as required.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, association or
corporation to enter into a contract or agreement with another so as to bring
himself, herself or itself under the definition of a plumber or plumbing
contractor herein, or to perform any work as a plumber or plumbing contractor
or any work under a contract for any work involving plumbing construction,
without first having obtained a plumber’s or plumbing contractor’s license
issued by the city.
(Ord. 162, passed - -)
§ 4-423 SAME; APPLICATION; GRANTING.
   Application for a plumber’s or plumbing contractor’s license shall be made
upon a form to be supplied by the city, which shall disclose the name of the
applicant, his or her place of business in the city (and home office if a
nonresident), the kind of contracting work engaged in, the length of time
engaged in such work and places where work has been performed within the past
two years. The application shall be signed by the plumber or plumbing
contractor or his or her authorized agent. The application shall be submitted
to the City Clerk. Such license shall be issued by the City Clerk upon approval
of the application and payment of the fees hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 312, passed 12-6-2016)
§ 4-424 SAME; LICENSE FEES; CONDITIONS; RENEWAL; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (a)   The following license fees shall be paid for the calendar year or
major fraction thereof:
      (1)   General plumber, the sum of $25; and
      (2)   Plumbing contractor, the sum of $25.
   (b)   Any license issued on or after July 1 of each year shall be issued
upon payment of one-half the annual license fee.
   (c)   The licensee shall display his or her license at any place where he or
she may be engaged in plumbing work or produce the same on demand of any city
officer. All licenses shall be renewable annually as in the case of an original
license on or before the first day of January of the year for which issued.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to contract
for any kind of work covered by this article without having a valid license
issued by the city to perform such contracts.
(Ord. 162, passed - -)
§ 4-425 PLUMBER’S OR PLUMBING CONTRACTOR’S BOND REQUIRED; CONDITIONS; APPROVAL;
RIGHTS RESERVED.
   (a)   Before any license shall be issued to any plumber or plumbing
contractor required by this article to obtain a license and pay a fee to the
city, the plumber or plumbing contractor shall secure and file with the City
Clerk a good and sufficient corporate surety bond in the principal sum of
$5,000, conditioned that the principal named therein shall faithfully and fully
observe all laws of the city relating to the business or occupation for which a
license is desired and further conditioned to hold and save the city harmless
and free of claims for loss or damage to persons or property, or from damage,
injury or destruction of property belonging to the city, resulting from, or
arising out of, the negligence or failure of the principal or any of his, her
or its employees, agents, servants to use due care or diligence respecting any
opening or excavation made in, or adjacent to, any street, alley or public
ground in the city, or any materials stored, placed or used in any such places,
or the operation or use of any vehicle, machinery or equipment in the streets,
alleys or public grounds in connection with the business or occupation
licensed. Each such bond shall be issued by a company authorized to do business
in the state and shall be executed by an agent of the company residing in the
county, and further conditioned that in the event of cancellation or
expiration, the company or agent will give ten days’ notice of such fact to the
City Clerk. Each such bond shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney
and approved as to surety by the City Clerk, and the approval thereof shall be
endorsed on the bond by the City Attorney and by the Chairperson of the Council
over their signatures.
   (b)   Each bond shall be dated to run from the first day of any license
issued by the city to the principal and may cover the period of not to exceed
two years. No bond shall be renewed by an extension certificate, but a new bond
shall be filed by the principal for each successive period following the
renewal thereof. The city reserves the right to furnish the form of all surety
bonds as may be required by this article.
(Ord. 162, passed - -)
§ 4-426 INSURANCE.
   In addition to obtaining a corporate surety bond as required by §
4-425, a plumber or plumbing contractor must procure and maintain a liability
insurance policy in the amount of $100,000 for the death or injury of any one
person, and $300,000 for the death or injury of any number of persons in any
one accident, and $50,000 for property damage in any one accident. Such
policies of insurance shall be issued by some insurance company authorized to
do business in the state. A plumber or plumbing contractor may qualify as to
the insurance requirements by filing a certificate with the City Clerk,
executed by the resident agent of such company, stating that the required
policy of insurance has been issued by such company for the purpose required by
this article and that such insurer will not cancel the policy except upon
giving 30 days’ notice in writing to the city; and that the certificate shall
be filed for an annual period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of
such year.
§ 4-427 LICENSE SUSPENSION; REVOCATION; APPEAL; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (a)   (1)   The license of any plumber or plumbing contractor may be
suspended temporarily, for a period of not to exceed 30 days at any one time,
by the Chief Building Official upon his or her own motion or upon a complaint
of the City Plumbing Inspector.
      (2)   Notice shall be given in writing to such plumber or plumbing
contractor giving reasonable notice of a time of hearing of the complaint or
the matter alleged against such plumber or plumbing contractor involving any
one or more of the following:
      (A)   Misrepresentation of a material fact by the applicant in obtaining
a license;
      (B)   Use of license to obtain a plumbing permit for another;
      (C)   Failure or neglect to observe conditions of a permit authorizing
the encumbering of streets or sidewalks for the safety of the public;
      (D)   Performance of any plumbing work without a permit where one is
required by law; or
      (E)   Willful disregard of any violation of the plumbing laws, or failure
to comply with any lawful order of the City Plumbing Inspector.
   (b)   Any licensee may, within 15 days, appeal in writing to the governing
body from any order of the Chief Building Official suspending his or her
license for its final decision thereon. The governing body may, upon such
hearing, terminate such suspension within not more than 30 days thereafter, or
may revoke such license. If any license shall be revoked, the plumber or
plumbing contractor shall not be eligible for a new license during a period of
six months thereafter. No fee shall be refunded in the event of the suspension
or revocation of any plumber’s or plumbing contractor’s license.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful to engage in the occupation or trade of plumber
or plumbing contractor during the time any license of such plumber or plumbing
contractor has been suspended or revoked.
§ 4-428 EXCAVATIONS.
   When it appears that the laying or repairing of any water or sewer pipes or
the making of any connection therewith shall require excavation in any street,
alley or public way of the city or the cutting or removal of any pavement, curb
or gutter or any sidewalk, during the course of such work, the application for
a permit shall so state and describe the location and extent of the excavation,
cutting or removal. Before the City Clerk shall issue any permit for such work,
the applicant shall pay any fee required by this code. All excavations shall be
barricaded and guarded as provided by the appropriate sections of this code.
Before any such excavation shall be backfilled, new plumbing work therein shall
be inspected and the bottom of the excavation holding any sewer, drain or water
pipe shall be so filled, leveled and tamped so as to properly support the pipe
and permit proper drainage when carrying sewage, and the excavation shall be
backfilled and all paving, curbing, guttering or sidewalks shall be restored as
near as possible to their last condition, subject always to the approval of the
Plumbing Inspector or the Superintendent of Streets.
§ 4-429 WORK BY PROPERTY OWNERS.
   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any property owner from personally
installing plumbing piping or equipment within and upon his or her own
residence and intended for his or her personal use and permanent occupancy;
provided, the owner shall satisfy the Plumbing Inspector as to his or her
ability to install such piping or equipment, secure a permit, pay required
fees, do work in accordance with this article, and apply for an inspection and
receive approval. Personal installation by an owner under this section shall be
by himself or herself for himself or herself, on his or her own residence
without compensation, and no person shall be employed to assist him or her in
any way on such work except a plumber or plumbing contractor licensed by the
city.
§ 4-430 APPROVED MATERIALS.
   No plumbing materials, appliances or equipment shall be installed in the
city unless they are in conformity with the provisions of this article and with
the approved standards of construction for safety to life and property.
Conformity of materials for plumbing materials, appliances and equipment to the
standards of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., shall be prima facie evidence
that the materials, devices, appliances and equipment comply with the
requirements of this article.
§ 4-431 LIABILITY.
   This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or
performing any plumbing construction for damages to persons or property caused
by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such
liability by reason of the inspection or re-inspection authorized herein, or
the certificate of approval of any work or equipment authorized herein, or by
reason of any permit or license granted herein.
§ 4-432 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section of the International Residential Code or of this article
shall be held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, then such section shall be considered separate and apart from the
remaining provisions of the International Residential Code or of this article.
The section is to be completely severable from the remaining provisions, which
shall continue in full force and effect.
ARTICLE 5: MOVING BUILDINGS
Section
   
4-501   Building Official; authority
   
4-502   Permit required
   
4-503   Same; application for permit
   
4-504   Same; bond, insurance required
   
4-505   Same; fee
   
4-506   Contractor; license required; fee
   
4-507   Route; duties of Building Official
   
4-508   Notice to owners
   
4-509   Duty of owners
   
4-510   Interfering with poles; wires
   
4-511   Display of lanterns
§ 4-501 BUILDING OFFICIAL; AUTHORITY.
   The Building Inspector or his or her authorized designee shall be
responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article and the
appointment of an Inspector in accordance with §§
4-204 to
4-209, which apply in a like manner to this article.
§ 4-502 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall move, haul or transport any house,
building, derrick or other structure of the height, when loaded for movement,
of 16 feet or more from the surface of the highway, road, street or alley, or a
width of eight feet or more, or which cannot be moved at a speed of four mph or
faster upon, across or over any street, alley or sidewalk in this city, without
first obtaining a permit therefor.
(K.S.A. 17-1914)
§ 4-503 SAME; APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   All applications for permits required under the provisions of this article
shall be made in writing to the City Clerk specifying the day and hour said
moving is to commence and the route through the city’s streets over which the
house, building, derrick or other structure shall be moved and stating whether
it will be necessary to cut and move, raise or in any way interfere with any
wires, cables or other aerial equipment of any public or municipally owned
utility, and if so, the application shall also state the name of the public or
municipally owned utility, and the time and location that the applicant’s
moving operations shall necessitate the cutting, moving, raising or otherwise
interfering with such aerial facilities.
(K.S.A. 17-1915)
§ 4-504 SAME; BOND, INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of any person, at the time of making application
for a permit as provided in this article, to give a good and sufficient surety
bond to the city, to be approved by the governing body, indemnifying the city
against any loss or damage resulting from the failure of any such person to
comply with the provisions of this article or for any damage or injury caused
in moving any such house or structure. The bond herein shall be in the sum of
$5,000, or cash may be deposited in lieu of such surety bond.
   (b)   A public liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state, in the amount of $100,000 per person,
$300,000 per accident as to personal injury and $50,000 property damage, may be
permitted in lieu of a bond.
§ 4-505 SAME; FEE.
   Before any permit to move any house or structure is given under the
provisions of this article, the applicant shall pay a fee of not less than $5
to the City Clerk, plus the additional cost for the time for any city crews
involved in such moving.
§ 4-506 CONTRACTOR; LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   The provisions of §§
4-219 to
4-225 shall apply in a like manner to this article.
§ 4-507 ROUTE; DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The City Clerk shall, upon filing of the above application, refer the same
to the Chief Building Official or his or her authorized designee to check the
proposed route and determine if it is practical to move such house or other
structure over the route proposed. If it shall appear that such route is not
practical and another route may be used equally well with less danger to street
and travel, then he or she may designate such other route as the one to be used
and shall notify the applicant of the same. The Building Official may also
require the planking of any street, bridge or culvert or any part thereof to
prevent damage thereto. It shall also be the duty of the Chief Building
Official or his or her authorized designee to inspect the progress of moving
any house or other structure to see that the same is being moved in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
§ 4-508 NOTICE TO OWNERS.
   (a)   Upon issuance of a moving permit, the applicant shall give not less
than 15 days’ written notice to any person owning or operating any wires,
cables or other aerial equipment along the proposed route of the intent to move
the structure, giving the time and location that the applicant’s moving
operation shall necessitate the cutting, moving, raising or interfering of any
wires, cables or other aerial equipment.
   (b)   The notice provision of division (a) above shall not apply where the
person owning or operating any wires, cables or other aerial equipment has
waived their right to advance notice.
   (c)   Should the moving operation be delayed, the applicant shall give the
owner or his or her agent not less than 24 hours’ advance notice of the actual
operation.
(K.S.A. 17-1916)
§ 4-509 DUTY OF OWNERS.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the person or the city owning or operating
such poles or wires, after service of notice as provided herein, to furnish a
competent lineman or workers to remove such poles, or raise or cut such wires,
cables or other aerial equipment, as will be necessary to facilitate the moving
of such house or structure. The necessary expense which is incurred thereby
shall be paid by the holder of the moving permit.
   (b)   The owner of any wires, cables or other aerial equipment, after
service of notice as provided in §
4-508, shall be liable to the permit holder for damages in an amount not to
exceed $100 per day for each day the owner shall fail or refuse to accommodate
the permit holder’s moving operations.
(K.S.A. 17-1917)
§ 4-510 INTERFERING WITH POLES; WIRES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in moving any house or other
structure to raise, cut or in any way interfere with any wires, or poles
bearing wires, or any other aerial equipment.
(K.S.A. 17-1918)
§ 4-511 DISPLAY OF LANTERNS.
   It shall be the duty of any person moving any of the structures mentioned in
this article upon or across any street, alley or sidewalk or other public place
in this city to display red lanterns thereon in such a manner as to show the
extreme height and width thereof from sunset to sunrise.
ARTICLE 6: DANGEROUS AND UNFIT STRUCTURES
Section
   
4-601   Purpose
   
4-602   Definitions
   
4-603   Enforcing officer; duties
   
4-604   Procedure; petition
   
4-605   Same; notice
   
4-606   Same; publication
   
4-607   Same; hearing, order
   
4-608   Duty of owner
   
4-609   Same; failure to comply
   
4-610   Same; make site safe
   
4-611   Assessment of costs
   
4-612   Immediate hazard
   
4-613   Appeals from order
   
4-614   Scope of article
§ 4-601 PURPOSE.
   The governing body has found that there exists within the corporate limits
of the city structures which are unfit for human use or habitation because of
dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire or accidents, structural
defects or other conditions which render such structures unsafe, unsanitary or
otherwise inimical to the general welfare of the city, or conditions which
provide a general blight upon the neighborhood or surrounding properties. It is
hereby deemed necessary by the governing body to require or cause the repair,
closing or demolition or removal of such structures as provided in this
article.
(K.S.A. 12-1751)
§ 4-602 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENFORCING OFFICER. The Building Inspector or his or her authorized
representative.
   STRUCTURE. Any building, wall or other structure.
(K.S.A. 12-1750)
§ 4-603 ENFORCING OFFICER; DUTIES.
   The enforcing officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may be
necessary to carry out the purposes of this article, including the following:
   (a)   Inspect any structure which appears to be unsafe, dangerous or unfit
for human habitation;
   (b)   Have authority to enter upon premises at reasonable hours for the
purpose of making such inspections. Entry shall be made so as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to any person in possession of the structure. If
entry is denied, the enforcing officer may seek an order for this purpose from
a court of competent jurisdiction;
   (c)   Report all structures which he or she believes to be dangerous, unsafe
or unfit for human habitation to the governing body; and
   (d)   Receive petitions as provided in this article.
§ 4-604 PROCEDURE; PETITION.
   Whenever a petition is filed with the enforcing officer by at least five
residents charging that any structure is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human
habitation, or whenever it appears to the enforcing officer on his or her own
motion that any structure is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human habitation,
he or she shall, if his or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for
such charges, report such findings to the governing body. Such findings shall
be in writing and describe the property and where it is located.
(K.S.A. 12-1752)
§ 4-605 SAME; NOTICE.
   The governing body, upon receiving a report as provided in §
4-604, shall by resolution fix a time and place at which the owner, the owner’s
agent, any lienholders of record and any occupant of the structure may appear
and show cause why the structure should not be condemned and ordered repaired
or demolished.
(K.S.A. 12-1752)
§ 4-606 SAME; PUBLICATION.
   (a)   The resolution shall be published once each week for two consecutive
weeks and on the same day of each week. At least 30 days shall elapse between
the last publication and the date set for the hearing.
   (b)   A copy of the resolution shall be mailed by certified mail within
three days after its first publication to each owner, agent, lienholder and
occupant at the last known place of residence and shall be marked “deliver to
addressee only.”
(K.S.A. 12-1752)
§ 4-607 SAME; HEARING, ORDER.
   If, after notice and hearing, the governing body determines that the
structure under consideration is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human use or
habitation, it shall state in writing its findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall cause the resolution to be published once in the
official city newspaper and a copy mailed to the owners, agents, lienholders of
record and occupants in the same manner provided for the notice of hearing. The
resolution shall fix a reasonable time within which the repair or removal of
such structure shall be commenced and a statement that if the owner of such
structure fails to commence the repair or removal of such structure within the
time stated or fails to diligently prosecute the same until the work is
completed, the governing body will cause the structure to be razed and removed.
(K.S.A. 12-1753)
§ 4-608 DUTY OF OWNER.
   Whenever any structure within the city shall be found to be dangerous,
unsafe or unfit for human use or habitation, it shall be the duty and
obligation of the owner of the property to render the same secure and safe, or
to remove the same.
§ 4-609 SAME; FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (a)   If, within the time specified in the order, the owner fails to comply
with the order to repair, alter, improve or vacate the structure, the enforcing
officer may cause the structure to be repaired, altered, improved or vacated
and closed.
   (b)   If, within the time specified in the order, the owner fails to comply
with the order to remove or demolish the structure, the enforcing officer may
cause the structure to be removed and demolished.
(K.S.A. 12-1755)
§ 4-610 SAME; MAKE SITE SAFE.
   Upon removal of any structure, the owner shall fill any basement or other
excavation located upon the premises and take any other action necessary to
leave the premises in a safe condition. If the owner fails to take such action,
the enforcing officer may proceed to make the site safe.
(K.S.A. 12-1754)
§ 4-611 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   (a)   The cost to the city of any repairs, alterations, improvements,
vacating, removal or demolition by the enforcing officer, including making the
site safe, shall be reported to the City Clerk.
   (b)   The city shall give notice to the owner of the structure by restricted
mail of the cost of removing the structure and making the premises safe and
secure. The notice shall also state that payment of the cost is due and payable
within 30 days following receipt of the notice.
   (c)   If the costs remain unpaid after 30 days following receipt of notice,
the City Clerk may sell any salvage from the structure and apply the proceeds,
or any necessary portion thereof, to pay the cost of removing the structure and
making the site safe. Any proceeds in excess of that required to recover the
costs shall be paid to the owner of the premises upon which the structure was
located.
   (d)   If there is no salvageable material or if the proceeds from the sale
of salvage, or from the proceeds of any insurance policy in which the city has
created a lien pursuant to K.S.A. 40-3901 et seq., and amendments thereto, are
insufficient to recover the above-stated costs, the balance shall be collected
in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, or shall be
assessed as special assessments against the lot or parcel of land on which the
structure was located, and the City Clerk, at the time of certifying other city
taxes, shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs to the County Clerk, and
who shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the county against such lot or
parcel of land, and it shall be collected by the County Treasurer and paid to
the city as other city taxes are collected and paid. The city may pursue
collection both by levying a special assessment and in the manner provided by
K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, but only until the full cost and
applicable interest has been paid in full.
   (e)   If there is no salvage material, or if the monies received from the
sale of salvage or from the proceeds of any insurance policy in which the city
has created a lien pursuant to K.S.A. 40-3901 et seq., and amendments thereto,
are insufficient to pay the costs of the work and the costs of providing
notice, such costs, or any portion thereof, in excess of that received from the
sale of salvage or any insurance proceeds may be financed, until the costs are
paid, out of the General Fund or by the issuance of no-fund warrants.
(K.S.A. 12-1755)
§ 4-612 IMMEDIATE HAZARD.
   When, in the opinion of the governing body, any structure is in such
condition as to constitute an immediate hazard requiring immediate action to
protect the public, the governing body may direct the enforcing officer to
erect barricades or cause the property to be vacated, taken down, repaired,
shored or otherwise made safe without delay. Such action may be taken without
prior notice to or hearing of the owners, agents, lienholders and occupants.
The cost of any action under this section shall be assessed against the
property as provided in §
4-611.
(K.S.A. 12-1756)
§ 4-613 APPEALS FROM ORDER.
   Any person affected by an order issued by the governing body under this
article may, within 30 days following service of the order, petition the
District Court of the county in which the structure is located for an
injunction restraining the enforcing officer from carrying out the provisions
of the order pending final disposition of the case.
§ 4-614 SCOPE OF ARTICLE.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of its
charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations
thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and
supplemental to the powers conferred by the Constitution, and any other law or
ordinance. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any
way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise, or to exercise those
powers granted specifically by K.S.A. 12-1750 to 12-1756.
ARTICLE 7: NUMBERING BUSINESSES, DWELLINGS AND CERTAIN OTHER PLACES
Section
   
4-701   Buildings to be numbered
   
4-702   Method of numbering
   
4-703   Owner to number
§ 4-701 BUILDINGS TO BE NUMBERED.
   In order to add to the efficiency of the operation of the Sumner County 911
Preparedness System within the city, all business houses, dwelling houses and
all other places which are inhabited or used for the carrying on of any
business or occupation within the city shall be numbered in plain figures, not
less than three inches in height, placed on the front thereof so as to be
easily read and identifiable from the street line on which the building or
structure is located.
(Ord. 198, passed - -)
§ 4-702 METHOD OF NUMBERING.
   Numbers provided for in §
4-701 shall be determined and made as follows.
   (a)   Structures and buildings upon streets and avenues running east and
west shall be numbered each way from Sumner Street so as to have odd numbers on
the north side of the streets and even numbers on the south side of the
streets, commencing with 100 and adding 100 for each successive block.
   (b)   Structures and buildings upon streets running north and south shall be
numbered each way from Main Street so as to have even numbers on the east side
of the streets and odd numbers on the west side of the streets, commencing with
100 and adding 100 for each successive block.
(Ord. 198, passed - -)
§ 4-703 OWNER TO NUMBER.
   (a)   The owners of structures and/or buildings in the city that are
required to be numbered by the provisions of this article shall number or cause
the same to be numbered in the manner set forth in this article. Newly
constructed structures or buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the
provisions of this article within ten days after the occupation of the
structure or building.
   (b)   If any owner shall fail to comply with the provisions of this article,
the City Superintendent shall number the structures or buildings in conformity
with this article and shall charge the expense thereof to the property so
numbered, the same to be collected in the same manner as repairs on sidewalks.
(Ord. 198, passed - -)
ARTICLE 8: INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE
Section
   
4-801   Incorporating the 2015 International Residential Code
§ 4-801 INCORPORATING THE 2015 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   There is hereby incorporated by reference, for the purpose of regulating and
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair or maintenance of one- and two-family
dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories in height in the city;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
other provisions provided for within, the 2015 Edition of the International
Residential Code, including the appendix chapters.
(Ord. 336, passed 10-6-2020)
ARTICLE 9: VACANT BUILDINGS
Section
   
4-901   Purpose
   
4-902   Definitions
   
4-903   Registration and maintenance requirements; fees
   
4-904   Marketing requirements; exemption
   
4-905   Penalties; procedures
   
4-906   Annual inspection requirement for structures or properties classified
as chronic
§ 4-901 PURPOSE.
   Recognizing that vacant buildings and properties contribute to blight in
both residential and nonresidential areas, discourage economic development and
hinders appreciation of property values, endanger public health and safety,
attract criminal activity, and create fire hazards, it is the responsibility of
property owners to prevent buildings from becoming a burden to the neighborhood
and community and a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare.
Maintenance of the public health, safety, and welfare thus requires the city to
maintain an accurate registration of all vacant buildings and properties.
(Ord. 355, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 4-902 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. A building, accessory structure, mobile or modular structure, or
other structure adapted to permanent occupancy for residential, commercial or
industrial purposes.
   CITY. The City of Oxford, Kansas.
   CHRONIC VACANCY. Any building or property vacant one year after initial
registration.
   COMMERCIAL. Any nonresidential structure or property in an area that is
zoned commercial.
   INDUSTRIAL. Any nonresidential structure or property in an area that is
zoned industrial.
   OWNER. The person, persons or entity identified as the owner of the parcel
with the Sumner County Appraiser’s Office, and any agent identified by a
nonresident owner.
   RESIDENTIAL. Any residential structure or property in an area that is zoned
residential.
   UNSECURED. That access to the building may be obtained through open,
unlocked, broken or missing doors or windows of such building.
   VACANT BUILDING. A building or property that is unattended or unoccupied and
is not actively used as a place of residence or business, or the building is
frequently open or unsecured so that unauthorized admittance may be gained
without damaging any portion of the property. A residential, commercial or
industrial building or property will be considered VACANT when found to be in
the above condition for more than 12 months and subject to the registration
requirements found in §
4-903.
(Ord. 355, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 4-903 REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS; FEES.
   (a)   The owner of a vacant building or property must register the building
with the city designated officer within 20 days of written notice provided to
the owner or the owner’s resident agent of the existence of the vacant
building. Such notice shall be served on the owner or resident agent by
personal service or by return receipt requested, which may be affected by
certified mail, priority mail, commercial courier service, overnight delivery
service, or other reliable personal delivery service. If the owner is a
nonresident of the city, such notice shall be sent by return receipt delivery,
to the last known address of the owner.
   (b)   The city shall also accept notifications by mail or electronic
transmissions of a building or property that meets the definition of a vacant
building or property, as defined in §
4-902, and shall pursue registration of said building or property in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
   (c)   The required registration shall be submitted on the form provided by
the city or available on the city’s website, which form shall include the name,
current mailing address, phone number, email address and any other contact
information of the owner; the names and addresses of all known lien holders and
all other parties with a legal or equitable interest in the building; the
common address of the building, as well as the tax map, map block, parcel tax
identification and sale or rental price. The form shall also include the period
of time the vacant building is expected to remain vacant, and a detailed plan
and timetable for either:
      (1)   Returning the vacant building or property to appropriate occupancy
or use; or
      (2)   Marketing the property pursuant to the requirements of division (d)
below.
   (d)   Pursuant to the registration requirements of this division (d), for
every subsequent year a building remains vacant beyond the initial
registration, the owner of the vacant building must:
      (1)   Re-register the building or property, including appropriate fees;
and
      (2)   Submit an updated plan for either returning the vacant building or
property to appropriate occupancy or use, or marketing thereof.
   (e)   If the owner of the vacant building does not reside in Sumner County
for at least six months a year, then he, she or they must provide the
information for a resident agent with authority to act with respect to the
property, including name, current mailing address, phone number, email address
and any other contact information of the owner’s agent.
   (f)   Any subsequent owner of a vacant building or property must register or
re-register the building with the city designated officer within 30 days of any
transfer of any ownership interest in the vacant building.
   (g)   The owner of a vacant building or property must keep the building and
any adjoining property secure, safe and maintained in compliance with all
federal, state and local laws.
   (h)   A registration fee in accordance with the city’s master fee schedule
shall be collected by the city designated officer at the time of registration
or re-registration. At the time of adoption of this article, the fee shall
start at $20.
(Ord. 355, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 4-904 MARKETING REQUIREMENTS; EXEMPTION.
   The following vacant buildings or properties shall be exempt from the
registration fees required by §
4-903(h), but must still comply with all other registration requirements under
§
4-903:
   (a)   All buildings and properties which are actively marketed as “for rent”
in a newspaper or in a recognized online website listing at a fair market value
rental rate based upon market rental rates for comparable properties. It is the
obligation of the vacant building owner to produce evidence of active marketing
to claim this exemption. In the event that active rental marketing ceases, the
vacant building in question shall be subject to the registration fees provided
for in §
4-903(h), which shall immediately become due and owing to the city;
   (b)   All buildings or properties which are being actively marketed as “for
sale” by a licensed real estate broker or by the owner and advertised as such
in a newspaper or listed on a recognized online website. The vacant building
owner has the obligation to produce evidence of active marketing in order to
obtain this exemption. In the event that the active “for sale” marketing
ceases, the vacant building in question shall be subject to the registration
fees provided for above and shall immediately become due and owing to the city;
   (c)   Any vacant residential building for which the owner executes a valid
affidavit on a form provided by the city attesting that the owner intends to
resume occupancy of the vacant building as a dwelling within 180 days. Failure
to actually resume use of the vacant building as a dwelling within 180 days
will result in the imposition of the registration fee that was exempted under
this section; and
   (d)   An owner who acquires a vacant building or property for which the
registration fee has already been paid for the calendar year period shall
register the change of ownership with the city, but is not liable for an
additional registration fee for that calendar year.
(Ord. 355, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 4-905 PENALTIES; PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Any owner who fails to register a vacant building under this article,
as required by §
4-903, may be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $50.
   (b)   If the building continues to meet the definition of a vacant building
for a period of 90 calendar days beyond the required registration or re-
registration date, and the owner fails to register or re-register such
building, the city designated officer may assess a penalty of $100 for each 90-
calendar-day period the building continues to be unregistered. At no time may
the amount of the assessment exceed $400 per building in a calendar year.
   (c)   If a building or property is vacant more than one year after initial
registration, it may be classified as a chronic vacancy, as defined in §
4-902, and shall be subject to a fee of $250 per year for residential and $500
per year for commercial or industrial with a 10% annual increase for each
category. Funds derived from said fee shall be used to offset the city’s cost
of annual inspections and incentives as found in §
4-903.
   (d)   All penalties assessed shall be payable directly to the city.
   (e)   Any and all civil penalties assessed under this section shall be
billed to the owner or other responsible party. Failure or refusal to pay any
and all such penalties shall permit the city to pursue any and all available
legal remedies for the enforcement and collection of such penalties, including,
but not limited to, filing a lawsuit to seek recovery of such penalties and/or
injunctive relief, abatement of nuisances in accordance with the code, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding. The city shall be entitled to recover
reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs of collection from the property owner in
the event that it prevails in a lawsuit hereunder.
   (f)   Upon failure to register a vacant building, as required by § 4-9032, a
notice of registration penalty may be issued to the owner.
      (1)   A separate notice shall be issued for each subsequent penalty that
may be assessed pursuant to §
4-905.
      (2)   The notice shall be served upon the owner by return receipt
delivery or personal service.
      (3)   This section in no way limits the penalties, actions or abatement
procedures which may be undertaken by the city for a violation of any other
ordinance or provision of the city code or any other statute or law.
(Ord. 355, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 4-906 ANNUAL INSPECTION REQUIREMENT FOR STRUCTURES OR PROPERTIES CLASSIFIED
AS CHRONIC.
   (a)   The city’s designated officer or their appointee may inspect or cause
to be inspected any premises in the city for the purposes of enforcing and
assuring compliance with the provisions of this article and safeguarding the
health, safety and welfare of the general public. Upon the request of the city
designated officer, an owner shall provide access to all interior portions of
any vacant building or suspected vacant building in order to permit a complete
inspection.
   (b)   The city’s designated officer is authorized to enter and inspect, or
cause to be inspected, all vacant buildings and premises for the purpose of
conducting an annual code compliance inspection.
(Ord. 355, passed 8-19-2025)
CHAPTER V: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Article
      
1.   GENERAL REGULATIONS AND LICENSES
      
2.   SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL REGULATIONS AND LICENSES
Section
   
5-101   License required
   
5-102   Application for license
   
5-103   Not assignable or transferable
   
5-104   License period; duration
   
5-105   Exemption of farmers
   
5-106   Reserved
   
5-107   Same; when payable; time period
   
5-108   Payment of fees; receipt
   
5-109   Contents of license
   
5-110   Record
   
5-111   Display of license
§ 5-101 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as
principal or agent or employee, to conduct, pursue, carry on or operate any
calling, trade, profession or occupation in the city without first paying the
license fee prescribed and procuring such a license from the City Clerk
whenever the procuring of the license is required by the city.
§ 5-102 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (a)   Every person, firm or corporation desiring to do business in the city
shall apply to the City Clerk for a license to operate such business, and in
the case of new licenses, shall appear before the governing body before the
commencement of business and issuance of the license.
   (b)   Upon approval by the governing body, the City Clerk shall issue to the
applicant a license that shall be signed by the City Clerk.
   (c)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to pay over the amount so
collected on each license issued to the City Treasurer of the city.
§ 5-103 NOT ASSIGNABLE OR TRANSFERABLE.
   (a)   No license granted by the city shall be assignable or transferable,
nor shall such license authorize any person to do business or act under it but
the person named therein, nor at more than one place.
   (b)   There shall be no refunds except as specifically provided.
§ 5-104 LICENSE PERIOD; DURATION.
   Unless otherwise provided, licenses shall commence and endure from January 1
and expire on December 31 of the same year, except that all semi-annual
licenses issued as provided in this chapter shall expire on June 30 or December
31 next following the date of their issuance.
§ 5-105 EXEMPTION OF FARMERS.
   No producer or grower, or his or her agents or employees, selling in the
city farm or garden products or fruits grown by him or her in the state shall
be required to pay any license fee or occupation tax imposed by any law of this
city, and he or she, his or her agents or employees, are hereby exempt from the
payment of any such fees or taxes or the securing of a license.
(K.S.A. 12-1617)
§ 5-106 RESERVED.
§ 5-107 SAME; WHEN PAYABLE; TIME PERIOD.
   (a)   All license fees shall be due and payable before the commencement of a
trade, occupation, business or profession in which license fees are required.
   (b)   No license shall be issued until the fee is paid.
   (c)   Licenses shall be renewed on or before the expiration date of the
current licenses.
   (d)   If the license prescribed is for an annual, quarterly, monthly, weekly
or daily period, the license shall not be issued for any part or fraction of
the year, quarter, month, week or day, respectively.
   (e)   The license for a day shall expire at midnight.
§ 5-108 PAYMENT OF FEES; RECEIPT.
   The City Clerk shall, upon payment of any license fee specified, give a
receipt therefor stating the amount paid, the nature of the licenses issued,
for what time, and to whom issued, and if possible, the exact location where
the business is to be carried on and the kind of business.
§ 5-109 CONTENTS OF LICENSE.
   Unless otherwise provided, all licenses shall be dated on the date of their
issue, and shall state the name of the licensee, the kind of business he or she
desires to engage in and the location thereof, the amount paid and time the
license shall expire; and the person having such license shall be authorized to
carry on the business therein named.
§ 5-110 RECORD.
   The City Clerk shall keep a record of the name of each person licensed, his
or her address, the date of the license, the purpose in which it is granted,
the amount paid therefor and the time the same shall expire, and within 24
hours after any license has expired, the City Clerk shall notify the Chief of
Police of such expiration unless the same shall have been renewed.
§ 5-111 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   All persons doing business in a permanent location are required to have
their license conspicuously displayed in their place of business, and all
persons to whom licenses are issued not having a permanent place of business
are required to carry their licenses with them, and any licensee shall present
the license for inspection when requested to do so by any citizen or officer of
the city.
ARTICLE 2: SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS
Section
   
5-201   Definitions
   
5-202   License required
   
5-203   Same; application required
   
5-204   Issuance; county residents
   
5-205   Same; investigation and issuance; non-county resident
   
5-206   Same; time limits and exemptions
   
5-207   Renewal
   
5-208   Denial, revocation or suspension of license; notice
   
5-209   Appeal to governing body
   
5-210   Regulations
   
5-211   Use of streets and sidewalks
   
5-212   Disturbing the peace
§ 5-201 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANVASSER or SOLICITOR. Any individual, whether a resident of the city or
not, whose business is mainly or principally carried on by traveling, either by
foot, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to
place, from house to house or from street to street, taking or attempting to
take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise; personal property of
any nature whatsoever for future delivery; or for services to be furnished or
performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes
for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he or she is
collecting advance payments on such sales or not. Such definition shall include
any person who, for himself, herself or for another person, hires, leases, uses
or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room,
lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the sole
purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
   PEDDLER. Any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by
foot, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place,
from house to house or from street to street, carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden
trucks, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale,
or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without
traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a
wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad boxcar or other vehicle or conveyance, and
further provided that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction
makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the
provisions of this article shall be deemed a PEDDLER.
   RESIDENCE. Includes every separate living unit occupied for residential
purposes by one or more persons contained within any type of building or
structure.
   SOLICITING. Includes any one or more of the following activities:
      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs or services of any kind, character or description
whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever;
      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase
of insurance of any type, kind or character; or
      (3)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication.
   STREET SALESPERSON. Any person engaged in any manner in selling merchandise
of any kind from a vehicle or stand temporarily located on the public streets
or sidewalks of this city.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT or ITINERANT VENDOR. Any person,
whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city
or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods,
wares and merchandise within such city, and who, in furtherance of such
purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor
vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar or boat, public room in a hotel, lodging house,
apartment or shop, or any street, alley or other place within the city, for the
exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or
at public auction. Such definition shall not be construed to include any person
who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock but
exhibits samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery
only. The person so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the
provisions of this article merely by reason of associating temporarily with any
local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient
business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer,
trader, merchant or auctioneer.
§ 5-202 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the activities
defined in the preceding sections of this article within the corporate limits
of the city without then having an unrevoked and unexpired license therefor in
his or her possession and issued by the City Clerk.
   (b)   The governing body may waive the license requirements of this section
for any person, firm or corporation exempt from the payment of a license fee
under §
5-206.
§ 5-203 SAME; APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   Before the City Clerk may issue any license required by this article, he or
she shall require a sworn application in writing, prepared in duplicate, on a
form to be supplied by the City Clerk that shall give the following
information:
   (a)   Name and description of applicant;
   (b)   Permanent home address and full local address of applicant;
   (c)   Identification of applicant, including driver’s license number, date
of birth, expiration date of license and description of applicant;
   (d)   Identification of vehicle used by applicant, including license
therefor used by applicant in conducting his or her business;
   (e)   A brief description of the nature of the business to be carried on or
the goods to be sold and the length of time such applicant has been engaged in
the business;
   (f)   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing such relationship, including the authority by the
employer authorizing the applicant to represent the employer in conducting
business;
   (g)   The length of time that business is proposed to be carried on;
   (h)   The place where services are to be performed or where the goods or
property proposed to be sold or orders taken for the sale thereof are
manufactured or produced; where such goods or products are located at the time
the application is filed; and the proposed method of delivery;
   (i)   A photograph of the applicant, taken within 90 days prior to the date
of making application, which picture shall be at least two inches by two
inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinguishing manner; or in lieu thereof, the fingerprints of the applicant
may be taken by the Chief of Police and filed with the application;
   (j)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has within two years
prior to the date of the application been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor
(other than minor traffic violations) or violation of any municipal law
regulating peddlers, solicitors or canvassers; and giving the nature of the
offenses, the punishment assessed therefor, if any, and the city and state
where conviction occurred; and
   (k)   The applicant’s state sales tax number.
§ 5-204 ISSUANCE; COUNTY RESIDENTS.
   (a)   Except as provided in §
5-208, if the applicant is a current resident of the county, upon receipt of an
application for a license and payment of the license fee, the City Clerk shall
issue the license. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the
issuing officer and shall show the name and address of the licensee, the date
of issuance, the length of time the license shall be operative and the nature
of the business involved. The City Clerk shall keep a permanent record of all
such licenses issued and submit a copy of such license to the Chief of Police.
The licensee shall carry the license certificate at all times.
   (b)   If the applicant is not a current resident of the county, a license
will not be issued until after investigation.
§ 5-205 SAME; INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE; NON-COUNTY RESIDENT.
   (a)   Upon receipt of the above application from an applicant who is not a
current resident of the county, the City Clerk shall refer the same to the
Chief of Police, who shall cause an investigation of the facts stated therein
to be made within not to exceed five days.
   (b)   If, as a result of the investigation, the applicant’s character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or the facts stated
therein to be untrue, the Chief of Police shall endorse on such application his
or her findings and endorse his or her disapproval of the application and the
reasons for the same and shall return the application to the City Clerk, who
then shall notify the applicant that his or her application is disapproved and
that no license will be issued.
   (c)   If, however, the investigation of such application discloses that the
character and business responsibility and the facts stated in the application
are satisfactory and true, the Chief of Police shall endorse his or her
findings and approval on the application and return the same to the City Clerk,
who shall, upon payment of the license and investigation fees prescribed, issue
a license to the applicant to engage in the business described in the
application. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing
officer and shall show the name and address of the licensee, the date of
issuance and length of time the license shall be operative and the nature of
the business involved. The City Clerk shall keep a permanent record of all such
licenses issued and submit a copy of such license to the Chief of Police. The
licensee shall carry the license certificate at all times.
§ 5-206 SAME; TIME LIMITS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   Any individual engaged in a business activity set forth by this
article shall make application for a license upon such forms as are required by
the City Clerk. The license fee shall be $25 for all individuals whose business
is carried out at a stationary location. STATIONARY, as used in this section,
includes business carried out by individuals not engaged in door-to-door sales.
The license fee shall be $100 for all other solicitors, vendors, canvassers and
peddlers.
   (b)   Any such license granted upon application as required hereinabove
shall expire five days from the date of issuance. Solicitation or sales by any
peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall be conducted only between the hours of 8:
00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
   (c)   No license fee shall be required of:
      (1)   Any person selling products of the farm or orchard actually
produced by the seller; and
      (2)   Any businesses, trades or occupations which are part of fairs or
celebrations sponsored by the city or any other governmental subdivision or the
state, or when part or all of the expenses of the fairs or celebrations are
paid for by the city or any other governmental subdivision or the state.
(Ord. 325, passed 5-7-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see K.S.A. 12-1617
§ 5-207 RENEWAL.
   All licenses issued may be subject to renewal upon a showing of compliance.
The City Clerk shall not renew or extend any license where there is
satisfactory evidence of any grounds for the suspension or revocation of any
prior license, and the applicant shall be required to apply for a license as in
the case of an original license.
(Ord. 325, passed 5-7-2019)
§ 5-208 DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; NOTICE.
   The City Clerk or Chief of Police may deny any application or may revoke or
suspend any license issued under this article for any of the following causes:
   (a)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license;
   (b)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business;
   (c)   Any violation of this article;
   (d)   Conducting a business, as defined in §
5-201, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the city. Notice of the denial, revocation or suspension of a license shall be
given in writing to the applicant or mailed to his or her last known address,
and the City Clerk shall set forth the grounds of such denial, revocation or
suspension; or
   (e)   Conviction of the crime of theft, larceny, fraud, embezzlement or any
felony within two years prior to the application date.
(Ord. 325, passed 5-7-2019)
§ 5-209 APPEAL TO GOVERNING BODY.
   (a)   Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or City
Clerk in the denial of an application or revocation or suspension of a license,
as provided in this article, shall have a right of appeal to the governing
body.
   (b)   Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk within 14
days after notice of revocation, suspension or denial of the license has been
given to or mailed to such applicant’s last known address and setting forth the
grounds for appeal.
   (c)   The governing body shall set a time and place for a hearing on such
appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same
manner as provided herein for notice of denial, revocation or suspension.
   (d)   The decision and order of the governing body on such appeal shall be
final and conclusive.
(Ord. 325, passed 5-7-2019)
§ 5-210 REGULATIONS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to make false or fraudulent
statements concerning the quality or nature of his or her goods, wares and
merchandise for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same.
   (b)   Licensees are required to exhibit their license at the request of any
person to whom they attempt to sell their goods, wares and merchandise or take
orders for future delivery of the same.
(Ord. 325, passed 5-7-2019)
§ 5-211 USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   Except when authorized in writing by the City Clerk, no peddler, solicitor
or canvasser or any other person shall have the exclusive right to any location
in the public streets for the purpose of selling or soliciting sales, nor shall
any person be permitted a stationary location in the public street, nor shall
any person be permitted to operate in the sidewalks and streets within the fire
limits of the city or any congested area where his or her operations might
impede or inconvenience the public.
(Ord. 325, passed 5-7-2019)
§ 5-212 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   Except when authorized in writing by the City Clerk, no licensee, nor any
person on his or her behalf, shall use any sound device, including any loud-
speaking radio or sound-amplifying system, upon any of the streets, alleys,
parks or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the
city where sound of sufficient volume is entitled or produced therefrom to be
capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or
other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares
or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.
(Ord. 325, passed 5-7-2019)
CHAPTER VI: ELECTIONS
   Article
      
1.   CITY ELECTIONS
ARTICLE 1: CITY ELECTIONS
Section
   
6-101   Conduct of election
   
6-102   Hours of voting
   
6-103   Commencement of terms of office; oath of office
   
6-104   Governing body
§ 6-101 CONDUCT OF ELECTION.
   The election of city officials shall be conducted in all respects as
provided by the laws of the state governing the holding of city elections.
(K.S.A. 25-2101 et seq.)
§ 6-102 HOURS OF VOTING.
   At all city elections, the polls shall be open at 7:00 a.m. and close at 7:
00 p.m. unless different hours are set and publicly announced by the County
Election Officer.
(K.S.A. 25-106, 25-2111)
§ 6-103 COMMENCEMENT OF TERMS OF OFFICE; OATH OF OFFICE.
   (a)   (1)   The term of office shall commence on a date established by
resolution of the city on or after December 1 following the certification of
the election and no later than the second Monday in January following
certification of the election by the County Election Officer.
      (2)   If a date is not established by resolution, the term shall begin on
the second Monday in January.
   (b)   Every person elected or appointed to city office, before entering upon
the duties of such office, shall take and subscribe an oath or affirmation as
specified in K.S.A. 54-106, and amendments thereto, and every such oath or
affirmation shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(K.S.A. 25-2120)
§ 6-104 GOVERNING BODY.
   (a)   The governing body shall consist of a Mayor and five Councilmembers,
to be elected to terms as set forth herein. The Mayor and Councilmembers shall
be residents and qualified electors of the city.
   (b)   General elections shall take place on the Tuesday succeeding the first
Monday in November 2017. Succeeding elections will be held every two years for
all such governing body positions whose terms have expired. A Mayor and two
Councilmembers shall be elected at one election, and the remaining three
Councilmembers shall be elected at the succeeding election. The Mayor and all
Councilmembers shall have four-year terms.
   (c)   In case of a vacancy in the Council occurring by reason of
resignation, death or removal from office or from the city, the Mayor, by and
with the advice and consent of the remaining Councilmembers, shall appoint an
elector to fill the vacancy until the next election for that office. In case
any person elected as a Councilmember neglects or refuses to qualify withing 30
days after election, the Councilmember shall be deemed to have refused to
accept the office and a vacancy shall exist. The Mayor may, with the consent of
the remaining Councilmembers, appoint a suitable elector to fill the vacancy.
   (d)   In case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the President of the
Council shall become Mayor until the next regular election for that office, and
a vacancy shall occur in the office of the Councilmember becoming Mayor.
   (e)   Any person desiring to become a candidate for city office elected at
large shall file with the County Election Officer before the filing deadline
established in K.S.A. 25-205, and amendments thereto, a declaration of
candidacy on a form furnished by the County Election Officer as specified by
the Secretary of State. The nomination petition must be signed by 30 qualified
electors of the city.
(C.O. No. 1, passed - -; C.O. No. 12, passed 2-2-2016)
CHAPTER VII: FIRE
   Article
      
1.   RESERVED
      
2.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
3.   FIREWORKS
      
4.   FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS, LP GASES, EXPLOSIVES
ARTICLE 1: RESERVED
ARTICLE 2: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
   
7-201   International Fire Code incorporated
   
7-202   Same; enforcement
   
7-203   Same; amendments
   
7-204   Open burning
   
7-205   Accumulation of rubbish and trash
   
7-206   Stacking of hay or straw
   
7-207   Keeping of packing materials
   
7-208   Storage of ashes
   
7-209   Filling gasoline tanks of motor vehicles
   
7-210   Fire hazards generally
   
7-211   Same; inspections to discover
   
7-212   Abatement of fire hazards; issuing order
   
7-213   Same; service of order; records
§ 7-201 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE INCORPORATED.
   There is hereby adopted by the governing body of the city, for the purpose
of prescribing regulations, governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion, that certain code and standards known as the
International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, including all the appendix chapters,
published by the International Code Council; one copy shall be filed in the
office of the Clerk of the city, and the same are hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on
which this article shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the city.
(Ord. 336, passed 10-6-2020)
§ 7-202 SAME; ENFORCEMENT.
   The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the Chief of the Rural Township
Fire Department.
§ 7-203 SAME; AMENDMENTS.
   (a)   Wherever the word MUNICIPALITY is used in the code hereby adopted, it
shall be held to mean the City of Oxford.
   (b)   All sections of the International Fire Code relating to fireworks are
hereby deleted in their entirety.
§ 7-204 OPEN BURNING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste, as that term is
defined in §
15-501, within the corporate limits of the city, and the burning of materials
other than solid waste in the city shall be unlawful.
§ 7-205 ACCUMULATION OF RUBBISH AND TRASH.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow to accumulate or to keep in any
part of any building, or outside of and adjacent to any building, or in any
alley, sidewalk, street or premises within 30 feet of any building, any
rubbish, trash, waste paper, excelsior, empty boxes, barrels or other
combustibles that shall constitute a fire hazard.
§ 7-206 STACKING OF HAY OR STRAW.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, stack or store any hay or
straw within 500 feet of any building located inside the fire limits of the
city.
§ 7-207 KEEPING OF PACKING MATERIALS.
   It shall be unlawful to keep excelsior or other packing materials in any
other than metal or wood metal-lined boxes or bins having self-closing or
automatic covers. All refuse and trash from rooms where packing or unpacking is
done shall be removed daily.
§ 7-208 STORAGE OF ASHES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to store ashes inside of any non-fireproof
building unless they are stored in a noncombustible container or receptacle,
and a clearance of at least five feet shall be maintained between such
container or receptacle and any combustible materials not placed therein.
   (b)   Ashes shall not be stored outside of any building in wooden, plastic
or paper product receptacles or dumped in contact with or in close proximity to
any combustible materials.
§ 7-209 FILLING GASOLINE TANKS OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   The engines of motor vehicles shall be stopped when the gasoline tanks of
such vehicles are being filled with gasoline at service stations or other
places where gasoline is supplied to motor vehicles. The driver or person in
control of such vehicle when the gasoline tank of same is being filled who
refuses, neglects or fails to stop the engine of such vehicle shall likewise be
guilty of a violation of this code.
§ 7-210 FIRE HAZARDS GENERALLY.
   It is unlawful for any person to cause or create anywhere within the city,
or to permit on any premises under his or her control, any situation or
condition that is conducive to or likely to cause or permit the outbreak of
fire or the spreading of fire. Any situation or condition conducive to the
outbreak of or spreading of fire is declared to be a fire hazard. The violation
of or failure to comply with any law pertaining to the storage, handling or use
of inflammable oils, explosives, liquefied petroleum gases or fertilizers, and
all wires and other conductors charged with electricity, is declared to be a
fire hazard. The placing of stools, chairs or any other obstruction in the
aisles, hallways, doorways or exits of any theater, public hall, auditorium,
church or other place of indoor public assemblage, or the failure to provide
any such place of public assemblage with sufficient, accessible and
unobstructed fire exits and escapes, is also declared to be a fire hazard. The
obstruction of any street, avenue, alley, fire hydrant or any other condition
that might delay the Rural Township Fire Department in fighting fire is
declared to be unlawful.
§ 7-211 SAME; INSPECTIONS TO DISCOVER.
   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to inspect or cause to be inspected
by Rural Township Fire Department officers or members, as often as may be
necessary, all buildings, particularly all mercantile buildings, manufacturing
plants, warehouses, garages, hotels, boarding houses, rooming houses, theaters,
auditoriums and all places of public assemblage, for the purpose of discovering
the violation of any fire preventive law or any fire hazard and ascertaining
and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fires and to see
that all places of public assemblage, hotels and rooming houses have sufficient
and unobstructed facilities for escape therefrom in case of fire.
§ 7-212 ABATEMENT OF FIRE HAZARDS; ISSUING ORDER.
   Whenever any officer or member of the Rural Township Fire Department shall
find or discover any fire hazard or shall find in any building or upon any
premises combustible or explosive material or dangerous accumulation of rubbish
or unnecessary accumulation of paper, boxes, shavings or any other inflammable
material so situated as to endanger property by the probability of fire, or
shall find or discover any violation of this chapter or any other law hazardous
to public safety from fires, the Fire Chief shall order the fire hazard or
danger from the fire forthwith abated and remedied, and such order shall be
complied with immediately by the owner or occupant of such buildings or
premises. If the hazard or condition ordered abated and remedied is a violation
of or a failure to comply with any law, the Fire Chief shall report the matter
to the City Attorney and he or she shall, if he or she deems it advisable,
prosecute the offender.
§ 7-213 SAME; SERVICE OF ORDER; RECORDS.
   Any order made under §
7-212 shall be in writing and may be served personally upon the owner or
occupant of the premises or by leaving it with any person in charge of the
premises, or if the premises are unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident of
the city, then by mailing a copy to the owner’s last known post office address.
One notice to either the occupant or owner shall be sufficient. The Fire Chief
shall keep a record of and copies of all such orders and notices and shall
follow up such notices at the expiration of the time for compliance therewith,
and when complied with make proper entry, and if not complied with, file
complaint with the Municipal Court against the property owner and/or occupant.
ARTICLE 3: FIREWORKS
Section
   
7-301   Fireworks defined
   
7-302   Fireworks prohibited
   
7-303   Same: exceptions; discharges
   
7-304   Same: exception; sale of fireworks
   
7-305   Permit for sale of fireworks required; fee; issuance
   
7-306   Permit for public fireworks display required
   
7-307   Approved fireworks; bottle rockets prohibited
   
7-308   Reserved
   
7-309   Throwing prohibited
   
7-310   Sale of fireworks; where prohibited
   
7-311   Retail display of fireworks
   
7-312   Fire extinguishers required
   
7-313   Restrictions as to gasoline installations
   
7-314   Reserved
   
7-315   Banning fireworks
§ 7-301 FIREWORKS DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIREWORKS. Those items as defined by the rules and regulations of the State
Fire Marshal, and shall include, but not be limited to: firecrackers,
torpedoes, sparklers, Roman candles, sky rockets, pin wheels, cap or toy
pistols (except such pistols or any like device designed to discharge paper
caps containing not more than 0.25 grains of explosive mixture), canes, bombs,
cannons or other like devices, and all classes of fireworks that may be shot
into the air or propelled over the ground by explosive discharges or any device
using blank cartridges.
§ 7-302 FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Except as provided in §§
7-303 to
7-306, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep, store, display for sale,
fire, discharge or explode any fireworks.
   (b)   Nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to:
      (1)   Toy paper caps containing not more than 0.25 of a grain of
explosive composition per cap;
      (2)   The manufacture, storage, sale or authorized use of signals
necessary for the safe operation of railroads or other classes of public or
private transportation;
      (3)   The military or naval forces of the United States or of this state
while in the performance of official duty;
      (4)   Law enforcement officers while in the performance of official duty;
or
      (5)   The sale or use of blank cartridges for ceremonial, theatrical or
athletic events.
§ 7-303 SAME: EXCEPTIONS; DISCHARGES.
   (a)   Section
7-302 of this article shall not apply to the firing or discharge of fireworks
within the city limits from July 1 through July 4, during the following hours:
      (1)   8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on weekdays (Monday through Thursday); and
      (2)   8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on weekends (Friday, Saturday, and Sunday).
   (b)   No fireworks shall be fired, ignited or discharged at any time within
1,000 feet of any hospital, sanitarium or infirmary, or into, under or on a car
or vehicle whether moving or standing still or within 50 feet before any retail
fireworks stand or facility where fireworks are stored.
   (c)   No fireworks shall be discharged in a reckless or unsafe manner, or in
a manner that disturbs the peace and quiet of others.
   (d)   The governing body of the city may, in its discretion, grant
permission at any time for the public display of fireworks by responsible
individuals or organizations when such display or displays shall be of such a
character and so located, discharged and fired as shall not be a fire hazard or
endanger persons or surrounding property.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to give any
public display of fireworks without having first obtained a permit therefor.
(Ord. 354, passed 7-1-2025)
§ 7-304 SAME: EXCEPTION; SALE OF FIREWORKS.
   Any person, firm or corporation who or which has first obtained a valid
permit to sell fireworks within the city may do so from July 1 through July 4,
both dates inclusive, each year, provided, however, that if July 4 falls on a
Sunday, the sale of fireworks shall be permitted on July 5.
(Ord. 212, passed - -)
§ 7-305 PERMIT FOR SALE OF FIREWORKS REQUIRED; FEE; ISSUANCE.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or
organization to sell, display for sale, offer to sell or give away any type of
fireworks within the city without first paying a fee of $1,000 per
establishment or premises to the City Clerk and applying for and securing a
permit therefor on or before May 25 of the permit year, to be voted on by the
Council at the regular June meeting.
   (b)   Permits to sell fireworks in the city may only be issued to local
nonprofit organizations.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section a LOCAL NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION is
defined as:
      (1)   An organization exempt from federal income tax pursuant to § 501(c)
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, being 26 U.S.C. § 501(c); and
      (2)   Is organized under public or private auspices, especially for the
purpose of establishing and operating community programs or services in the
city and the surrounding area.
   (d)   No permit shall be issued for any location where retail sales are not
permitted under the zoning laws. Prior to the issuance of the permit, an
inspection will be made of the applicant’s facility for compliance with this
chapter and other pertinent laws, and no permit shall be issued for any
premises not in compliance with such laws. Upon qualifying for the permit, the
permittee shall prominently display the same at the establishment or premises
where fireworks are to be sold or displayed for sale. The permit fee shall not
be refundable upon failure to qualify for the permit or withdrawal or
cancellation of the application or permit.
(Ord. 214, passed - -)
§ 7-306 PERMIT FOR PUBLIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to give or provide a
fireworks display for the public or for organized groups without first
obtaining a permit to do so by making application at least 30 days in advance
of the desired display. Approval of the permit shall be by the governing body.
No permit shall be approved unless the applicant furnishes a certificate of
public liability insurance for the display in a minimum amount of $100,000,
written by an insurance carrier licensed to do business in the state,
conditioned as being non-cancellable except by giving ten days’ advance written
notice to the City Clerk. In the event of cancellation of the insurance prior
to the display, the permit shall automatically be revoked and void.
      (2)   The application for the permit shall clearly state:
      (A)   The name of the applicant;
      (B)   The group for which the display is planned;
      (C)   The location of the display;
      (D)   The date and time of the display;
      (E)   The nature or kind of fireworks to be used;
      (F)   The name of the person, firm or corporation that will make the
actual discharge of the fireworks; and
      (G)   Anticipated need for police, fire or other municipal services.
   (b)   No permit shall be issued if the location, nature of the fireworks or
other relevant factor is such as to create an undue hazard or risk of harm or
damage to persons or property.
§ 7-307 APPROVED FIREWORKS; BOTTLE ROCKETS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   All fireworks offered for sale and discharged within the city shall be
of a type that has been tested and approved for sale and use within the state
by the State Fire Marshal.
   (b)   Bottle rockets and other similar self-propelled fireworks or fireworks
devices consisting of a tube and attached guiding stock or rod shall not be
sold or discharged in the city.
§ 7-308 RESERVED.
§ 7-309 THROWING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast or propel fireworks of
any kind in the direction of or into the path of any animal, person or group of
persons, or from, in the direction of or into any vehicle of any kind.
§ 7-310 SALE OF FIREWORKS; WHERE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for fireworks to be stored, sold or displayed for
sale in a place of business where paint, oils, varnishes, turpentine or
gasoline or other flammable substances are kept unless such fireworks are in a
separate and distinct section or department of the premises.
   (b)   Where the Fire Chief deems there is a fire hazard, he or she is hereby
authorized to have such hazard abated.
§ 7-311 RETAIL DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS.
   (a)   All retailers are forbidden to expose fireworks where the sun shines
through glass on the merchandise displayed, except where such fireworks are in
the original package.
   (b)   All fireworks displayed for sale must remain in original packages,
except where an attendant is on constant duty at all times where such fireworks
are on display; provided, that fireworks in open stock may be kept in show
cases or counters out of the reach of the public without an attendant being on
duty.
   (c)   Signs reading “Fireworks for Sale – No Smoking Allowed” shall be
displayed in the section of a store or premises set aside for the sale of
fireworks.
§ 7-312 FIRE EXTINGUISHERS REQUIRED.
   (a)   Two functioning and approved fire extinguishers must be provided and
kept in close proximity to the stock of fireworks in all permanent buildings
where fireworks are stored, sold or displayed for sale.
   (b)   Small stands, temporarily erected to be used as a place for storing
and selling fireworks only, shall have one such fire extinguisher, or in lieu
of the fire extinguisher, a pressurized water hose with nozzle end, within five
feet of the fireworks stand.
§ 7-313 RESTRICTIONS AS TO GASOLINE INSTALLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to store, keep, sell, display for sale or discharge any
fireworks within 50 feet of any gasoline pump, gasoline filling station,
gasoline bulk station or any building in which gasoline or volatile liquids are
sold in quantities in excess of one gallon, except in stores where cleaners,
paints and oils are handled in sealed containers only.
§ 7-314 RESERVED.
§ 7-315 BANNING FIREWORKS.
   The Chief of the Fire District or the Mayor shall have the authority and
discretion to ban the discharge of all fireworks within the corporate limits of
the city if the weather conditions make the discharge of fireworks in the city
hazardous to persons or property.
ARTICLE 4: FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS, LP GASES, EXPLOSIVES
Section
   
7-401   Flammable and combustible liquids; incorporating rules and regulations
   
7-402   Liquified petroleum gases; incorporating rules and regulations
§ 7-401 FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS; INCORPORATING RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   There is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, for the purpose
of regulating the storage and handling of flammable and combustible liquids
within the corporate limits of the city, K.A.R. 22-7-6, 22-7-7, 22-7-8, 22-7-9,
22-7-10, 22-7-11 and 22-7-12, 2019 Supplement, such incorporation being
authorized by K.S.A. 12-3009 to 12-3012, inclusive, as amended. Not less than
three copies of the Kansas Administrative Regulations shall be marked or
stamped “Official Copy as incorporated by the 2014 Code of the City of Oxford,
Kansas,” with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted or
changed clearly marked to show any such omission or change and to which shall
be attached a copy of this code section, and filed with the City Clerk to be
open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours.
   (b)   All administrative departments of the city charged with the
enforcement of this code section shall be supplied, at the cost of the city,
such number of official copies of such Kansas Administrative Regulations,
similarly marked, as may be deemed expedient.
(Ord. 331, passed 6-2-2020)
§ 7-402 LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GASES; INCORPORATING RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   There is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, for the purpose
of regulating the storage and handling of liquified petroleum gases and the
operating of liquified petroleum gas installations within the corporate limits
of the city, K.A.R. 22-8-2, 22-8-3, 22-8-5, 22-8-6, 22-8-8, 22-8-9, 22-8-10,
22-8-11, 22-8-12, 22-8-13, 22-8-14 and 22-8-17, 2019 Supplement, such
incorporation being authorized by K.S.A. 12-3009 to 12-3012, inclusive,
amended. Not less than three copies of the Kansas Administrative Regulations
shall be marked or stamped “Official Copy as incorporated by the 2014 Code of
the City of Oxford, Kansas,” with all sections or portions thereof intended to
be omitted or changed clearly marked to show any such omission or change and to
which shall be attached a copy of this code section, and filed with the City
Clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable
hours.
   (b)   All administrative departments of the city charged with the
enforcement of this code section shall be supplied, at the cost of the city,
such number of official copies of such Kansas Administrative Regulations,
similarly marked, as may be deemed expedient.
(Ord. 331, passed 6-2-2020)
CHAPTER VIII: HEALTH AND WELFARE
   Article
      
1.   BOARD OF HEALTH
      
2.   HEALTH NUISANCES
      
2A.   ENVIRONMENTAL CODE
      
3.   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
      
4.   WEEDS
      
5.   MINIMUM HOUSING CODE
      
6.   RODENT CONTROL
      
7.   INSURANCE PROCEEDS FUND
ARTICLE 1: BOARD OF HEALTH
Section
   
8-101   Board of Health created
   
8-102   City Health Officer; duties
§ 8-101 BOARD OF HEALTH CREATED.
   The Board of Health shall consist of a City Health Officer, who shall be a
practicing doctor of medicine, and two additional members, who shall be members
of the governing body. The City Health Officer and the two additional members
of the Board of Health shall be appointed annually by the Mayor at the first
regular meeting of the governing body in April of each year, to serve for one-
year terms, subject to confirmation by the Council; provided, that a member of
the governing body appointed to the Board of Health shall have no right to vote
for or against his or her own confirmation. The Board shall adopt such rules
and regulations as may be necessary to guide its operations. The City Clerk
shall be Secretary of the Board but shall have no vote. He or she shall
preserve its records, rules and regulations and shall issue all orders and
notices that may be required by ordinance or order of the Board.
§ 8-102 CITY HEALTH OFFICER; DUTIES.
   The City Health Officer shall:
   (a)   Cause health investigations and inspections to be made as required by
the laws of the state and of the city;
   (b)   Make recommendations to the Board respecting the improvement of health
of the inhabitants of the city;
   (c)   Make all health reports required by the State Department of Health and
Environment, Division of Health;
   (d)   Prepare an annual health report of the city for submission to the
governing body; and
   (e)   Perform such other duties as may be required of him or her under the
laws of the state or of the city.
ARTICLE 2: HEALTH NUISANCES
Section
   
8-201   Nuisances unlawful; defined
   
8-202   Public officer
   
8-203   Complaints; inquiry and inspection
   
8-204   Right of entry
   
8-205   Order of violation
   
8-206   Same; contents
   
8-207   Failure to comply; penalty
   
8-208   Abatement
   
8-209   Hearing
   
8-210   Costs assessed
§ 8-201 NUISANCES UNLAWFUL; DEFINED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit any nuisance
within the city as defined, without limitation, as follows:
   (a)   Filth, excrement, lumber, rocks, dirt, cans, paper, trash, metal or
any other offensive or disagreeable thing or substance thrown or left or
deposited upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, park, public or private
enclosure or lot, whether vacant or occupied;
   (b)   All dead animals not removed within 24 hours after death;
   (c)   Any place or structure or substance that emits or causes any
offensive, disagreeable or nauseous odors;
   (d)   All stagnant ponds or pools of water;
   (e)   All grass or weeds or other unsightly vegetation not usually
cultivated or grown for domestic use or to be marketed or for ornamental
purposes;
   (f)   Abandoned iceboxes or refrigerators kept on the premises under the
control of any person, or deposited on the sanitary landfill, or any icebox or
refrigerator not in actual use unless the door, opening or lid thereof is
unhinged or unfastened and removed therefrom;
   (g)   All articles or things whatsoever caused, kept, maintained or
permitted by any person to the injury, annoyance or inconvenience of the public
or of any neighborhood; and
   (h)   Any fence, structure, thing or substance placed upon or being upon any
street, sidewalk, alley or public ground so as to obstruct the same, except as
permitted by the laws of the city.
(K.S.A. 21-6204)
§ 8-202 PUBLIC OFFICER.
   The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, shall designate a public officer
to be charged with the administration and enforcement of this article.
§ 8-203 COMPLAINTS; INQUIRY AND INSPECTION.
   The public officer shall make inquiry and inspection of premises upon
receiving a complaint or complaints in writing signed by two or more persons
stating that a nuisance exists and describing the same and where located, or is
informed that a nuisance may exist by the Board of Health, Chief of Police or
the Fire Chief. The public officer may make such inquiry and inspection when he
or she observes conditions that appear to constitute a nuisance. Upon making
any inquiry and inspection, the public officer shall make a written report of
findings.
§ 8-204 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The public officer has right of access and entry upon private property at
any reasonable time to the extent allowed by law for the purpose of making
inquiry and inspection to determine if a nuisance exists.
§ 8-205 ORDER OF VIOLATION.
   (a)   The governing body shall serve upon the owner, any agent of the owner
of the property, or any other person, corporation, partnership or association
found by the public officer to be in violation of §
8-201, an order stating the violation. The order shall be served on the owner
or agent of such property by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal service; if the property is unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident,
then by mailing the order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
last known address of the owner.
   (b)   If the owner or the agent of the owner of the property has failed to
accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order
sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period, the
governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further
orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of
the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers,
conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal
notification, telephone communication or first-class mail. If the property is
unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, notice provided by this section
shall be given by telephone communication or first-class mail.
(K.S.A. 12-1617e)
§ 8-206 SAME; CONTENTS.
   (a)   The order shall state the condition(s) that is/are in violation of §
8-201. The order shall also inform the person, corporation, partnership or
association that:
      (1)   He, she or they shall have ten days from the receipt of the order
to abate the condition(s) in violation of §
8-201; provided, however, that the governing body shall grant one or more
extensions of the ten-day period if the owner or agent of the property
demonstrates that due diligence is being exercised in the abatement of the
conditions in violation of §
8-201; or
      (2)   He, she or they have ten days from the receipt of the order, plus
any additional time granted under division (a)(1) above, to request a hearing
before the governing body or its designated representative of the matter as
provided by §
8-209.
   (b)   Failure to abate the condition(s) or to request a hearing within the
time allowed may result in prosecution as provided by §
8-207 and/or abatement of the condition(s) by the city as provided by §
8-208.
(K.S.A. 12-1617e)
§ 8-207 FAILURE TO COMPLY; PENALTY.
   Should the person, corporation, partnership or association fail to comply
with the order to abate the nuisance or request a hearing, the public officer
may file a complaint in the Municipal Court of the city against such person,
corporation, partnership or association and, upon conviction of any violation
of provisions of §
8-201, be fined in an amount not to exceed $100 or be imprisoned not to exceed
30 days, or be both fined and imprisoned. Each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues after notice has been served shall constitute an
additional or separate offense.
§ 8-208 ABATEMENT.
   (a)   In addition to, or as an alternative to, prosecution as provided in §
8-207, the public officer may seek to remedy violations of this article in the
following manner. If a person to whom an order has been served pursuant to §
8-205 has neither alleviated the conditions causing the alleged violation nor
requested a hearing before the governing body within the time periods specified
in §
8-206, the public officer may present a resolution to the governing body for
adoption authorizing the public officer or other agents of the city to abate
the conditions causing the violation at the end of ten days after passage of
the resolution. The resolution shall further provide that the costs incurred by
the city shall be charged against the lot or parcel of ground on which the
nuisance was located as provided in §
8-210.
   (b)   A copy of the resolution shall be served upon the person in violation
in one of the following ways:
      (1)   Personal service upon the person in violation;
      (2)   Certified mail, return receipt requested; or
      (3)   In the event the whereabouts of such person are unknown and the
same cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, an
affidavit to that effect shall be made by the public officer and filed with the
City Clerk, and the serving of the resolution shall be made by publishing the
same once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper
and by posting a copy of the resolution on the premises where such condition
exists.
   (c)   If the owner or the agent of the owner of the property has failed to
accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order
sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period, the
governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further
orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of
the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers,
conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal
notification, telephone communication or first-class mail. If the property is
unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, notice provided by this section
shall be given by telephone communication or first-class mail.
§ 8-209 HEARING.
   If a hearing is requested within the ten-day period as provided in §
8-206, such request shall be made in writing to the governing body. Failure to
make a timely request for a hearing shall constitute a waiver of the person’s
right to contest the findings of the public officer. The hearing shall be held
by the governing body or its designated representative as soon as possible
after the filing of the request therefor, and the person shall be advised by
the city of the time and place of the hearing at least five days in advance
thereof. At any such hearing, the person may be represented by counsel, and the
person and the city may introduce such witnesses and evidence as is deemed
necessary and proper by the governing body or its designated representative.
The hearing need not be conducted according to the formal rules of evidence.
Upon conclusion of the hearing, the findings of the governing body or its
designated representative shall be prepared in resolution form, adopted by the
governing body, and the resolution shall be served upon the person in the
manner provided in §
8-208.
§ 8-210 COSTS ASSESSED.
   If the city abates or removes the nuisance pursuant to §
8-208, the city shall give notice to the owner or his or her agent by certified
mail, return receipt requested, of the total cost of the abatement or removal
incurred by the city. The notice shall also state that the payment is due
within 30 days following receipt of the notice. The city also may recover the
cost of providing notice, including any postage, required by this section. The
notice shall also state that if the cost of the removal or abatement is not
paid within the 30-day period, the cost of the abatement or removal shall be
collected in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, or
shall be assessed as special assessments and charged against the lot or parcel
of land on which the nuisance was located; and the City Clerk, at the time of
certifying other city taxes, shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs; and
the County Clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the county against
such lot or parcel of land; and it shall be collected by the County Treasurer
and paid to the city as other city taxes are collected and paid. The city may
pursue collection both by levying a special assessment and in the manner
provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, but only until the full
cost and applicable interest has been paid in full.
(K.S.A. 12-1617e)
ARTICLE 2A: ENVIRONMENTAL CODE
Section
   
8-2A01   Title
   
8-2A02   Legislative finding of fact
   
8-2A03   Purpose
   
8-2A04   Rules of construction
   
8-2A05   Definitions
   
8-2A06   Public officer
   
8-2A07   Enforcement standards
   
8-2A08   Unlawful acts
   
8-2A09   Order of violation
   
8-2A10   Penalty
   
8-2A11   Abatement
   
8-2A12   Hearing
   
8-2A13   Appeals
   
8-2A14   Costs assessed
   
8-2A15   Construction
§ 8-2A01 TITLE.
   This article shall be known as the “Environmental Code.”
§ 8-2A02 LEGISLATIVE FINDING OF FACT.
   (a)   The governing body has found that there exists within the city
unsightly and hazardous conditions due to: dilapidation, deterioration or
disrepair of walls, siding, fences or structure exteriors; accumulations
increasing the hazards of accidents or other calamities; structural defects;
uncleanliness; and unsightly stored or parked material, equipment, supplies,
machinery, vehicles or parts thereof. Such conditions are inimical to the
general welfare of the community in that they have a blighting influence on the
adjoining properties, the neighborhood and the city, or are injurious to the
health and safety of the residents of the city.
   (b)   The governing body desires to promote the public health, safety and
welfare by the repair, removal, abatement and regulation of such conditions in
the manner hereafter provided.
§ 8-2A03 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to protect, preserve, upgrade and regulate
the environmental quality of industrial, commercial and residential
neighborhoods in this city by outlawing conditions which are injurious to the
health, safety, welfare or aesthetic characteristics of the neighborhoods and
to provide for the administration and enforcement thereof.
§ 8-2A04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following rules of construction shall
apply.
   (a)   Any part thereof. Whenever the words PREMISES, STRUCTURE, BUILDING or
YARD are used, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the
words “or any part thereof.”
   (b)   Gender. Words of gender shall be construed to mean neuter, feminine or
masculine, as may be applicable.
   (c)   Number. Words of number shall be construed to mean singular or plural,
as may be applicable.
   (d)   Tense. Words of tense shall be construed to mean present or future, as
may be applicable.
   (e)   Shall. The word SHALL is mandatory and not permissive.
§ 8-2A05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle that is not currently registered
or tagged pursuant to K.S.A. 8-126 to 8-149, inclusive, as amended; or parked
in violation of the ordinance; or incapable of moving under its own power; or
in a junked or wrecked condition.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A secondary structure detached from the principal
structure but on the same premises, including, but not limited to, garages,
sheds, barns or outbuildings.
   COMMERCIAL or INDUSTRIAL. Used or intended to be used primarily for other
than residential purposes.
   DILAPIDATION, DETERIORATION or DISREPAIR. Any condition characterized by,
but not limited to, holes, breaks, rot, decay, crumbling, cracking, peeling or
flaking paint, rusting or other evidence of physical damage, neglect, lack of
maintenance, excessive use or weathering.
   EXTERIOR. Those parts of a structure that are exposed to the weather or
subject to contact with the elements, including, but not limited to, sidings,
facings, veneers, masonry, roofs, foundations, porches, screens, shutters,
windows, doors or signs.
   GARBAGE. Without limitation, any accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable
waste matter that results from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving,
delivering, storage or use of foodstuffs.
   PERSON. Any individual, individuals, corporation, partnership,
unincorporated association, other business organization, committee, board,
trustee, receiver, agent or other representative who has charge, care, control
or responsibility for the maintenance of any premises, regardless of status as
owner, renter, tenant or lessee, whether or not in possession.
   PREMISES. Any lot, plot or parcel of land, including the structures thereon.
PREMISES shall also mean any lot, plot or parcel of land without any structures
thereon.
   REFUSE. Garbage and trash.
   RESIDENTIAL. Used or intended to be used primarily for human habitation.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the
ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground, including
any appurtenances belonging thereto.
   TRASH. Combustible waste consisting of, but not limited to, papers, cartons,
boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, furniture, bedding, rags, leaves, yard
trimmings or tree branches, and non-combustible waste consisting of, but not
limited to, metal, tin, cans, glass, crockery, plastics, mineral matter, ashes,
clinkers or street rubbish and sweepings.
   WEATHERED. Deterioration caused by exposure to the elements.
   YARD. The area of the premises not occupied by any structure.
§ 8-2A06 PUBLIC OFFICER.
   The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, shall designate a public officer
to be charged with the administration and enforcement of this article.
§ 8-2A07 ENFORCEMENT STANDARDS.
   No person shall be found in violation of this article unless the public
officer, after a reasonable inquiry and inspection of the premises, believes
that conditions exist of a quality and appearance not commensurate with the
character of the neighborhood. Such belief must be supported by evidence of a
level of maintenance significantly below that of the rest of the neighborhood.
Such evidence shall include conditions declared unlawful under § 8-2A08, but
shall not include conditions that are not readily visible from any public place
or from any surrounding private property.
§ 8-2A08 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow to exist on any
residential, commercial or industrial premises conditions that are injurious to
the health, safety or general welfare of the residents of the community or
conditions that are detrimental to adjoining property, the neighborhood or the
city.
   (b)   For the purpose of fair and efficient enforcement and administration,
such unlawful conditions shall be classified as follows:
      (1)   Exterior conditions (yard) shall include, but not be limited to,
the scattering over or the parking, leaving, depositing or accumulation on the
yard of any of the following:
      (A)   Lumber, wire, metal, tires, concrete, masonry products, plastic
products, supplies, equipment, machinery, auto parts, junk or refuse;
      (B)   Abandoned motor vehicles;
      (C)   Furniture, stoves, refrigerators, televisions, sinks, bicycles,
lawn mowers or other such items of personal property; or
      (D)   Nauseous substances, carcasses of dead animals or places where
animals are kept in an offensive manner.
      (2)   Exterior conditions (structure) shall include, but not be limited
to, deteriorated, dilapidated or unsightly:
      (A)   Exteriors of any structure;
      (B)   Exteriors of any accessory structure; or
      (C)   Fences, walls or retaining walls.
§ 8-2A09 ORDER OF VIOLATION.
   (a)   The governing body shall serve upon the owner, any agent of the owner
of the property or any other person, corporation, partnership or association
found by the public officer to be in violation of § 8-2A08 an order stating the
violation. The order shall be served on the owner or agent of such property by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service; if the
property is unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, then by mailing the
order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of
the owner.
   (b)   (1)   If the owner or the agent of the owner of the property has
failed to accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice
or order sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period,
the governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any
further orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide
notice of the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door
hangers, conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal
notification, telephone communication or first-class mail. If the property is
unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, notice provided by this section
shall be given by telephone communication or first-class mail.
      (2)   The order shall state:
      (A)   The condition that has caused the violation of this article; and
      (B)   That the person in violation shall have:
      (i)   Ten days from the receipt of the order to alleviate the exterior
conditions (yard) violation;
      (ii)   Forty-five days from the receipt of the order to alleviate the
exterior conditions (structure) violation; or
      (iii)   Ten days from the receipt of the order, plus any additional time
granted under division (c) below, to request, as provided in §
8-2A12, a hearing before the governing body or its designated representative on
the matter.
   (c)   Provided, however, that the governing body shall grant one or more
extensions to the time periods stated in divisions (b)(2)(B)(i) and (b)(2)(B)
(ii) above if the owner or agent of the property demonstrates that due
diligence is being exercised in the abatement of the conditions that have
caused the violation of this article; and
   (d)   That failure to alleviate the condition or to request a hearing may
result in prosecution under §
8-2A10 and/or abatement of the condition by the city according to §
8-2A11 with the costs assessed against the property under §
8-2A14.
(K.S.A. 12-1617e)
§ 8-2A10 PENALTY.
   The public officer may file a complaint in the Municipal Court against any
person found to be in violation of §
8-2A08, provided, however, that such person shall first have been sent an order
of violation as provided in §
8-2A09 and that the person has neither alleviated the conditions causing the
alleged violation nor requested a hearing before the governing body within the
time periods specified in §
8-2A09. Upon such complaint in the Municipal Court, any person found to be in
violation of §
8-2A08 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $100, or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment, for each offense. For the purposes of this article, a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such
violation is permitted to exist.
§ 8-2A11 ABATEMENT.
   (a)   In addition to, or as an alternative to, prosecution as provided in §
8-2A10, the public officer may seek to remedy violations of this article in the
following manner. If a person to whom an order has been served pursuant to §
8-2A09 has neither alleviated the conditions causing the alleged violation nor
requested a hearing before the governing body within the time periods specified
in §
8-2A09, the public officer may present a resolution to the governing body for
adoption authorizing the public officer or other agents of the city to abate
the conditions causing the violation at the end of ten days after passage of
the resolution. The resolution shall further provide that the costs incurred by
the city shall be charged against the lot or parcel of ground on which the
nuisance was located as provided in §
8-2A14.
   (b)   A copy of the resolution shall be served upon the person in violation
in one of the following ways:
      (1)   Personal service upon the person in violation;
      (2)   Certified mail, return receipt requested; or
      (3)   In the event the whereabouts of such person are unknown and the
same cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, an
affidavit to that effect shall be made by the public officer and filed with the
City Clerk, and the serving of the resolution shall be made by publishing the
same once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper
and by posting a copy of the resolution on the premises where such condition
exists.
   (c)   If the owner or the agent of the owner of the property has failed to
accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order
sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period, the
governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further
orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property, or provide notice of
the order, by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers,
conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal
notification, telephone communication or first-class mail. If the property is
unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, notice provided by this section
shall be given by telephone communication or first-class mail.
§ 8-2A12 HEARING.
   If a hearing is requested within the ten-day period as provided in §
8-2A09, such request shall be made in writing to the governing body. Failure to
make a timely request for a hearing shall constitute a waiver of the person’s
right to contest the findings of the public officer. The hearing shall be held
by the governing body or its designated representative as soon as possible
after the filing of the request therefor, and the person shall be advised by
the city of the time and place of the hearing at least five days in advance
thereof. At any such hearing, the person may be represented by counsel, and the
person and the city may introduce such witnesses and evidence as is deemed
necessary and proper by the governing body or its designated representative.
The hearing need not be conducted according to the formal rules of evidence.
Upon conclusion of the hearing, the findings of the governing body or its
designated representative shall be prepared in resolution form, adopted by the
governing body, and the resolution shall be served upon the person in the
manner provided in §
8-2A11.
§ 8-2A13 APPEALS.
   Any person affected by any determination of the governing body under §§
8-2A11 and
8-2A12 may appeal such determination in the manner provided by K.S.A. 60-2101.
§ 8-2A14 COSTS ASSESSED.
   If the city abates or removes the nuisance pursuant to §
8-2A11, the city shall give notice to the owner or his or her agent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of the total cost of the abatement or
removal incurred by the city. The notice shall also state that the payment is
due within 30 days following receipt of the notice. The city also may recover
the cost of providing notice, including any postage, required by this section.
The notice shall also state that if the cost of the removal or abatement is not
paid within the 30-day period, the cost of the abatement or removal shall be
collected in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, or
shall be assessed as special assessments and charged against the lot or parcel
of land on which the nuisance was located, and the City Clerk, at the time of
certifying other city taxes, shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs, and
the County Clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the county against
such lot or parcel of land, and it shall be collected by the County Treasurer
and paid to the city as other city taxes are collected and paid. The city may
pursue collection both by levying a special assessment and in the manner
provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, but only until the full
cost and applicable interest has been paid in full.
§ 8-2A15 CONSTRUCTION.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of its
laws nor to prevent or punish violations thereof. The powers conferred by this
article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by the
State Constitution, by any other law or by ordinance.
ARTICLE 3: JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Section
   
8-301   Findings of governing body
   
8-302   Definitions
   
8-303   Nuisances unlawful; defined; exceptions
   
8-304   Public officer
   
8-305   Complaints; inquiry and inspection
   
8-306   Right of entry
   
8-307   Order of violation
   
8-308   Same; contents
   
8-309   Failure to comply; penalty
   
8-310   Abatement
   
8-311   Disposition of vehicle; recovery of vehicle
   
8-312   Hearing
   
8-313   Costs assessed
§ 8-301 FINDINGS OF GOVERNING BODY.
   The governing body finds that junked, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative or
abandoned vehicles affect the health, safety and general welfare of citizens of
the city because they:
   (a)   Serve as a breeding ground for flies, mosquitoes, rats and other
insects and rodents;
   (b)   Are a danger to persons, particularly children, because of broken
glass, sharp metal protrusions, insecure mounting on blocks, jacks or other
supports;
   (c)   Are a ready source of fire and explosion;
   (d)   Encourage pilfering and theft;
   (e)   Constitute a blighting influence upon the area in which they are
located; and
   (f)   Constitute a fire hazard because they frequently block access for fire
equipment to adjacent buildings and structures.
§ 8-302 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INOPERABLE. A condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially
dismantled, discarded, abandoned or unable to perform the function or purpose
for which it was originally constructed.
   VEHICLE. Without limitation, any automobile, truck, tractor or motorcycle
which as originally built contained an engine, regardless of whether it
contains an engine at any other time.
§ 8-303 NUISANCES UNLAWFUL; DEFINED; EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit any motor vehicle
nuisance within the city.
   (a)   (1)   A MOTOR VEHICLE NUISANCE is any motor vehicle that is not
currently registered or tagged pursuant to K.S.A. 8-126 to 8-149, inclusive, as
amended; or parked in violation of city ordinance; or incapable of moving under
its own power; or in a junked, wrecked or inoperable condition.
      (2)   Any one of the following conditions shall raise the presumption
that a vehicle is junked, wrecked or inoperable:
      (A)   Absence of a current registration plate upon the vehicle;
      (B)   Placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, blocks or
other supports; or
      (C)   Absence of one or more parts of the vehicle necessary for the
lawful operation of the vehicle upon street or highway.
   (b)   The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any motor vehicle that is enclosed in a garage or other building;
      (2)   The parking or storage of a vehicle inoperable for a period of 30
consecutive days or less; or
      (3)   Any person conducting a business enterprise in compliance with
existing zoning regulations or who places such vehicles behind screening of
sufficient size, strength and density to screen such vehicles from the view of
the public and to prohibit ready access to stored vehicles by children;
however, nothing in this division (b)(3) shall be construed to authorize the
maintenance of a public nuisance.
§ 8-304 PUBLIC OFFICER.
   The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, shall designate a public officer
to be charged with the administration and enforcement of this article.
§ 8-305 COMPLAINTS; INQUIRY AND INSPECTION.
   The public officer shall make inquiry and inspection of premises upon
receiving a complaint or complaints in writing signed by two or more persons
stating that a nuisance exists and describing the same and where located, or is
informed that a nuisance may exist by the Board of Health, Chief of Police or
the Fire Chief. The public officer may make such inquiry and inspection when he
or she observes conditions that appear to constitute a nuisance. Upon making
any inquiry and inspection, the public officer shall make a written report of
findings.
§ 8-306 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The public officer has the right of access and entry upon private property
at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inquiry and inspection to
determine if a nuisance exists.
§ 8-307 ORDER OF VIOLATION.
   (a)   (1)   The governing body shall serve upon the owner, any agent of the
owner of the property or any other person, corporation, partnership or
association found by the public officer to be in violation of §
8-303 an order stating the violation.
      (2)   The order shall be served on the owner or agent of such property by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service; if the
property is unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, then by mailing the
order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of
the owner.
   (b)   If the owner or the agent of the owner of the property has failed to
accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order
sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period, the
governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further
orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of
the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers,
conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal
notification, telephone communication or first-class mail. If the property is
unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, notice provided by this section
shall be given by telephone communication or first-class mail.
(K.S.A. 12-1617e)
§ 8-308 SAME; CONTENTS.
   (a)   The order shall state the condition(s) which is/are in violation of §
8-303.
   (b)   The order shall also inform the person, corporation, partnership or
association that:
      (1)   He, she or they shall have ten days from receipt of the order to
abate the condition(s) in violation of §
8-303; or
      (2)   He, she or they have ten days from receipt of the order to request
a hearing before the governing body or its designated representative of the
matter, as provided by §
8-312.
   (c)   Failure to abate the condition(s) or to request a hearing within the
time allowed may result in prosecution as provided by §
8-309 and/or abatement of the condition(s) by the city as provided by §
8-310.
§ 8-309 FAILURE TO COMPLY; PENALTY.
   Should the person fail to comply with the order to abate the nuisance or
request a hearing, the public officer may file a complaint in the Municipal
Court of the city against such person and, upon conviction of any violation of
the provisions of §
8-303, be fined in an amount not to exceed $100 or be imprisoned not to exceed
30 days, or be both fined and imprisoned. Each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues after notice has been served shall constitute an
additional or separate offense.
§ 8-310 ABATEMENT.
   (a)   In addition to, or as an alternative to, prosecution as provided in §
8-309, the public officer may seek to remedy violations of this article in the
following manner. If a person to whom an order has been sent pursuant to §
8-307 has neither alleviated the conditions causing the alleged violation or
requested a hearing before the governing body within the time period specified
in §
8-308, the public officer may present a resolution to the governing body for
adoption authorizing the public officer or other agents of the city to abate
the conditions causing the violation at the end of ten days after passage of
the resolution.
   (b)   (1)   The resolution shall further provide that the costs incurred by
the city shall be charged against the lot or parcel of ground on which the
nuisance was located as provided in §
8-313.
      (2)   A copy of the resolution shall be served upon the person in
violation in one of the following ways:
      (A)   Personal service upon the person in violation;
      (B)   Service by certified mail, return receipt requested; or
      (C)   In the event the whereabouts of such person are unknown and the
same cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, an
affidavit to that effect shall be made by the public officer and filed with the
City Clerk, and the serving of the resolution shall be made by publishing the
same once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper
and by posting a copy of the resolution on the premises where such condition
exists.
      (3)   If the owner or the agent of the owner of the property has failed
to accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or
order sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period, the
governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further
orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of
the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers,
conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal
notification, telephone communication or first-class mail. If the property is
unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, notice provided by this section
shall be given by telephone communication or first-class mail.
§ 8-311 DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE; RECOVERY OF VEHICLE.
   (a)   Disposition of any motor vehicle removed and abated from private
property pursuant to this article shall be as provided by K.S.A. 8-1102, and
amendments thereto.
   (b)   Any person attempting to recover a motor vehicle impounded as provided
in this article shall show proof of valid registration and ownership of the
motor vehicle before the motor vehicle shall be released. In addition, the
person desiring the release of the motor vehicle shall pay all reasonable costs
associated with the impoundment of the motor vehicle, including transportation
and storage fees, prior to the release of the motor vehicle.
§ 8-312 HEARING.
   If a hearing is requested within the ten-day period as provided in §
8-308, such request shall be made in writing to the governing body. Failure to
make a timely request for a hearing shall constitute a waiver of the person’s
right to contest the findings of the public officer. The hearing shall be held
by the governing body or its designated representative as soon as possible
after the filing of the request therefor, and the person shall be advised by
the city of the time and place of the hearing at least five days in advance
thereof. At any such hearing, the person may be represented by counsel, and the
person and the city may introduce such witnesses and evidence as is deemed
necessary and proper by the governing body or its designated representative.
The hearing need not be conducted according to the formal rules of evidence.
Upon conclusion of the hearing, the findings of the governing body or its
designated representative shall be prepared in resolution form, adopted by the
governing body, and the resolution shall be served upon the person in the
manner provided in §
8-310.
§ 8-313 COSTS ASSESSED.
   If the city abates or removes the nuisance pursuant to §
8-310, the city shall give notice to the owner or his or her agent by certified
mail, return receipt requested, of the total cost of the abatement or removal
incurred by the city. The notice shall also state that the payment is due
within 30 days following receipt of the notice. The city also may recover the
cost of providing notice, including any postage, required by this section. The
notice shall also state that if the cost of the removal or abatement is not
paid within the 30-day period, the cost of the abatement or removal shall be
collected in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, or
shall be assessed as special assessments and charged against the lot or parcel
of land on which the nuisance was located, and the City Clerk, at the time of
certifying other city taxes, shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs, and
the County Clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the county against
such lot or parcel of land, and it shall be collected by the County Treasurer
and paid to the city as other city taxes are collected and paid. The city may
pursue collection both by levying a special assessment and in the manner
provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, but only until the full
cost and applicable interest has been paid in full.
ARTICLE 4: WEEDS
Section
   
8-401   Weeds to be removed
   
8-402   Definition
   
8-403   Public officer; notice to remove
   
8-404   Abatement; assessment of costs
   
8-405   Right of entry
   
8-406   Unlawful interference
   
8-407   Noxious weeds
§ 8-401 WEEDS TO BE REMOVED.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, lessee, tenant or other person
occupying or having charge or control of any premises to permit weeds to remain
upon said premises or any area between the property lines of said premises and
the centerline of any adjacent street or alley, including, but not specifically
limited to, sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements, rights-of-way and all other
areas, public or private. All weeds as hereinafter defined are hereby declared
a nuisance and are subject to abatement as hereinafter provided.
§ 8-402 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WEEDS. As used herein, means any of the following:
      (1)   Brush and woody vines shall be classified as WEEDS;
      (2)   Weeds and grasses that may attain such large growth as to become,
when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved property;
      (3)   Weeds that bear or may bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature;
      (4)   Weeds that are located in an area that harbors rats, insects,
animals, reptiles or any other creature that either may or does constitute a
menace to health, public safety or welfare; and
      (5)   Weeds and indigenous grasses on or about residential property
which, because of its height, has a blighting influence on the neighborhood.
Any such weeds and indigenous grasses shall be presumed blighting if they
exceed eight inches in height.
(Ord. 339, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 8-403 PUBLIC OFFICER; NOTICE TO REMOVE.
   (a)   (1)   The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, shall designate a
public officer to be charged with the administration and enforcement of this
article.
      (2)   The public officer or authorized assistant shall give written
notice to the owner, occupant or agent of such property by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or by personal service, to cut or destroy weeds;
provided, however, that if the property is unoccupied and the owner is a
nonresident, such notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the last known address of the owner.
      (3)   Such notice shall be given only once per calendar year.
   (b)   The notice to be given hereunder shall state:
      (1)   The owner, occupant or agent in charge of the property is in
violation of the city weed control law;
      (2)   The owner, occupant or agent in control of the property is ordered
to cut or destroy the weeds within five days of the receipt of the notice;
      (3)   The owner, occupant or agent in control of the property may request
a hearing before the governing body or its designated representative within
five days of the receipt of the notice or, if the owner is unknown or a
nonresident and there is no resident agent, ten days after notice has been
published by the City Clerk in the official city newspaper;
      (4)   If the owner, occupant or agent in control of the property does not
cut or destroy the weeds or fails to request a hearing within the allowed time,
the city or its authorized agent will cut or destroy the weeds and assess the
cost of cutting or destroying the weeds, including a reasonable administrative
fee, against the owner, occupant or agent in control of the property at the
following rates:
      (A)   Rate table.
 
Administrative fee $50
First mowing       $100
Second mowing      $125
Third mowing       $150
 
      (B) Flat rate. All mowing fees will be assessed as a flat rate for each
mowing and corresponding with the number of mowings the property has received
in a calendar year; and
      (C)   Repair. All repair charges or costs for damage to city equipment
incurred while removing weeds from property.
      (5)   The owner, occupant or agent in control of the property will be
given an opportunity to pay the assessment, and if it is not paid within 30
days of such notice, it will be added to the property tax as a special
assessment;
      (6)   No further notice will be given during the current calendar year
prior to the removal of weeds from the property; and
      (7)   The public officer should be contacted if there are questions
regarding the order.
   (c)   If there is a change in the record owner of title to property
subsequent to the giving of notice pursuant to this section, the city may not
recover any costs or levy an assessment for the costs incurred by the cutting
or destruction of weeds on such property unless the new record owner of title
to such property is provided notice as required by this article.
(Ord. 339, passed 7-6-2021; Ord. 352, passed 10-1-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see K.S.A. 12-1617f
§ 8-404 ABATEMENT; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   (a)   If the owner, occupant or agent in charge of the property has neither
alleviated the conditions causing the alleged violation nor requested a hearing
within the time periods specified in § 8-403, the public officer or an
authorized assistant shall abate or remove the conditions causing the
violation.
   (b)   If the city abates or removes the nuisance pursuant to this section,
the city shall give notice to the owner or his or her agent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, of the total cost of the abatement or removal
incurred by the city. The notice shall also state that the payment is due
within 30 days following receipt of the notice. The city also may recover the
cost of providing notice, including any postage, required by this section.
   (c)   The notice shall also state that if the cost of the removal or
abatement is not paid within the 30-day period, the cost of the abatement or
removal shall be collected in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and
amendments thereto, or shall be assessed as special assessments and charged
against the lot or parcel of land on which the nuisance was located, and the
City Clerk, at the time of certifying other city taxes, shall certify the
unpaid portion of the costs, and the County Clerk shall extend the same on the
tax rolls of the county against such lot or parcel of land, and it shall be
collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the city as other city taxes are
collected and paid. The city may pursue collection both by levying a special
assessment and in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments
thereto, but only until the full cost and applicable interest has been paid in
full.
(K.S.A. 12-1617f)
§ 8-405 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The public officer and the public officer’s authorized assistants,
employees, contracting agents or other representatives are hereby expressly
authorized to enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for the
purpose of cutting, destroying and/or removing such weeds in a manner not
inconsistent with this article.
§ 8-406 UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or to attempt to
prevent the public officer or the public officer’s authorized representative
from entering upon any such lot or piece of ground or from proceeding with such
cutting and destruction. Such interference shall constitute a code violation.
§ 8-407 NOXIOUS WEEDS.
   (a)   Nothing in this article shall affect or impair the rights of the city
under the provisions of K.S.A. Chapter 2, Article 13, relating to the control
and eradication of certain noxious weeds.
   (b)   For the purpose of this article, the term NOXIOUS WEEDS shall mean
hoary cress (Lepidium draba), leafy spurge (Euphorbia virgata), quackgrass
(Elymus repens), Russian knapweed (Rhaponticum repens), kudzu (Pueraria montana
variety lobata), pignut (Hofmannseggia glauca), Canada thistle (Cirsium
arvense), field bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), musk thistle (Carduus nutans),
sericea lespedeza (Lespedeza cuneata), Johnson grass (Sorghum halepense) and
bur ragweed (Ambrosia grayii).
(K.S.A. 2-1314, K.A.R. 4-8-44)
ARTICLE 5: MINIMUM HOUSING CODE
Section
   
8-501   Title
   
8-502   General
   
8-503   Declaration of policy
   
8-504   Definitions
   
8-505   Duty of occupant or owner of occupied or unoccupied building and its
premises or vacant premises
   
8-506   Regulations for the use and occupancy of dwellings
   
8-507   Maintenance and repair; dwellings
   
8-508   Designation of unfit dwellings
   
8-509   Designation of blighted premises (residential and nonresidential)
   
8-510   Designation of blighted buildings and premises (nonresidential)
   
8-511   Inspection of buildings, structures and premises
   
8-512   Notice of violations; procedures
   
8-513   Public officer; authority
   
8-514   Governing body; authority
   
8-515   Order to correct and/or repair, remove or demolish
   
8-516   Demolition by public officer; procedure and costs
   
8-517   Conflict of laws; effect or partial invalidity
   
8-518   Governing body; appeals
   
8-519   Right of petition
§ 8-501 TITLE.
   This article shall be known as the “Minimum Standard for Housing and
Premises Code” and will be referred to herein as “this code.”
§ 8-502 GENERAL.
   Buildings used in whole or in part as a home or residence of a single family
or person, and every building used in whole or in part as a home or residence
of two or more persons or families living in separate apartments, and all
premises, either residential or nonresidential, shall conform to the
requirements of this code.
§ 8-503 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   The governing body declares the purpose of this code is to protect, preserve
and promote the physical and mental health of the people; investigate and
control communicable diseases; regulate privately- and publicly-owned
structures or dwellings and all premises for the purpose of sanitation, public
health and general appearance; protect the safety of the people; and promote
the general welfare by legislation that shall be applicable to all dwellings,
structures and premises now in existence or hereafter constructed or developed,
and which legislation:
   (a)   Establishes minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for
light, ventilation and heating, for safety from fire, for the use and location
and amount of space for human occupancy and for safe and sanitary maintenance;
   (b)   Establishes standards concerning unsightly and blighted buildings and
premises, both residential and nonresidential structures;
   (c)   Determines the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants;
and
   (d)   Provides for the administration and enforcement thereof.
§ 8-504 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partially underground, but
having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade
of the adjoining ground.
      CELLAR. A portion of a building located partially or wholly underground,
and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground.
      DWELLING. Any building that is wholly or partially used or intended to be
used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary
housing, hereinafter defined, shall not be regarded as a DWELLING.
      DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used, or intended to
be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
      HABITABLE DWELLING. Any structure or part thereof that shall be used as a
home or place of abode by one or more persons.
      HABITABLE ROOM. A room designed to be used for living, sleeping, eating
or cooking purposes, excluding bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls and
storage places or other similar places not used by persons for extended
periods.
      INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of insects,
rodents or other pests.
      INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE. The 2015 edition of the International
Residential Code.
      MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
      OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
      OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care, owns or has control of a
premises, or of a building or structure or part thereof, in which dwelling
units or rooming units are let.
      OWNER. Any person, firm or corporation who, jointly or severally along
with others, shall be in actual possession of, or have charge, care and control
of, any structure or dwelling unit or premises within the city as owner,
employee or agent of the owner, or as trustee or guardian of the estate or
person of the title holder, and such person shall be deemed and taken to be the
record owner or owner of such property within the true intent and meaning of
this code and shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article to
the same extent as the record owner, and notice to any such person shall be
deemed and taken to be a good and sufficient notice as if such person or
persons were actually the record owner or owner of such property.
      PERSON. Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
      PLUMBING. Includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: gas or fuel pipes; gas or fuel burning equipment; water pipes;
garbage disposal units; waste pipes; water closets; sinks; installed
dishwashers; lavatories; bathtubs; shower baths; installed clothes-washing
machines; catch basins; drains; vents; and any other similar supplied fixtures,
together with all connections to water, sewer, gas or fuel lines.
      PREMISES. Any lot or land area, either residential or nonresidential, not
covered by a structure and which is subject to a city tax in part or in whole.
      PUBLIC OFFICER. The Building Inspector.
      REFUSE. For the purpose of this article, REFUSE shall include garbage and
trash.
      (A)   GARBAGE. Any accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable waste
matter that attends the preparation of, use of, cooking of, delivering of or
storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables.
      (B)   TRASH (COMBUSTIBLE). Waste consisting of papers, cartons, boxes,
barrels, wood and excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture,
bedding and leaves, or any other combustible materials.
      (C)   TRASH (NON-COMBUSTIBLE). Waste consisting of metals, tin cans,
glass, crockery, other mineral refuse and ashes and street rubbish and
sweepings, dirt, sand, concrete scrap or any other non-combustible material.
      ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling, or that part of a dwelling containing one or
more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or
more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father or
sister or brother of the owner or operator.
      ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or
eating purposes.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to
something having a location on the ground.
      SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished by or provided by, or under the control of,
the owner or operator.
      TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human
shelter that is designed to be transportable and that is not attached to the
ground, house or building or another structure, or to any utilities system on
the same premises, for more than 30 consecutive days, except when located in a
mobile home court duly licensed under the laws of the city.
   (b)   Whenever the words DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT, ROOMING HOUSE, ROOMING
UNIT or PREMISES are used in this article, they shall be construed as though
they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
§ 8-505 DUTY OF OCCUPANT OR OWNER OF OCCUPIED OR UNOCCUPIED BUILDING AND ITS
PREMISES OR VACANT PREMISES.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the owner of every occupied or unoccupied
dwelling, building and premises, or vacant premises, including all yards, lawns
and courts, to keep such property clean and free from any accumulation of
filth, rubbish, garbage or any similar matter as covered by §§
8-508 and
8-509.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of each occupant of a dwelling unit to keep in
clean condition the portion of the property that he or she occupies and of
which he or she has exclusive control of; to comply with the rules and
regulations; and to place all garbage and refuse in proper containers. Where
care of the premises is not the responsibility of the occupant, then the owner
is responsible for violations of this code applicable to the premises.
   (c)   If receptacles are not provided by the owner, then the occupant shall
provide receptacles as may be necessary to contain all garbage and trash.
   (d)   Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single-dwelling unit shall
be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling
containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the unit primarily infested.
   (e)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
vermin-proof or reasonably insect-proof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner and operator.
   (f)   Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in
any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two
or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of
the owner.
§ 8-506 REGULATIONS FOR THE USE AND OCCUPANCY OF DWELLINGS.
   (a)   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping,
cooking or eating therein that does not comply with the following requirements.
   (b)   The following requirements are hereby declared essential to the health
and safety of the occupants of such dwelling or dwelling unit.
      (1)   Attached garages or non-dwelling areas. All non-dwelling
occupancies shall be separated from the dwelling unit by a fire-resistant wall,
and if the dwelling and garage are covered by a common or connecting roof, then
the ceiling also must have a fire-resistance rating of not less than one hour
as defined in the Building Code.
      (2)   Basement or cellar. The basement or cellar of any dwelling shall be
reasonably dry and ventilated and shall be kept free from rubbish accumulation.
      (3)   Basement dwelling units. The use of basements or cellars for
dwelling units is prohibited unless they comply with division (b)(18) below
governing ventilation, provided, however, if occupied at the time of the
passage of this code and if it complies with all other provisions of this code,
the public officer may approve less than the required windows if, in his or her
opinion, the window area is not detrimental to the occupants.
      (4)   Bathing facilities. Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a
room which affords privacy to a person in the room, a bathtub or shower in good
working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system.
      (5)   Boarding and rooming houses. No room shall be used for sleeping
purposes unless the ceiling height is at least seven feet and there are at
least 400 cubic feet of air space for each occupant over six years of age. For
sleeping rooms with sloping ceilings, the ceiling height shall be at least
seven feet over at least 50% of the floor area.
      (A)   Bathing facilities shall be provided in the form of a tub or shower
for each eight occupants. Separate facilities shall be provided for each sex
and plainly marked.
      (B)   A flush water closet shall be provided for each six occupants and
shall be separated with separate access from bathing facilities if more than
four occupants are served by each. Separate facilities shall be provided for
each sex and shall be plainly marked.
      (6)   Drainage. All courts, yards or other areas on the premises of any
dwelling shall be so graded and drained that there is no pooling of the water
thereon. Properly constructed wading and swimming pools and fish ponds are
excepted from this section.
      (7)   Entrances.
      (A)   There shall be for each dwelling unit a normally used separate
access either to a hallway, stairway or street that is safe and in good repair.
      (B)   A secondary exit to the ground shall be available in case of fire
through windows, porch roofs, ladders or any combination that is free of hazard
or egress.
      (8)   Floor area. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square
feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional
square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof. The floor
space shall be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area, inside
measurements. No floor space shall be included in determining habitable room
area over which the ceiling is less than seven feet above the floor for the
purpose of this division (b)(8).
      (9)   Garbage and trash receptacles. Every dwelling and every dwelling
unit shall be provided with such receptacles, not exceeding 32-gallon capacity,
as may be necessary to contain all garbage and trash, and such receptacles
shall at all times be maintained in good repair.
      (10)   Heating. Every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be so
constructed, insulated and maintained and be provided by owner or occupant with
heating units so that it is capable of reaching an air temperature of 70°F
under ordinary winter conditions. The chimney of the dwelling or dwelling unit
shall be maintained in good order and the owner of the approved heating
equipment shall maintain it in good order and repair.
      (11)   Kitchen sink. In every dwelling unit containing two or more rooms,
there shall be at least one kitchen sink with public water under pressure and
connected to the public sewer, or if that sewer system is not available, to a
sewage disposal system approved by the City Health Department.
      (12)   Lavatory facilities. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its
walls a lavatory basin in good working condition and properly connected to an
approved water and sewer system and located in the same room as the required
flush water closet, or as near to the room as practicable.
      (13)   Lighting. Every habitable room shall have a ceiling electric
outlet and a duplex outlet in wall or floor, or at least two wall or floor
outlets.
      (14)   Lighting of toilets and bathrooms. Every toilet and every bathroom
in every dwelling shall have at least one electric light in either the ceiling
or on the wall.
      (15)   Plumbing. All plumbing, water closets and other plumbing fixtures
in every dwelling or dwelling unit shall be maintained in good working order.
      (16)   Privies. All pit privies, privy vaults, “dry hopper” sewer-
connected privies and frost-proof closets are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.
      (17)   Toilet facilities. There shall be at least one flush water closet
in good working condition for each dwelling unit, which flush water closet
shall be located within the dwelling and in a room that affords privacy.
      (18)   Ventilation. Every habitable room in a dwelling or dwelling unit
shall contain a window or windows openable directly to the outside air, and the
total area of such window or windows shall be not less than 5% of the floor
area of such room. An approved system of mechanical ventilation or air
conditioning may be used in lieu of openable windows. Such system shall be
capable of providing not less than four air changes per hour, except that in
toilet compartments, such system shall provide a complete air change every five
minutes and be automatically put in operation when the toilet compartment light
is in the “on” position.
      (19)   Water heating facilities. Every dwelling shall have supplied water
heating facilities that are installed in an approved manner and are maintained
and operated in a safe and good working condition and are properly connected
with the hot water lines to the kitchen sink, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
      (20)   Windows and doors. Every window and exterior door shall be
reasonably weather-tight, lockable and rodent-proof and shall be kept in good
working condition and good repair.
§ 8-507 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR; DWELLINGS.
   Every dwelling and every part thereof shall be maintained in good repair by
the owner or agent and be fit for human habitation. The roof shall be
maintained so as not to leak, and all rainwater shall be drained therefrom so
as not to cause dampness in the walls or ceilings. All floors, stairways,
doors, porches, windows, skylights, chimneys, toilets, sinks, walls and
ceilings shall be kept in good repair and usable condition.
§ 8-508 DESIGNATION OF UNFIT DWELLINGS.
   The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation
and placarding of such unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out
in compliance with the following requirements.
   (a)   Existence of conditions. The public officer may determine, or five
citizens may petition in writing, that any dwelling unit is unfit for human use
or habitation if he, she or they find that conditions exist in such structure
that are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the
occupants of such buildings or other residents of the neighborhood, or which
shall have a blighting influence on properties in the area.
   (b)   Conditions generally. Such conditions may include the following
without limitation:
      (1)   Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities;
      (2)   Lack of:
      (A)   Adequate ventilation;
      (B)   Light;
      (C)   Cleanliness; and
      (D)   Sanitary facilities.
      (3)   Dilapidation;
      (4)   Disrepair;
      (5)   Structural defects;
      (6)   Overcrowding;
      (7)   Inadequate ingress and egress;
      (8)   Unsightly appearance that constitutes a blight to the adjoining
property, the neighborhood or the city; and
      (9)   Air pollution.
   (c)   Placarding; order to vacate. Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned
as unfit for human habitation, and so designated and placarded by the public
officer, shall be vacated within a reasonable time as so ordered.
   (d)   Notice of violation. Procedures as outlined in §
8-512 are applicable hereto.
   (e)   Compliance required before re-occupancy. No dwelling or dwelling unit
that has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again
be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and such
placard is removed by, the public officer.
      (1)   The public officer shall remove such placard whenever the defect or
defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been
eliminated.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to let, lease, occupy or permit the
occupancy, whether for a consideration or not, of any dwelling so posted, and
any violation of this provision shall constitute a public offense within the
meaning of this code.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or remove the placard
from any dwelling or dwelling unit that has been condemned as unfit for human
habitation and placarded as such, except the public officer as herein provided,
and any violation of this provision shall constitute a public offense within
the meaning of this code.
§ 8-509 DESIGNATION OF BLIGHTED PREMISES (RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL).
   The designation of unsightly and blighted premises and elimination thereof
shall be carried out in compliance with the following requirements.
   (a)   Public officer determinations. The public officer may determine, or
five citizens may petition in writing, that if the appearance of a premises is
not commensurate with the character of the properties in the neighborhood or
otherwise constitutes a blight to the adjoining property or the neighborhood or
the city for such reasons as, but not limited to:
      (1)   Dead trees or other unsightly natural growth;
      (2)   Unsightly stored or parked material, equipment, supplies,
machinery, trucks or automobiles, or parts thereof; vermin infestation;
inadequate drainage; and
      (3)   Violation of any other law or regulations relating to the use of
land and the use and occupancy of the buildings and improvements.
   (b)   Notice of violation. Procedures as outlined in §
8-512 are applicable hereto.
§ 8-510 DESIGNATION OF BLIGHTED BUILDINGS AND PREMISES (NONRESIDENTIAL).
   (a)   Certain blighted conditions. Certain blighted conditions covered in §§
8-508 and
8-509 concerning buildings and premises that are on the tax roll of the city
are applicable to all nonresidential buildings and premises.
   (b)   Notice of violation. Procedures of notification shall follow those
prescribed in §
8-512.
§ 8-511 INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND PREMISES.
   (a)   For the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this
code, the public officer or his or her authorized representative is hereby
authorized to make inspections to determine the condition, use and occupancy of
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and the premises upon which the same
are located. This requirement is applicable to existing dwellings or buildings.
   (b)   The public officer is not limited by the conditions in division (a)
above where new construction or vacant premises are involved and may make such
inspections at any appropriate time.
   (c)   The owner, operator and occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and
rooming unit shall give the public officer, or his or her authorized
representative, during reasonable hours, free access to such dwelling, dwelling
unit and rooming unit, and its premises, for the purpose of such inspection,
examination and survey after identification by proper credentials.
   (d)   Every occupant of a dwelling shall give the owner thereof, or his or
her authorized agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling, or its
premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this
code or with any rule or regulation adopted and promulgated, or any order
issued pursuant to the provisions of this code.
§ 8-512 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS; PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Informal discussion. Whenever the public officer or his or her
authorized representative determines that there has been a violation of any
provision of this code, the public officer will arrange with the alleged
violator for an informal discussion of violations, and whether repair and
correction is justified.
   (b)   Formal hearing. If a satisfactory solution to the violations either by
correction, demolition or removal is not forthcoming, then a legal notice of a
formal hearing will be issued according to the following procedures:
      (1)   Shall be in writing;
      (2)   Shall list the violations alleged to exist or to have been
committed;
      (3)   Shall provide a reasonable time, but not less than 30 days in any
event, for the correction of the violations particularized;
      (4)   Shall be addressed to and served upon the owner of the property,
the operator of the dwelling and the occupant of the dwelling unit or rooming
unit concerned, if the occupant is or may be responsible for violation;
      (5)   If one or more persons to whom the notice is addressed cannot be
found or served after diligent effort to do so, service may be made upon such
person or persons by posting a notice in a conspicuous place in or about the
dwelling affected by the notice, in which event the public officer or his or
her authorized representative shall include in the record a statement as to why
such posting was necessary; and
      (6)   Delivery shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, or
by personal service. If service is made by certified mail, the public officer
or his or her authorized representative shall include in the record a verified
statement giving details regarding the mailing.
§ 8-513 PUBLIC OFFICER; AUTHORITY.
   For the purpose of protecting the city against unsightly or blighted
premises, and also the health, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of
dwellings or dwelling units, the public officer referred heretofore is hereby
authorized, with the consent and prior knowledge of the governing body, to
enforce provisions of this code and of other laws that regulate or set
standards affecting buildings and premises.
§ 8-514 GOVERNING BODY; AUTHORITY.
   The governing body is hereby authorized:
   (a)   To informally review all alleged violations as provided in § 8-512(a)
prior to the notification prescribed in §
8-512(b);
   (b)   To take action as prescribed in §
8-512(b);
   (c)   To hear appeals if there is opposition to any order, requirement,
decision or determination by the public officer in enforcement of this code as
outlined in §
8-518; and
   (d)   Discretionary authority may be exercised in specific cases where
variance from the terms of the code:
      (1)   Will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare of
inhabitants of the city;
      (2)   Is in harmony with the spirit of this code; and
      (3)   Where literal enforcement of the code will result in unnecessary
hardship.
§ 8-515 ORDER TO CORRECT AND/OR REPAIR, REMOVE OR DEMOLISH.
   At the time of the placarding and order to vacate specified by §
8-508(c), the public officer shall also issue and cause to be served upon the
owner a notice advising of the option of removal or demolition in lieu of
correction and/or repair following the procedures as outlined in §
8-512.
§ 8-516 DEMOLITION BY PUBLIC OFFICER; PROCEDURE AND COSTS.
   (a)   For failure to comply with the order under §
8-515 for the alteration or improvement of such structure, the public officer,
with the consent and prior knowledge of the governing body, may cause such
condemned structure to be removed or demolished and the premises improved to
eliminate the conditions outlined in §
8-509.
   (b)   The cost of demolition by a public officer shall be a lien upon the
property upon which the cost was incurred, and such lien, including as a part
thereof an allowance of his or her costs and necessary attorney’s fees, may be
foreclosed in judicial proceedings in the manner provided or authorized by law
for loans secured by liens on real property, or shall be assessed as a special
assessment upon the lot or parcel of land on which the structure was located,
and the City Clerk, at the time of certifying other city taxes, shall certify
the unpaid portion of the aforesaid costs, and the County Clerk shall extend
the same on the tax rolls against the lot or parcel of land.
   (c)   If the structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, he or
she shall offer for bids and sell the structure or the materials of such
structure. The proceeds of such sale shall be credited against the cost of the
removal or demolition and, if there is any balance remaining, it shall be paid
to the parties entitled thereto after deduction of costs or judicial
proceedings, if any, including the necessary attorney’s fees incurred therein,
as determined by the court, if involved.
§ 8-517 CONFLICT OF LAWS; EFFECT OR PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   (a)   With conflicts between the provisions of this code and with a
provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of
the city existing on the effective date of this article, the provision shall
prevail that establishes the higher standard.
   (b)   With conflicts between this article with a provision of any other
ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date of this article
that establishes a lower standard, the provisions of this article shall be
deemed to prevail, and such other laws or codes are hereby declared to be
repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this code.
§ 8-518 GOVERNING BODY; APPEALS.
   (a)   Any person, firm or corporation considering themselves aggrieved by
the decision of the public officer and who desires to present a formal protest
to the governing body shall, in writing, request a hearing before the governing
body within ten days after receiving notice of the decision from the public
officer, as provided in §
8-512(b). Such protest and request for a hearing shall be filed with the office
of the City Clerk.
   (b)   Upon receipt of a protest and request for a hearing, the City Clerk
shall notify in writing the governing body of such appeal.
   (c)   The governing body shall, within 30 days of receipt of protest and
request for a hearing, determine a date for the hearing.
   (d)   Notice of the date for the hearing shall be sent to the appellant at
least ten days before the hearing.
   (e)   Except where an immediate hazard exists, as described in §
4-612 of this code, the filing of a protest and request for a hearing before
the governing body as specified in division (a) above shall operate as a stay
of the enforcement of the public officer’s order until such time as the
governing body has reached a decision on the matter.
§ 8-519 RIGHT OF PETITION.
   After exhausting the remedy provided in §
8-518, any person aggrieved by an order issued by the public officer and
approved by the governing body after a hearing on the matter may, within 30
days from the date that the order became final, petition the District Court of
the county in which the property is located to restrain the public officer from
carrying out the provisions of the order.
ARTICLE 6: RODENT CONTROL
Section
   
8-601   Definitions
   
8-602   Building maintenance
   
8-603   Notice to rat-stop; when city to do work
   
8-604   Failure to comply
   
8-605   Replace rat-stoppage
   
8-606   Notice to eradicate rats
   
8-607   Conditions conducive to harborage of rats
   
8-608   Inspections
§ 8-601 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any structure, whether public or private, that is adapted for
occupancy as a residence; the transaction of business; the rendering of
professional services; amusement; the display, sale or storage of goods, wares
or merchandise; or the performance of work or labor, including office
buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, workshops
and all other houses, sheds and other structures on the premises used for
business purposes.
   OCCUPANT. The person that has the use of, controls or occupies any business
building or any portion thereof, whether owner or tenant. In the case of vacant
business buildings or any vacant portion of a business building, the owner,
agent or other person having custody of the building shall have the
responsibilities of an OCCUPANT of a building.
   OWNER. The owner of any building or structure, whether individual, firm,
partnership or corporation.
   RAT HARBORAGE. Any condition that provides shelter or protection for rats,
thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or outside
a structure of any kind.
   RAT-STOPPAGE. A form of rat-proofing to prevent the ingress of rats into
buildings from the exterior or from one building to another, consisting
essentially of the closing of all openings in the exterior walls, ground or
first floors, basements, roofs and foundations, that may be reached by rats
from the ground by climbing or by burrowing, with material or equipment
impervious to rat-gnawing.
§ 8-602 BUILDING MAINTENANCE.
   All buildings and structures located within the present or future boundaries
of the city shall be rat-stopped, freed of rats and maintained in a rat-stopped
and rat-free condition.
§ 8-603 NOTICE TO RAT-STOP; WHEN CITY TO DO WORK.
   Upon receipt of written notice from the governing body, the owner of any
building or structure specified therein shall take immediate measures for the
rat-stoppage of such building or structure. The work shall be completed in the
time specified in the written notice, which shall be within 15 days, or within
the time of any written extension thereof that may have been granted by the
governing body.
§ 8-604 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   If the owner fails to comply with such written notice or extension, then the
governing body is authorized to take such action as may be necessary to
completely rat-stop the building or structure at the expense of the owner, and
the City Clerk shall submit bills for the expense thereof to the owner of the
building or structure. If the bills are not paid within 60 days, the City Clerk
shall certify the amount due to the City Treasurer and the charge shall be a
lien against the property where the work has been done, and the owner shall be
promptly billed therefor. The expense thereof shall include the cost of labor,
materials, equipment and any other actual expense necessary for rat-stoppage.
§ 8-605 REPLACE RAT-STOPPAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any occupant, owner, contractor, public utility
company, plumber or any other person to remove the rat-stoppage from any
building or structure for any purpose and fail to restore the same in a
satisfactory condition, or to make any new openings that are not closed or
sealed against the entrance of rats.
§ 8-606 NOTICE TO ERADICATE RATS.
   Whenever the governing body notifies in writing the owner of any building or
structure theretofore rat-stopped, as hereinabove defined, that there is
evidence of rat infestation of the building or structure, the owner shall
immediately institute appropriate measures for freeing the premises so occupied
of all rats. Unless suitable measures for freeing the building or structure of
rats are instituted within five days after the receipt of notice, and unless
continually maintained in a satisfactory manner, the city is hereby authorized
to free the building or structure of rats at the expense of the owner thereof,
and the City Clerk shall submit bills for the expense thereof to the owner of
the building or structure, and if the same are not paid, the City Clerk shall
certify the amount due from the owner to the City Treasurer and the owner shall
be promptly billed therefor. The expense thereof shall include the cost of
labor, materials, equipment and any other actual expense necessary for the
eradication measures.
§ 8-607 CONDITIONS CONDUCIVE TO HARBORAGE OF RATS.
   (a)   All food and feed kept within the city for feeding animals shall be
kept and stored in rat-free and rat-proof containers, compartments or rooms
unless kept in a rat-stopped building.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, leave, dump or permit to
accumulate any garbage or trash in any building or premises so that the same
shall afford food and harborage for rats.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate, or to permit the
accumulation on any premises or on any open lot of, any lumber, boxes, barrels,
bricks, stone or similar materials that may be permitted to remain thereon and
that are rat harborages, unless the same shall be placed on open racks that are
elevated not less than 12 inches above the ground, evenly piled or stacked.
   (d)   Whenever conditions inside or under any building or structure provide
such extensive harborage for rats that the Health Department deems it necessary
to eliminate such harborage, he or she may require the owner to install
suitable cement floors in basements or to replace wooden first or ground floors
or require the owner to correct such other interior rat harborage as may be
necessary to facilitate the eradication of rats in a reasonable time and
thereby to reduce the cost of such eradication.
§ 8-608 INSPECTIONS.
   The Building Inspector is empowered to make such inspections and re-
inspections of the interior and exterior of any building or structure as in his
or her opinion may be necessary to determine full compliance with this article.
ARTICLE 7: INSURANCE PROCEEDS FUND
Section
   
8-701   Scope and application
   
8-702   Lien created
   
8-703   Same; encumbrances
   
8-704   Same; pro rata basis
   
8-705   Procedure
   
8-706   Fund created; deposit of monies
   
8-707   Building Inspector; investigation, removal of structure
   
8-708   Removal of structure; excess monies
   
8-709   Same; disposition of funds
   
8-710   Effect upon insurance policies
   
8-711   Insurers; liability
§ 8-701 SCOPE AND APPLICATION.
   The city is hereby authorized to utilize the procedures established by
K.S.A. 40-3901 et seq. whereby no insurance company shall pay a claim of a
named insured for loss or damage to any building or other structure located
within the city where the amount recoverable for the loss or damage to the
building or other structure under all policies is in excess of 75% of the face
value of the policy covering such building or other insured structure, unless
there is compliance with the procedures set out in this article.
§ 8-702 LIEN CREATED.
   The governing body of the city hereby creates a lien in favor of the city on
the proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a covered claim payment made
for damage or loss to a building or other structure located within the city
where the amount recoverable for all the loss or damage to the building or
other structure under all policies is in excess of 75% of the face value of the
policy(s) covering such building or other insured structure. The lien arises
upon any unpaid tax, special ad valorem levy, or any other charge imposed upon
real property by or on behalf of the city which is an encumbrance on real
property, whether or not evidenced by written instrument, or such tax, levy,
assessment, expense or other charge that has remained undischarged for at least
one year prior to the filing of a proof of loss.
§ 8-703 SAME; ENCUMBRANCES.
   Prior to final settlement on any claim covered by §
8-702, the insurer or insurers shall contact the County Treasurer to determine
whether any such encumbrances are presently in existence. If the same are found
to exist, the insurer or insurers shall execute and transmit in an amount equal
to that owing under the encumbrances a draft payable to the County Treasurer,
Sumner County, Kansas.
§ 8-704 SAME; PRO RATA BASIS.
   Such transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all insurance
companies insuring the building or other structure.
§ 8-705 PROCEDURE.
   (a)   When final settlement on a covered claim has been agreed to or arrived
at between the named insured or insureds and the company or companies, and the
final settlement exceeds 75% of the face value of the policy covering any
building or other insured structure, and when all amounts due the holder of a
first real estate mortgage against the building or other structure, pursuant to
the terms of the policy and endorsements thereto, shall have been paid, the
insurance company or companies shall execute a draft payable to the City
Treasurer in an amount equal to the sum of 15% of the covered claim payment,
unless the Chief Building Inspector of the city has issued a certificate to the
insurance company or companies that the insured has removed the damaged
building or other structure, as well as all associated debris, or repaired,
rebuilt or otherwise made the premises safe and secure.
   (b)   Such transfer of funds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies
insuring the building or other structure. Policy proceeds remaining after the
transfer to the city shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy terms.
   (c)   Upon the transfer of the funds as required by division (a) above, the
insurance company shall provide the city with the name and address of the named
insured or insureds, the total insurance coverage applicable to said building
or other structure, and the amount of the final settlement agreed to or arrived
at between the insurance company or companies and the insured or insureds,
whereupon the Chief Building Inspector shall contact the named insured or
insureds by certified mail, return receipt requested, notifying them that said
insurance proceeds have been received by the city and apprise them of the
procedures to be followed under this article.
§ 8-706 FUND CREATED; DEPOSIT OF MONIES.
   The City Treasurer is hereby authorized and shall create a fund to be known
as the Insurance Proceeds Fund. All monies received by the City Treasurer as
provided for by this article shall be placed in said fund and deposited in an
interest-bearing account.
§ 8-707 BUILDING INSPECTOR; INVESTIGATION, REMOVAL OF STRUCTURE.
   (a)   Upon receipt of monies as provided for by this article, the City
Treasurer shall immediately notify the Chief Building Inspector of said receipt
and transmit all documentation received from the insurance company or companies
to the Chief Building Inspector.
   (b)   Within 30 days of the receipt of said monies, the Chief Building
Inspector shall determine, after prior investigation, whether the city shall
instigate proceedings under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as
amended.
   (c)   Prior to the expiration of the 30 days established by division (b)
above, the Chief Building Inspector shall notify the City Treasurer whether he
or she intends to initiate proceedings under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as
amended.
   (d)   If the Chief Building Inspector has determined that proceedings under
K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended, shall be initiated, he or she will do so
immediately, but no later than 45 days after receipt of the monies by the City
Treasurer.
   (e)   Upon notification to the City Treasurer by the Chief Building
Inspector that no proceedings shall be initiated under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq.,
as amended, the City Treasurer shall return all such monies received, plus
accrued interest, to the insured or insureds as identified in the communication
from the insurance company or companies. Such return shall be accomplished
within 45 days of the receipt of the monies from the insurance company or
companies.
§ 8-708 REMOVAL OF STRUCTURE; EXCESS MONIES.
   If the Chief Building Inspector has proceeded under the provisions of K.S.A.
12-1750 et seq., as amended, all monies in excess of that which is ultimately
necessary to comply with the provisions for the removal of the building or
structure, less salvage value, if any, shall be paid to the insured.
§ 8-709 SAME; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   If the Chief Building Inspector, with regard to a building or other
structure damaged, determines that it is necessary to act under K.S.A. 12-1756,
any proceeds received by the City Treasurer under the authority of §
8-705(a) relating to that building or other structure shall be used to
reimburse the city for any expenses incurred by the city in proceeding under
K.S.A. 12-1756. Upon reimbursement from the insurance proceeds, the Chief
Building Inspector shall immediately effect the release of the lien resulting
therefrom. Should the expenses incurred by the city exceed the insurance
proceeds paid over to the City Treasurer under §
8-705(a), the Chief Building Inspector shall publish a new lien, as authorized
by K.S.A. 12-1756, in an amount equal to such excess expenses incurred.
§ 8-710 EFFECT UPON INSURANCE POLICIES.
   This article shall not make the city a party to any insurance contract, nor
is the insurer liable to any party for any amount in excess of the proceeds
otherwise payable under its insurance policy.
§ 8-711 INSURERS; LIABILITY.
   Insurers complying with this article or attempting in good faith to comply
with this article shall be immune from civil and criminal liability, and such
action shall not be deemed in violation of K.S.A. 40-2404 and any amendments
thereto, including withholding payment of any insurance proceeds pursuant to
this article or releasing or disclosing any information pursuant to this
article.
CHAPTER IX: MUNICIPAL COURT
   Article
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
9-101   Municipal Court established
   
9-102   Same; practice and procedure
   
9-103   Time and place of sessions
   
9-104   Municipal Judge; appointment
   
9-105   Same; absence; vacancy; pro tem
   
9-106   Same; powers and duties
   
9-107   Same; salary
   
9-108   Court Clerk
   
9-109   Payment of fine
   
9-110   Same; failure to pay separate violation
   
9-111   Failure to appear
   
9-112   Court and administration fees
§ 9-101 MUNICIPAL COURT ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   There is hereby established a Municipal Court for the city.
   (b)   The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine
cases involving violations of the ordinances of the city.
§ 9-102 SAME; PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE.
   The State Code of Procedure for Municipal Courts, as set forth in K.S.A. 12-
4101 et seq., and all acts amendatory or supplemental thereto, shall govern the
practice and procedure in all Municipal Court cases.
§ 9-103 TIME AND PLACE OF SESSIONS.
   The Municipal Court shall be held in the Municipal Courtroom in the City
Hall building on such days and at such hours as the Municipal Judge designates.
§ 9-104 MUNICIPAL JUDGE; APPOINTMENT.
   The Municipal Court shall be presided over by a Municipal Judge. The Mayor,
subject to the approval of the City Council, shall appoint the Judge of the
Municipal Court.
§ 9-105 SAME; ABSENCE; VACANCY; PRO TEM.
   (a)   In the event the Municipal Judge is temporarily unable to preside due
to absence, illness or disqualification, the Municipal Judge shall designate an
attorney or other qualified person to act as Judge Pro Tempore. In the event
the Municipal Judge fails to appoint a Judge Pro Tempore, the Judge Pro Tempore
shall be appointed in the same manner as the Municipal Judge is selected. The
Judge Pro Tempore shall receive compensation as shall be provided by ordinance,
payable in the same manner as the compensation of the regular Municipal Judge.
   (b)   In the event a vacancy shall occur in the office of Municipal Judge, a
successor shall be appointed to fill the unexpired term in the same manner as
the Municipal Judge was appointed.
(K.S.A. 12-4107)
§ 9-106 SAME; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Municipal Judge shall have such powers and duties as set forth in the
State Code of Procedure for Municipal Courts (K.S.A. 12-4101 et seq.) and all
acts amendatory or supplemental thereto.
§ 9-107 SAME; SALARY.
   The Municipal Judge shall receive a salary as shall be fixed by ordinance.
§ 9-108 COURT CLERK.
   (a)   There is hereby established the Office of the Clerk of the Municipal
Court of the city, which office shall be filled by appointment by the Municipal
Judge of the Municipal Court.
   (b)   The duties of the office shall be those prescribed by the Code for
Municipal Courts set forth in K.S.A. Chapter 12, Article 41, and shall include
the following duties.
      (1)   The Clerk shall issue all processes of the Court; administer oaths;
file and preserve all papers and docket cases and set same for trial; and shall
perform such further acts as may be necessary to carry out the duties and
responsibilities of the Court. The Clerk shall receive, account for and pay to
the City Treasurer monthly all fines and forfeited bonds paid into the Court.
The Clerk shall make reports to the Judicial Administrator and furnish the
information when requested by him, her or a departmental justice on such forms
furnished by the Judicial Administrator, and approved by the Supreme Court.
      (2)   The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall, within ten days after
selection and before entering upon the duties of office, execute to the city
such bond as the governing body may require, which shall be approved by the
governing body, and file in the office of the City Clerk, conditioned for the
faithful performance of the duties required of him or her by law and for the
faithful application and payment of all monies that may come into his or her
hands in the execution of the duties of the office. The city shall pay the cost
of such bond.
      (3)   The monthly salary of the Clerk shall be fixed by ordinance.
      (4)   A majority of all members of the Council may remove the Clerk
appointed under the authority of this article, or for good cause the Mayor may
temporarily suspend any such appointed Clerk.
(K.S.A. 12-4108)
§ 9-109 PAYMENT OF FINE.
   Where a Municipal Court judgment against any person results in a fine and/or
court costs only, the same shall be satisfied by paying the amount of such fine
and/or court costs to the Municipal Court immediately on the rendition of
judgment, or at such time as the Municipal Judge shall determine.
§ 9-110 SAME; FAILURE TO PAY SEPARATE VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail to pay any lawfully
imposed fine for a violation of any law of the city within the time authorized
by the Court and without lawful excuse having been presented to the Court on or
before the date the fine is due. Such conduct constitutes a violation of this
article, regardless of the full payment of the fine after such time.
§ 9-111 FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person charged with violation of any law
of the city to fail to appear before the Municipal Court when so scheduled to
appear unless lawful excuse for absence is presented to the Court on or before
the time and date scheduled for appearance.
   (b)   For the purpose of division (a) above, FAILURE TO APPEAR shall include
willfully incurring a forfeiture of an appearance bond and failure to surrender
oneself within 30 days following the date of such forfeiture by one who is
charged with a violation of the laws of the city and has been released on bond
for appearance before the Municipal Court for trial or other proceeding prior
to conviction, or willfully incurring a forfeiture of an appearance bond and
failing to surrender oneself within 30 days after his or her conviction of a
violation of the laws of the city has become final by one who has been released
on an appearance bond by any court of this state.
   (c)   Any person who is released upon his or her own recognizance, without
surety, or who fails to appear in response to a summons, notice to appear or
traffic citation duly served upon him or her personally, shall be deemed a
person released on bond for appearance within the meaning of division (b)
above.
   (d)   Failure to appear, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by
incarceration for up to 30 days and/or a fine of up to $250.
§ 9-112 COURT AND ADMINISTRATION FEES.
   For each case filed in municipal court, except for violations with penalty
provisions providing within the penalty provision that the fine shall include
the court costs, where there is a finding of guilt, either after trial or upon
the court accepting a plea of guilty or no contest, or upon a forfeiture of
bond or the entry of a diversion agreement, the following court costs shall be
imposed:
   (a)   A docket fee of $41.50 shall be imposed. On any case where the fee
imposed pursuant to K.S.A. 12-4117 in division (b) below need not be imposed,
then this docket fee shall be increased by $22.50 so that the total amount
collected in all cases will be $65;
   (b)   A fee of $22.50, as required by K.S.A. 12-4117, except for cases
involving nonmoving traffic violations. All parking tickets shall be deemed to
be nonmoving traffic offenses. Any traffic violation, including ordinance
traffic infractions without a corresponding state statute being violated, shall
be deemed nonmoving traffic violations;
   (c)   Witness fees of $10 for each witness, plus mileage, shall be assessed
for all witnesses signing up for a witness fee after being subpoenaed to
testify, except for currently employed city police officers;
   (d)   A bench warrant fee of $50 shall be assessed when a bench warrant has
been served upon the defendant. There shall be no more than one bench warrant
fee in any case even though multiple bench warrants may be served upon the
defendant when the court recalls the bench warrant, such as when the defendant
appears in court to turn himself or herself in and the court exercises its
discretion to recall the warrant;
   (e)   A KBI laboratory fee of $400 shall be assessed in each case in which
the KBI provided forensic science, laboratory services or forensic computer
examination services in connection with the investigation of such case,
provided that such services were provided prior to the defendant being granted
diversion or adjudicated guilty of the crime pertaining thereto;
   (f)   An incarceration fee of $35 per day for each day or portion of a day
that the defendant is committed by the court to serve time in the County Jail,
up to a maximum incarceration fee of $350 per case (ten days in jail). This
incarceration fee only applies to jail time served pursuant to court order and
shall not apply to jail time served prior to the defendant being initially
sentenced by the court;
   (g)   A notice fee of $30 shall be assessed not more than once in each case
in which the Court Clerk either sends notice to the defendant, by mail or
summons, that the defendant has failed to pay or appear in court as required.
Such notice may be the notice required to be sent prior to suspension of the
defendant’s driver’s license for a traffic offense or it may be such other
notice that the Clerk uses to notify the defendant of missing a required court
appearance;
   (h)   A judicial education fund assessment of $1 per case shall be assessed
as required by state law, including K.S.A. 12-4116;
   (i)   A probation supervision fee of $50 may be assessed against any
defendant that the court places on a reporting probation;
   (j)   An expungement fee of $75 shall be paid by the defendant upon the
defendant filing a motion for expungement;
   (k)   Driver’s license reinstatement fees, as required by state statute,
shall be collected by the Clerk as court costs and forwarded to the Department
of Revenue;
   (l)   The fees in divisions (a), (b), (c), (h) and (j) noted above are
mandatory and may not be waived by the court; and
   (m)   The fees provided for in divisions (d), (e), (f), (g) and (l) above
may be waived or partially waived by the Court upon the Court making a finding
that the defendant is indigent and is therefore either incapable of paying such
fees or would suffer significant financial hardship if required to pay such
fees. The basis for such a finding shall be documented by the court.
(Ord. 310, passed 8-2-2016)
CHAPTER X: POLICE
   Article
      
1.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
2.   PROPERTY IN POLICE CUSTODY
      
3.   POLICE FEES
      
4.   RESERVE POLICE FORCE
ARTICLE 1: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
10-101   Police Department
   
10-102   Law enforcement personnel; general duties
   
10-103   Rules and regulations
§ 10-101 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The law enforcement department shall consist of a Chief of Police and such
number of regular law enforcement officers as shall be appointed as provided by
K.S.A. 15-204.
§ 10-102 LAW ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL; GENERAL DUTIES.
   (a)   It shall be the general duty of the Chief of Police and all sworn law
enforcement personnel to the best of their ability to preserve good order,
peace and quiet throughout the city as provided by law or ordinance.
   (b)   The Chief of Police and all sworn law enforcement personnel shall at
all times have power to make arrests under proper process or without process on
view of any offense against the laws of the state or laws of the city and to
keep all persons so arrested, unless admitted to bail, in the City Jail, County
Jail or other proper place to prevent their escape until their trial can be had
before the proper officer.
   (c)   All persons arrested for violation of any law of the state and who
shall not be charged with an offense under any law of the city shall be
released to the custody of the Sheriff of the county, and such arrest shall be
reported to the County Attorney.
§ 10-103 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of Police shall have the power to make such rules and regulations
as may be necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of the Department.
Such rules and regulations shall be approved by the governing body.
ARTICLE 2: PROPERTY IN POLICE CUSTODY
Section
   
10-201   Regulations
   
10-202   Disposition
   
10-203   Same; exempt property
   
10-204   Claiming property
   
10-205   Proof of ownership
   
10-206   Auction
§ 10-201 REGULATIONS.
   The Police Department is required to establish regulations detailing the
collection, storage and inventory of property that may come under its control
by any manner.
§ 10-202 DISPOSITION.
   Any property which has been acquired or turned over to the Police Department
and has been classified, in accordance with procedures existing in the Police
Department, as unclaimed or for which the proper owner cannot be ascertained
shall be kept for a minimum of 90 days. After a period of 90 days, such
property, except as provided in §
10-203, shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder and the proceeds,
after expenses, shall be paid to the State Treasurer pursuant to K.S.A. 20-
2801, and amendments thereto.
§ 10-203 SAME; EXEMPT PROPERTY.
   The following classes of property shall be considered exceptions to §
10-202 and shall be dealt with in the following manner.
   (a)   Cash money shall be turned over to the City General Fund unless it
shall be determined to have collector’s value, in which case it shall be
auctioned according to the provisions in §
10-202.
   (b)   Except as provided in divisions (c) and (d) below, any weapon or
ammunition, in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction of the property,
shall be:
      (1)   Forfeited to the law enforcement agency seizing the weapon for use
within such agency; for sale to a properly licensed federal firearms dealer;
for trading to a properly licensed federal firearms dealer for other new or
used firearms or accessories for use within such agency; or for trading to
another law enforcement agency for that agency’s use;
      (2)   Forfeited to the State Bureau of Investigation for law enforcement,
testing or comparison by the State Bureau of Investigation forensic laboratory;
      (3)   Forfeited to a county regional forensic science center, or other
county forensic laboratory, for testing, comparison or other forensic science
purposes; or
      (4)   Forfeited to the State Department of Wildlife, Parks and Tourism
for use pursuant to the conditions set forth in K.S.A. 32-1047, and amendments
thereto.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (d) below, any weapon which cannot be
forfeited pursuant to division (b) above due to the condition of the weapon,
and any weapon which was used in the commission of a felony as described in
K.S.A. 21-5401, 21-5402, 21-5403, 21-5404 or 21-5405, and amendments thereto,
shall be destroyed.
   (d)   If a weapon is seized from an individual and the individual is not
convicted or adjudicated as a juvenile offender of the violation for which the
weapon was seized, then within 30 days after the declination or conclusion of
prosecution of the case against the individual, including any period of appeal,
the law enforcement agency that seized the weapon shall verify that the weapon
is not stolen, and upon such verification shall notify the person from whom it
was seized that the weapon may be retrieved. Such notification shall include
the location where such weapon may be retrieved.
   (e)   If weapons are sold as authorized by division (b) above, the proceeds
of the sale shall be credited to the Asset Seizure and Forfeiture Fund of the
seizing agency.
   (f)   For the purposes of divisions (b), (c) and (d) above, the term WEAPON
means any:
      (1)   Bludgeon, sand club, metal knuckle or throwing star;
      (2)   Dagger, dirk, billy, blackjack, slungshot, dangerous knife,
straight-edged razor, stiletto or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or
instrument of like character;
      (3)   Spring gun; or
      (4)   Firearm.
   (g)   Homemade weapons or weapons of a contraband nature shall be destroyed.
   (h)   Any items determined to be contraband, such as explosives, narcotics
and the like, shall be destroyed.
   (i)   Controlled substances forfeited for violations of K.S.A. 21-5701 to
21-5717, and amendments thereto, shall be dealt with as provided under K.S.A.
60-4101 to 60-4126, and amendments thereto.
   (j)   Items of a pharmaceutical nature which, while not contraband when
properly dispensed, or which are of an over-the-counter-variety, shall be
destroyed.
   (k)   Foodstuffs, if sealed and undamaged, may be turned over to any
appropriate social service agency or destroyed, but shall not be auctioned.
   (l)   Alcohol products such as beer, wine, whiskey and the like shall be
destroyed.
   (m)   Items with a value in excess of $500 may be sold after advertising
said item in a general circulation newspaper on at least two occasions. Such
sales shall be by closed bid.
(K.S.A. 22-2512)
§ 10-204 CLAIMING PROPERTY.
   The Police Department shall be required to make reasonable attempts to
locate the owner of any property in storage; however, the responsibility for
claiming and identifying any such property shall rest solely with the owner.
§ 10-205 PROOF OF OWNERSHIP.
   Claimants to any property in police storage shall be required to present
reasonable proof of ownership, and no property shall be released unless such
reasonable proof is presented.
§ 10-206 AUCTION.
   At such time as it has been determined that an auction is necessary to
dispose of unclaimed property, an inventory listing all property to be disposed
of shall be prepared and kept on file in the Police Department. Notice of an
auction shall be published at least twice in a general circulation newspaper
before the date of the auction. The notice shall specify the date, time and
place of the auction and shall also notify prospective buyers or potential
claimants that a list of items to be auctioned is available at the Police
Department and any claims on property must be made before the start of the
auction.
ARTICLE 3: POLICE FEES
Section
   
10-301   Definitions
   
10-302   Initial police responses to parties, gatherings or events
   
10-303   Subsequent police responses to parties, gatherings or events;
liability
   
10-304   Cost; collection
§ 10-301 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOST. The person who owns or is in possession of the property where the
party, gathering or event takes place, or the person in charge of the premises,
or the person who organized the event. If the HOST is a minor, then the parents
or guardians of that minor will be jointly and severally liable for the fee
incurred for police services.
   PARTY, GATHERING or EVENT. An event involving a group of persons who have
assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or for a social activity.
   POLICE SERVICES FEE. The cost to the city of any special security
assignment, including, but not limited to, salaries of police officers while
responding to or remaining at the party, gathering or event; the pro rata cost
of equipment; the cost of repairing city equipment and property; the cost of
any medical treatment of injured police officers; and the cost of reasonable
attorney’s fees.
   SPECIAL SECURITY ASSIGNMENT. The assignment of police officers, services and
equipment during a second or subsequent response to the party, gathering or
event after delivery of a written notice to the host that a fee may be imposed
for costs incurred by the city for any subsequent police response.
§ 10-302 INITIAL POLICE RESPONSES TO PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR EVENTS.
   When any police officer responds to any party, gathering or event and that
police officer determines there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety
or general welfare, the police officer shall issue a written notice to the host
or hosts that a subsequent response to that same location or address within 24
hours of the first response shall be deemed a special security assignment
rendered to provide security and order on behalf of the party, gathering or
event and that the host may be liable for a police services fee as defined in
this article.
§ 10-303 SUBSEQUENT POLICE RESPONSES TO PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR EVENTS;
LIABILITY.
   (a)   If, after a written notice is issued pursuant to § 10-302, a
subsequent police response, or responses, is necessary to the same location or
address within 24 hours of the first response, such response or responses shall
be deemed a special security assignment. Persons previously warned shall be
jointly and severally liable for a police services fee as defined in this
article.
   (b)   The amount of the fee shall be a debt owed to the city by the person
or persons warned, and if he or she is a minor, his or her parents or guardians
shall be jointly and severally liable for the debt.
§ 10-304 COST; COLLECTION.
   The Chief of Police shall notify the City Treasurer in writing of the
performance of a special security assignment, of the name and address of the
responsible person or persons, the date and time of the incident, the services
performed, the costs and such other information as may be required. The City
Treasurer shall thereafter cause appropriate billings to be made.
ARTICLE 4: RESERVE POLICE FORCE
Section
   
10-401   Reserve Police Force established
   
10-402   Reserve Police Force; rules and regulations
§ 10-401 RESERVE POLICE FORCE ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a Reserve Police Force for the purpose of
providing better and more efficient police protection for the city and its
residents and occupants, and shall function and operate in accordance with the
rules and regulations set forth in §
10-402.
(Ord. 216, passed 7-7-1998)
§ 10-402 RESERVE POLICE FORCE; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The members of the Reserve Police Force shall be appointed by the
Chief of Police with the approval of the Mayor. Such appointments shall be for
the period of one year.
   (b)   The Police Reserve Force shall be under the general supervision of the
Chief of Police, and the members of such Force shall not draw any compensation
for their service.
   (c)   The city shall endeavor to obtain insurance coverage for members of
the Reserve Force comparable to the insurance coverage provided to members of
the Police Department. Whether or not such insurance coverage is obtained for
members of the Reserve Force, the city shall not be liable for any injuries
sustained by members of the Reserve Force while carrying out their duties or
acting as reserve police officers.
   (d)   Members of the Reserve Police Force shall have police powers only when
they are called to active duty by the Chief of Police, and such members shall
not exercise any police powers at any other time.
   (e)   Members of the Reserve Police Force shall carry firearms only while on
active duty as a member of the force and at no other time unless expressly so
ordered in writing by the Chief of Police.
   (f)   The Chief of Police shall formulate all necessary rules relating to
the training, conduct and duties of members of the Reserve Police Force and
submit the same to the governing body for approval prior to their enforcement.
   (g)   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the Mayor, may, at any time
and without cause, suspend or remove from the Reserve Police Force any member
thereof in accordance with applicable personnel rules and regulations of the
Police Department.
(Ord. 216, passed 7-7-1998)
CHAPTER XI: PUBLIC OFFENSES
   Article
      
1.   UNIFORM OFFENSE CODE
      
2.   LOCAL REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 1: UNIFORM OFFENSE CODE
Section
   
11-101   Incorporating Uniform Public Offense Code
§ 11-101 INCORPORATING UNIFORM PUBLIC OFFENSE CODE.
   There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating
public offenses within the corporate limits of the city, that certain code
known as the Uniform Public Offense Code, 41st Edition, prepared and published
in book form by the League of Kansas Municipalities, Topeka, Kansas, save and
except such articles, sections, parts or portions as are hereafter omitted,
deleted, modified or changed. No fewer than three copies of said Uniform Public
Offense Code shall be marked or stamped “Official copy as adopted by Ordinance
No. 353,” with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted or
changed clearly marked to show any such omission or change and to which shall
be attached a copy of this section, and filed with the City Clerk to be open to
inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours.
(Ord. 353, passed 7-1-2025)
ARTICLE 2: LOCAL REGULATIONS
Section
   
11-201   Public urination or defecation
   
11-202   Possession of controlled substances, opiates or narcotic drugs
   
11-203   Definition; minor
   
11-204   Curfew; hours declared; exception
   
11-205   Same; responsibility of parent or person having custody
   
11-206   Same; penalty
   
11-207   Littering
   
11-208   Prohibition against disturbing the peace
§ 11-201 PUBLIC URINATION OR DEFECATION.
   Any person who shall urinate or defecate in or on any public sidewalk,
street, highway, alley or roadway, or any other public or private property
outside of public restrooms and other buildings containing toilet facilities,
in the city shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in §
1-116.
(Ord. 119, passed - -)
§ 11-202 POSSESSION OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES, OPIATES OR NARCOTIC DRUGS.
   Except as authorized by the State Uniform Controlled Substances Act, any
person who shall possess, have under his or her control, deliver or distribute
any controlled substance, opiate or narcotic drug in the city shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided in §
1-116.
(Ord. 151, passed - -)
§ 11-203 DEFINITION; MINOR.
   The word MINOR as used in this article shall mean any person under the age
of 18 years, except a person 16 years of age or over who is or has been
married.
(Ord. 199, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see K.S.A. 38-101
§ 11-204 CURFEW; HOURS DECLARED; EXCEPTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play
in or upon the public streets, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other
public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and
entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places in the city between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, except Fridays and
Saturdays, when the hours shall be 12:00 a.m. midnight to 6:00 a.m.; provided,
however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a minor
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand
or legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian or other person
having the care and custody of the minor.
(Ord. 199, passed - -)
§ 11-205 SAME; RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR PERSON HAVING CUSTODY.
   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody
of a minor to permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or
upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other
public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and
entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, except on Fridays and Saturdays,
when the hours shall be 12:00 a.m. midnight to 6:00 a.m.; provided, however,
that the provisions of this section shall not apply when the minor is
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand
or legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of the minor.
(Ord. 199, passed - -)
§ 11-206 SAME; PENALTY.
   (a)   Any minor violating the provisions of this article shall be dealt with
in accordance with the provisions of the State Juvenile Offenders Code.
   (b)   Any parent, guardian or person in charge of a minor who shall permit
such minor to violate the provisions of this article after having been notified
of a prior violation by such minor shall be fined in an amount not less than
$25 nor more than $100.
(Ord. 199, passed - -)
§ 11-207 LITTERING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall throw, place or drop litter from a motor vehicle
upon any public street or alley. No person shall throw or deposit any litter
upon any public or private property without the consent of the owner of said
property. When litter is thrown or placed upon public or private property,
there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the owner of said property had not
consented thereto.
      (2)   LITTER shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, rubbish,
garbage and trash, including tree limbs, yard clippings, paper, metal, plastic,
glass, eggs, tomatoes and similar items.
    (b)   Littering is a Class C misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine of
up to $500 and/or 30 days in jail.
(Ord. 296, passed 6-5-2012)
§ 11-208 PROHIBITION AGAINST DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, maintain or
cause to be made or continued any excessive, unreasonable or unusually loud
noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the repose, health, peace or
safety of others within the city.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or permit the use
of operations of any electronic device, musical instrument, sound production or
reproduction device in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet or comfort of
the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with a louder volume than is
necessary for convenient hearing of persons who are in the room, vehicle or
chamber where such device is being operated and who are voluntary listeners
thereto. NEIGHBORING INHABITANTS shall include persons occupying nearby
residences and include other tenants within multiple-unit dwellings.
   (c)   No person shall be part of a gathering of people from which sound
emanates of a sufficient volume so as to disturb the peace, quiet or repose of
nearby residents. A police officer may order all persons present at any
location where a gathering or party exists in violation of this section to
immediately disperse in lieu of being charged under this section. Failure to so
disperse shall make such person equally responsible with the person in charge
of the premises and/or the person causing the disturbance. The owners or
tenants of the dwelling unit shall immediately abate the disturbance under this
division (c) and, upon their failure so to do, shall be in violation of this
division (c).
   (d)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and punished by a
fine of up to $500 and/or 30 days in jail.
(Ord. 298, passed 6-5-2012)
CHAPTER XII: PUBLIC PROPERTY
   Article
      
1.   CITY PARKS
ARTICLE 1: CITY PARKS
Section
   
12-101   City laws extended to park
   
12-102   Police jurisdiction over parks
   
12-103   Damaging park property
   
12-104   Vehicle regulations
   
12-105   Hunting
   
12-106   Fires
   
12-107   Camping prohibited
   
12-108   Sanitation
   
12-109   Prohibition against alcoholic beverages and cereal malt beverages
   
12-110   Preservation of natural state
   
12-111   General regulations
   
12-112   Power of Mayor/City Clerk to amend regulations
   
12-113   Camping fee schedule
§ 12-101 CITY LAWS EXTENDED TO PARK.
   The laws of the city shall extend to and cover all city parks.
§ 12-102 POLICE JURISDICTION OVER PARKS.
   The city shall have police regulations governing any public parks belonging
to the city, and the Chief of Police and law enforcement officers of the city
shall have full power to enforce city laws governing city parks and shall
maintain order therein.
§ 12-103 DAMAGING PARK PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except duly authorized city employees,
to willfully or wantonly remove, injure, tarnish, deface or destroy any
building, walk, bench, tree or improvement, or property of any kind, belonging
to any park owned by the city.
§ 12-104 VEHICLE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Motor vehicles, including any vehicle licensed to operate on public
streets, roads and highways, and motorbikes, go-carts, snowmobiles and other
motorized off-the-road vehicles shall be operated in a safe and prudent manner
at all times in park areas.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (d) below, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park any motor vehicle in any area not designated for such purpose.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (d) below, it shall be unlawful for any
person to operate any motor vehicle within any city park except upon roads,
drives and parking areas established by the city.
   (d)   Divisions (b) and (c) above shall not apply to authorized city
employees while engaged in the maintenance and care of the park.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful to operate any such vehicle in any park area at a
speed in excess of 15 mph.
§ 12-105 HUNTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to pursue, catch, trap, maim, kill,
shoot or take any wildlife, either bird or animal, in any manner at any time
while in any city park.
§ 12-106 FIRES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build or kindle any fire in any city
park except in the ovens, stoves or grills provided for that purpose by the
city, and such fire must be extinguished by the person, persons or parties
starting such fire immediately after use thereof.
§ 12-107 CAMPING PROHIBITED.
   Overnight camping is hereby prohibited in city parks except where posted.
§ 12-108 SANITATION.
   (a)   All waste material, paper, trash, rubbish, tin cans, bottles,
containers, garbage and refuse of any kind whatsoever shall be deposited in
disposal containers provided for such purposes. No such waste or contaminating
material shall be discarded otherwise.
   (b)   No sticks, stones, trash or other objects shall be thrown or discarded
in or on any park lands, fountains, pools, drinking fountains, sanitary
facilities or other improvements.
§ 12-109 PROHIBITION AGAINST ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CEREAL MALT BEVERAGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use, consume or have on
the premises of any park or other city property within the city any alcoholic
liquor or cereal malt beverage.
§ 12-110 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL STATE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except for duly authorized city
employees, to take, injure or disturb any live or dead tree, plant, shrub or
flower, or to otherwise interfere with the natural state of city parks.
§ 12-111 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   The city may post such rules and regulations as are approved by the
governing body pertaining to the use of the city parks in a conspicuous place
in each city park. Violations of these posted rules shall constitute a
violation of this code.
§ 12-112 POWER OF MAYOR/CITY CLERK TO AMEND REGULATIONS.
   The Mayor/City Clerk shall be authorized to alter, exempt or otherwise amend
the park regulations as deemed necessary for the best interest of the city and
its citizens.
(Res. 416, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 12-113 CAMPING FEE SCHEDULE.
   (a)   (1)   For the privilege of camping in Napawalla Park and Cave Park in
the city, there is hereby established and there shall be charged and collected
the following fees.
      (A)   Napawalla Park.
      (i)   Campers who make a connection with the electric system of the city
will pay $15 per day.
      (ii)   Campers who do not make a connection with the electric system of
the city will pay $3.50.
      (iii)   Any person who is not camping at Napawalla Park but is using the
dump station to empty black and/or gray water from his or her camper shall pay
a fee of $10 (city residents are exempt).
      (B)   Cave Park. Primitive overnight camping will be allowed in
designated areas of the park at no charge. Adult campers and juvenile campers
who are accompanied by an adult will be exempt from the curfew of Cave Park.
      (C)   Exemptions. Exemption from, or an increase or decrease in, such
fees, or exemption from any part of this section, may be granted by a majority
vote of the governing body of the city for special occasions or due to special
circumstances at the discretion of the governing body.
      (2)   Provided, however, that no person shall be permitted to camp in
Napawalla Park for more than 14 consecutive days; at least five days shall
elapse between any and all camping periods.
      (3)   The term DAY as used in this section shall mean any part of a
period of 24 consecutive hours, known as a CALENDAR DAY. The term OVERNIGHT
shall mean for one night only.
   (b)   Fees herein established shall be paid at the City Office or to any
duly authorized agent of the city, or at a self-pay station located at the
north entrance to Napawalla Park.
   (c)   The governing body may authorize any person to act as an agent for the
city for the purpose of collecting and remitting to the City Treasurer fees
herein established for camping in Napawalla Park.
   (d)   This section became effective May 4, 2022.
(Res. 425, passed 5-4-2022)
CHAPTER XIII: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
   Article
      
1.   SIDEWALKS
      
2.   STREETS
      
3.   TREES, HEDGES AND SHRUBS
      
4.   SNOW AND ICE
ARTICLE 1: SIDEWALKS
Section
   
13-101   Permit required
   
13-102   Sidewalk grade
   
13-103   Same; specifications
   
13-104   Same; petition
   
13-105   Same; condemnation, reconstruction
   
13-106   Notice; publication
   
13-107   Right of abutting owner
   
13-108   Repairs by owner or city
   
13-109   Performance, statutory bond
   
13-110   Obstructing sidewalks
   
13-111   Same; exception
§ 13-101 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk within
the city until the plans first have been approved by the governing body and a
permit issued for such work by the City Clerk.
§ 13-102 SIDEWALK GRADE.
   Hereafter, all sidewalks constructed or reconstructed in the city shall be
constructed on the established grade. When the governing body shall order a
sidewalk constructed as hereafter provided, the city shall pay the cost of
bringing the street to grade for the sidewalk. Where no grade has been
established, the owner of abutting property may construct a sidewalk on the
natural grade. If the grade has been established, the City Clerk shall furnish
the property owner with the official grade by reference to a stated distance
above or below the street grade.
(K.S.A. 12-1801, 12-1807)
§ 13-103 SAME; SPECIFICATIONS.
   Hereafter, all sidewalks shall be of single-course construction and shall be
constructed and laid in accordance with standard plans and specifications
hereby adopted by reference and filed in the office of the City Clerk as
provided by K.S.A. 12-1802. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk except as provided
by this article.
§ 13-104 SAME; PETITION.
   When a petition signed by no fewer than ten citizens owning real estate in
the city requesting construction of a sidewalk is filed with the City Clerk,
the governing body may in its discretion, by a resolution, order such sidewalk
constructed as herein provided.
(K.S.A. 12-1803)
§ 13-105 SAME; CONDEMNATION, RECONSTRUCTION.
   When any sidewalk, in the opinion of the governing body, becomes inadequate
or unsafe for travel thereon, the governing body may adopt a resolution
condemning such sidewalk and providing for the construction of a new sidewalk
in the place of the sidewalk condemned.
(K.S.A. 12-1804)
§ 13-106 NOTICE; PUBLICATION.
   The resolution providing for the construction or reconstruction of a
sidewalk, as the case may be, shall give the owner of the abutting property not
less than 30 days nor more than 60 days after its publication one time in the
official city paper in which to construct, or cause to be constructed or
reconstructed, the sidewalk at his or her own expense. If the sidewalk is not
constructed by the property owner within the time specified, the governing body
shall cause the work to be done by contract.
(K.S.A. 12-1805)
§ 13-107 RIGHT OF ABUTTING OWNER.
   (a)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the owner of
property abutting on a street, who desires to construct or reconstruct a
sidewalk at his or her own expense and in accordance with official plans and
specifications for the purpose, and which meet such other requirements as would
have to be met if the sidewalk were constructed or reconstructed by the city,
to construct or reconstruct a sidewalk without any petition or a condemning
resolution by the governing body.
   (b)   If such property owner desires the sidewalk to be constructed and
reconstructed by the city and an assessment levied as provided by law in other
cases, he or she shall file a request with the governing body. The governing
body, in its discretion, may provide for the construction or reconstruction of
the sidewalk requested in the same manner as in other cases where citizens or
taxpayers petition the governing body.
(K.S.A. 12-1806)
§ 13-108 REPAIRS BY OWNER OR CITY.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of the abutting property to keep the
sidewalk in repair, but the city may, after giving five days’ notice to the
owner or his or her agent, if known, of the necessity for making repairs, or
without notice if the lot or piece of land is unoccupied, make all necessary
repairs at any time. The same shall be done and the cost thereof assessed
against the lot or piece of land abutting on the sidewalk so repaired as may be
provided by law.
(K.S.A. 12-1808)
§ 13-109 PERFORMANCE, STATUTORY BOND.
   In any case where the reconstruction or construction of a sidewalk is
required to be done by contract as provided in §
13-106 hereof, the governing body may require the contractor to give a bond for
the faithful performance of the contract and for the construction of the
sidewalk in accordance with the plans and specifications, ordinances of the
city or laws of the state, and for all contracts exceeding $1,000 entered into
by the city for any such purpose, a statutory lien bond required by K.S.A. 60-
1111 shall be furnished.
§ 13-110 OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build or construct any step or other
obstruction, whether temporary or permanent, or to store, leave, or allow to be
left any implements, tools, merchandise, goods, containers, display or
showcases, on any sidewalk or other public ways in the city or to obstruct the
same longer than is necessary for loading or unloading any such article or
object. Benches, portable signs, decorative plant receptacles, or other items,
when authorized by the City Clerk in writing, can be allowed if it is
determined they will not impede or inconvenience the public.
(Ord. 303, passed - -)
§ 13-111 SAME; EXCEPTION.
   The governing body may authorize the granting of temporary permits in
connection with a building or moving permit for limited times only to the owner
of property abutting on any sidewalk to use or encumber such sidewalk or public
way of the city during the construction of any building or improvement thereon.
No permit shall be issued for such purpose until plans for warning and
safeguarding the public during such use of sidewalks shall have been submitted
by the owner or his or her contractor and approved by the governing body.
ARTICLE 2: STREETS
Section
   
13-201   Excavation permit
   
13-202   Same; bond
   
13-203   Same; filed
   
13-204   Same; barricades
   
13-205   Same; unlawful acts
   
13-206   Cutting curbs; pavement
   
13-207   Altering drainage
   
13-208   Unfinished pavement
   
13-209   Using streets
   
13-210   Dangerous objects in
   
13-211   Petroleum products in streets
   
13-212   Discharging water on streets
   
13-213   Burning in streets
   
13-214   Throwing in streets
   
13-215   Hauling loose material
§ 13-201 EXCAVATION PERMIT.
   (a)   No person, other than authorized city employees, shall dig or excavate
any hole, ditch, trench or tunnel in or under any street, alley, sidewalk, park
or other public property or public easement through private property without
first having secured a permit for such excavation.
   (b)   Application shall be made to the City Clerk.
§ 13-202 SAME; BOND.
   (a)   No permit authorized in this article shall be issued until the
applicant has given to the city a good and sufficient bond in the sum of
$5,000, conditioned that the applicant will faithfully comply with all the
terms and conditions of this article, and will indemnify and hold the city
harmless against all costs, expenses, damages and injuries by persons or by the
city sustained by reason of the carelessness or negligence of the permit
holder. No bond for this purpose shall run for longer than two years without
being renewed. The bond shall remain in full force and effect as to each
excavation for two years after the same has been made or completed.
   (b)   Any utility operating under a franchise or a contractor under contract
with the city for municipal improvement shall not be required to give bond as
provided in division (a) above.
   (c)   Each bond given under this section shall be approved by the City
Attorney and filed with the City Clerk.
§ 13-203 SAME; FILED.
   (a)   If the application is approved by the city, the City Clerk shall issue
a permit for unpaved streets and alleys upon payment of a $100 fee, and for all
other surfaces, the city shall issue a permit upon payment of a $5 fee.
   (b)   Each permit issued under the provisions of this section shall cover
only one specified excavation.
(Ord. 311, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 13-204 SAME; BARRICADES.
   Any person to whom an excavation permit is issued shall enclose all
excavations that he or she makes with sufficient barricades and danger signs at
all times and shall maintain sufficient warning lights or flares at nighttime.
The holder of an excavation permit shall take all necessary precautions to
guard the public against all accidents from the beginning of the work to the
completion of the same.
§ 13-205 SAME; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except those having authority from the
city or any officer thereof, to throw down, interfere with or remove any
barriers, barricades or lights placed in any street to guard and warn the
traveling public of any construction work thereon or adjacent thereto.
§ 13-206 CUTTING CURBS; PAVEMENT.
   (a)   No person shall cut any curb, gutter, pavement, blacktop or sidewalk,
or excavate any street, alley or other public grounds of the city, for any
purpose without first obtaining a permit authorizing the same from the City
Clerk.
   (b)   Once the work for which the excavation was made has been completed,
the city shall restore the pavement, blacktop, sidewalk or other surfacing at
the expense of the person from whom the excavation was made.
   (c)   In lieu of the city replacing pavement, it may elect to authorize
utility companies or contractors to resurface the streets or sidewalks with
like materials, subject to the approval of the Street Superintendent.
§ 13-207 ALTERING DRAINAGE.
   No person shall change or alter any gutter, storm sewer, drain or drainage
structure that has been constructed or is being lawfully maintained or
controlled by the city unless such change or alteration has been authorized or
directed by the governing body.
§ 13-208 UNFINISHED PAVEMENT.
   No person shall walk upon, drive or ride over or across any pavement,
sidewalk or incomplete grading that has not been opened for traffic.
§ 13-209 USING STREETS.
   (a)   No person shall occupy any portion of any street, alley or sidewalk
for the purpose of temporarily storing building materials without first
obtaining a permit for such temporary use from the governing body.
   (b)   No person may use any portion of any sidewalk or street right-of-way
for the purpose of displaying or offering for sale wares, goods, merchandise or
other items. Nothing in this article, however, shall be construed as
prohibiting the city governing body from temporarily waiving the prohibition of
this division (b) in connection with community promotions or community-wide
celebrations when such waiver is considered to be in the best interest of the
city.
§ 13-210 DANGEROUS OBJECTS IN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw or cause to be placed or
thrown in or on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public grounds of the city
any glass, tacks, nails, bottles, wire or other dangerous objects that might
wound any person or animal, or cut or puncture any pneumatic tire while passing
over the same.
§ 13-211 PETROLEUM PRODUCTS IN STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit or throw
any waste oil, fuel oil, kerosene, gasoline or other products of petroleum or
any acids into or upon any street or public grounds of the city, or willfully
to permit the same to be spilled, dripped or otherwise to come into contact
with the surface of any street, alley or sidewalk within the city.
§ 13-212 DISCHARGING WATER ON STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to throw or
discharge water into any ditch, street, avenue or alley in the city or to cause
any water to stand or form pools or to flow in a stream thereon. This section
shall not apply to persons cleaning or flushing such streets, avenues or alleys
under the authority of the governing body, nor to members of the Fire
Department.
§ 13-213 BURNING IN STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or cause to be made, any fire
upon any of the paved streets, alleys or street intersections within the city.
§ 13-214 THROWING IN STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful to throw or bat any ball, stone or other hard substance
into, on or across any street or alley or at or against any building or
vehicle.
§ 13-215 HAULING LOOSE MATERIAL.
   It shall be unlawful to haul over the streets or alleys of this city any
loose material of any kind except in a vehicle so constructed or maintained as
to prevent the splashing or spilling of any of the substances therein contained
upon the streets or alleys.
ARTICLE 3: TREES, HEDGES AND SHRUBS
Section
   
13-301   Tree Board; appointment; terms; officers; vacancies; compensation;
duties
   
13-302   Definitions
   
13-303   Planting trees
   
13-304   Maintenance, treatment and removal of trees
   
13-305   Failure to maintain, treat or remove trees; notice; assessment of
costs
   
13-306   Tree trimming along utility lines
§ 13-301 TREE BOARD; APPOINTMENT; TERMS; OFFICERS; VACANCIES; COMPENSATION;
DUTIES.
   (a)   There is hereby created a Tree Board of the city, which shall consist
of all members of the City Council, the City Clerk and not less than two nor
more than four members at-large, as determined by the Council, appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council from among residents of the city.
Members of the Tree Board shall serve in such capacity without compensation.
Councilmembers and the City Clerk shall serve as members of the Tree Board
during their tenures as such officers of the city. Appointees to the Tree Board
shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council, and vacancies among the
appointees shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments are
made.
   (b)   A simple majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
conduct of business, and a complete and accurate record shall be made and kept
of each meeting of the Board.
   (c)   The Board shall study, investigate and develop and/or update annually
a written plan for the care, replacement, maintenance and removal and
disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public
areas of the city, and shall present the same to the City Council for
acceptance and approval. Upon acceptance and approval by the City Council, the
written plan shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the
city and the plan shall then be administered by the Board.
   (d)   The Board shall make recommendations to the City Council regarding
policy and rules and regulations for the planting, pruning and removal of
street and park trees in the city, including a listing of acceptable species of
trees that may be located in street rights-of-way, easements, alleys and parks
of the city. Upon the acceptance of such recommendations by the City Council,
the same shall become and constitute the official policy, rules and regulations
of the city.
   (e)   When requested by the City Council, the Board shall consider,
investigate and make findings with reference to any particular matter or
question relating to street and/or park trees in the city and report the same
to the City Council with the Board’s recommendation, if appropriate.
   (f)   The Tree Board shall have the power at any time to engage in the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying and otherwise maintaining of
trees or removing trees from any streets, alleys, public ways, public parks or
other areas owned by the city to which the public shall have free access, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any way with such work of
the Tree Board; provided, however, that the owner of real property abutting the
parking on which a tree to be removed is located shall be notified before such
removal and any opposition to such removal expressed by the owner resolved
prior to the removal of the tree, if possible. If such opposition cannot be
resolved, the matter shall be presented to the governing body of the city for
final resolution of the issue.
(Ord. 205, passed - -)
§ 13-302 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CURBLINE. The line on either side of an unpaved street, avenue or public way
along which a curb would be constructed if such street were improved with a
cement or asphalt curb and gutter.
   LARGE TREE. A tree attaining a height of 40 feet or more.
   MEDIUM TREE. A tree attaining a height of 20 feet to 40 feet.
   PARK TREE. A tree, shrub, bush and all other woody vegetation in public
parks of the city having individual names and all other areas owned by the city
to which the public shall have free access or use.
   SMALL TREE. A tree attaining a normal maximum height of 20 feet.
   STREET TREE. A tree, shrub, bush and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between the property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or
public ways within the city.
   TOPPING. The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches
in diameter within the crown of the tree to such a degree that the normal
canopy of the tree is removed and the tree disfigured.
(Ord. 195, passed - -)
§ 13-303 PLANTING TREES.
   (a)   The city shall adopt and maintain a list of trees that are recommended
for planting in public areas of the city, to be known as the “Preferred Trees
Species List,” which shall be available to residents of the city, upon request,
to aid them in the selection of trees for planting in the city. The list shall
be updated periodically to reflect new development of species that will affect
the population of the community forest.
   (b)   (1)   No trees shall be planted closer to the curb or curbline than as
follows:
      (A)   Small and medium trees: four feet; and
      (B)   Large trees: six feet.
      (2)   No trees shall be planted closer to the sidewalk than as follows:
      (A)   Small trees: two feet;
      (B)   Medium trees: three feet; and
      (C)   Large trees: four feet.
      (3)   Provided, however, that the Tree Board may waive any of the
foregoing distance requirements when it is deemed appropriate.
   (c)   Only small trees, as defined in this article, may be planted under or
within 15 feet of any overhead utility wire, and no trees of any kind may be
planted within three linear feet of any underground waterline, sewer line or
other underground utility service line, nor shall any street tree be planted
within 45 feet of any street intersection or within ten feet of any fireplug.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any language in this article that may be construed or
interpreted to the contrary, no tree may be planted within 25 feet of the
centerline of any street.
(Ord. 195, passed - -)
§ 13-304 MAINTENANCE, TREATMENT AND REMOVAL OF TREES.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of all owners of real property abutting upon
streets, alleys and public ways in the city to properly maintain trees in the
abutting parking and to keep the trees in the parking trimmed in such a manner
that the lowest branches of the trees shall be at least eight feet above the
surface of any sidewalk or driveway and at least 12 feet above the surface of
any street, alley or public way over which the branches of the tree hang.
   (b)   It shall also be the duty of the owners of real property abutting upon
streets, alleys and public ways in the city to either treat or remove diseased
trees in the parking. All dead trees in the parkings in the city are hereby
declared to be a nuisance, and the trees and stumps shall be removed below the
surface of surrounding ground at the expense of the owner of the property
abutting the parking.
   (c)   No tree located on public property shall be topped except in instances
where trees have been severely damaged by storms or other causes or where trees
create an obstruction to overhead utility lines to the extent that other
pruning practices are impractical.
(Ord. 195, passed - -)
§ 13-305 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN, TREAT OR REMOVE TREES; NOTICE; ASSESSMENT OF
COSTS.
   (a)   Notice shall be given, by the City Clerk to owners of real property
abutting upon streets, alleys and public ways in the city who shall fail to
maintain and keep trimmed in accordance with the provisions of this article
trees in the parking abutting the owner’s real property, that trees in such
parking have not been maintained or trimmed in accordance with the provisions
of this article. Such notice shall include a listing in specific terms of those
things that the property owner must do to be in compliance with this article
together with a statement that the failure of the property owner to complete
the work necessary to comply with this article within ten days after the notice
is served on the owner may result in the city performing such work and
assessing the cost thereof against the owner’s property abutting such parking.
   (b)   The notice shall be served on the owner of the real property abutting
the parking upon which the subject trees are located and upon the occupant of
the abutting real property by delivering a copy of the notice to the owner and
occupant in person, or by leaving a copy of the notice with some responsible
person at their usual place of residence. Property owners who are nonresidents
of the city shall be served notice by mailing a copy of the notice to the owner
at his or her last known address and by posting a copy of such notice in a
conspicuous place upon the real property abutting the parking on which the
subject trees are located.
   (c)   If the maintenance or trimming of trees is not completed as set forth
in the notice within ten days after service of such notice as hereinabove
provided, the city may do the work necessary to bring such trees into
compliance with this article and assess the costs of such work against the real
property abutting the parking on which such trees are located as a special
assessment. The City Clerk shall, at the time of certifying other city taxes to
the County Clerk, certify the aforesaid costs, and the County Clerk shall
extend the same on the tax roll of the county against the abutting real
property, and it shall be collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the
city as other city taxes are collected and paid.
(Ord. 195, passed - -)
§ 13-306 TREE TRIMMING ALONG UTILITY LINES.
   No person, firm, association or corporation shall cut or trim trees around,
along or under any overhead pole line of an electric utility, telephone company
or cable television company without first obtaining a written permit from the
governing body of the city. If the governing body of the city determines that
the tree cutting or trimming proposed to be done might cause injury to persons
doing the work or to any other person or cause damage to the overhead pole line
or property of any other person, the city may require the applicant for the
permit to provide public liability insurance covering personal injury and
property damage resulting from the tree work proposed to be done, with the city
being a named insured in such amount as the governing body, in its sole
discretion, shall deem appropriate before such permit is issued.
(Ord. 195, passed - -)
ARTICLE 4: SNOW AND ICE
Section
   
13-401   Snow and ice to be removed
   
13-402   Same: exception; alternate remedy
   
13-403   Same; penalty
   
13-404   Removal may be made by city
   
13-405   Costs on tax rolls
§ 13-401 SNOW AND ICE TO BE REMOVED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or the occupant of any lots
abutting upon any sidewalks to fail to cause to be removed from such sidewalks
all snow and ice within 12 hours from the time that the snowfall or ice storm
ceases. If the snow falls or ice accumulates upon the sidewalks in the
nighttime, removal of same must be made within 12 hours after sunrise on the
following day.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place snow removed from private
property upon any public street, alley or sidewalk.
§ 13-402 SAME: EXCEPTION; ALTERNATE REMEDY.
   Where there shall be ice or compacted snow on any such sidewalk of such a
character as to make it practically impossible to remove the same, the
sprinkling of ashes, sand or other noncorrosive chemicals on the accumulation
of ice or snow in such a manner as to make such sidewalk reasonably safe for
pedestrian travel shall be deemed a sufficient compliance with the provisions
of this article until the ice or snow can be removed.
§ 13-403 SAME; PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of §
13-401 shall, upon conviction, be fined $25.
§ 13-404 REMOVAL MAY BE MADE BY CITY.
   If any owner or occupant of any lot or lots shall refuse or neglect to clean
or remove from the sidewalk abutting the lot or lots all snow and ice within
the time specified, the city may cause such snow and ice to be removed from
sidewalks and the cost thereof shall be assessed against such abutting lot or
lots, and the City Clerk shall certify the same to the County Clerk for
collection as provided by law.
§ 13-405 COSTS ON TAX ROLLS.
   The City Clerk shall, at the time of certifying other city taxes to the
County Clerk, certify the unpaid cost for removal of snow or ice performed
under the authority of §
13-404, and the County Clerk shall extend the same on the tax roll of the
county against the lot or parcel of ground. The cost of such work shall be paid
from the General Fund or other proper fund of the city, and such fund shall be
reimbursed when payments therefor are received or when such assessments are
collected and received by the city.
CHAPTER XIV: TRAFFIC
   Article
      
1.   STANDARD TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
      
2.   LOCAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
3.   RESERVED
      
4.   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
      
5.   MICRO-UTILITY TRUCKS AND WORK-SITE VEHICLES
ARTICLE 1: STANDARD TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
Section
   
14-101   Incorporating Standard Traffic Ordinance
   
14-102   Same; traffic infractions and traffic offenses
   
14-103   Penalty for scheduled fines
§ 14-101 INCORPORATING STANDARD TRAFFIC ORDINANCE.
   There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating
traffic within the corporate limits of the city, that certain standard traffic
ordinance known as the Standard Traffic Ordinance for Kansas Cities, 52nd
Edition, prepared and published in book form by the League of Kansas
Municipalities, save and except such articles, sections, parts or portions as
are hereafter omitted, deleted, modified or changed. No fewer than three copies
of said Standard Traffic Ordinance shall be marked or stamped “Official copy as
adopted by Ordinance No. 353,” with all sections or portions thereof intended
to be omitted or changed clearly marked to show any such omission or change and
to which shall be attached a copy of this section, and filed with the City
Clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable
hours.
(Ord. 353, passed 7-1-2025)
§ 14-102 SAME; TRAFFIC INFRACTIONS AND TRAFFIC OFFENSES.
   (a)   An ordinance traffic infraction is a violation of any section of this
article that prescribes or requires the same behavior as that prescribed or
required by a statutory provision that is classified as a traffic infraction in
K.S.A. Supp. 8-2118.
   (b)   All traffic violations which are included within this article, and
which are not ordinance traffic infractions as defined in division (a) above,
shall be considered traffic offenses.
(Ord. 235, passed - -)
§ 14-103 PENALTY FOR SCHEDULED FINES.
   (a)   The fine for violation of an ordinance traffic infraction or any other
traffic offense for which the Municipal Judge establishes a fine in a fine
schedule shall not be less than $10, nor more than $30, except for speeding,
which shall not be less than $10, nor more than $500.
   (b)   A person tried and convicted for violation of an ordinance traffic
infraction or other traffic offense for which a fine has been established in a
schedule of fines shall pay a fine fixed by the Court not to exceed $500.
ARTICLE 2: LOCAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
14-201   Traffic-control devices and markings
   
14-202   Parking vehicles, semi-trailers, trailers or other devices for more
than five 24-hour days; penalty; abatement of nuisance
   
14-203   Bicycles, skateboards, scooters, roller skates and in-line skates on
sidewalks
   
14-204   School zones
   
14-205   Truck; definitions
   
14-206   Same; application of regulation
   
14-207   Same; truck traffic in city
   
14-208   Same; Clerk maintains map
   
14-209   Same; signing
   
14-210   Same; weigh-in authorized
   
14-211   Same; penalties
   
14-212   Requirement to wear seat belts
   
14-213   Loud sound systems prohibited
   
14-214   Penalty
   
14-215   Engine compression braking by trucks or truck-tractors
   
14-216   Definitions
§ 14-201 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND MARKINGS.
   The Standard Traffic Ordinance, as adopted, is hereby modified by adding
thereto the following.
   (a)   The governing body may, by resolution, establish and fix the location
of such traffic-control devices as may be deemed necessary to guide and warn
traffic under the provisions of this chapter, other traffic ordinances and the
state laws. The city shall place and maintain such traffic-control signs,
signals and devices when and as may be required by the authority of the
governing body to make effective the provisions of this chapter and other
ordinances for the regulation of traffic.
   (b)   Any official traffic-control device placed pursuant to this section
shall be marked and labeled on a map of the city for the purpose of displaying
all such traffic-control devices and shall be filed with the City Clerk, to be
open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours of
business.
§ 14-202 PARKING VEHICLES, SEMI-TRAILERS, TRAILERS OR OTHER DEVICES FOR MORE
THAN FIVE 24-HOUR DAYS; PENALTY; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (a)   Any person who shall park or permit the parking, storing or standing
of any vehicle, semi-trailer, trailer or other device in, upon or by which a
person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street or
highway, except devices ordinarily moved by human power, upon any public
street, avenue or alley in the city for a continuous period of more than five
24-hour days shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in §
1-116.
   (b)   Any vehicle, semi-trailer, trailer or other device hereinabove
specified found to have been so parked, stored or standing for a continuous
period of more than five 24-hour days shall be deemed a public nuisance, and in
addition to the penalty herein provided, such nuisance may be abated in the
manner provided by law.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to house trailers unless the house
trailer is being used as a residence.
(Ord. 166, passed - -)
§ 14-203 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND IN-LINE SKATES ON
SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or propel bicycles, skateboards,
scooters, roller skates, or in-line blades/skates on sidewalks on both sides of
Sumner Street in the first blocks north and the first blocks south of highway
U.S. 160, and on sidewalks on both sides of highway U.S. 160 in the first one-
half block east and the first one-half block west of Sumner Street, and at
places otherwise posted in the city. This prohibition shall not apply to or
restrict the use of wheelchairs or other wheeled devices for transporting
handicapped persons or permitting mobilization for handicapped persons on said
sidewalks.
(Ord. 244, passed - -)
§ 14-204 SCHOOL ZONES.
   For the purpose of enforcing speed limitations in school zones in the city,
the following zones are hereby determined and designated as school zones in the
city:
   (a)   The 300, 400, 500 and 600 blocks of north Michigan Street;
   (b)   The 200, 300 and 400 blocks of east College Street;
   (c)   The 200 block of east Elm Street;
   (d)   The 200, 300, 400, 500 and 600 blocks of north Water Street;
   (e)   The 300 block of north Ohio Street;
   (f)   The 200 block of east Maple Street; and
   (g)   The 200 and 300 blocks of east Main Street.
(Ord. 209, passed - -)
§ 14-205 TRUCK; DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the word TRUCK shall mean any vehicle
designated or operated for the transportation of property of any kind
whatsoever, and whose body weight exceeds 10,000 pounds.
(Ord. 206, passed - -)
§ 14-206 SAME; APPLICATION OF REGULATION.
   No trucks shall be operated over and along any streets in the city except
Main Street, Sumner Street and Cottonwood Street, provided, however, that this
article shall not prohibit:
   (a)   The operation of trucks upon any street where necessary to pick up or
deliver property which is, or is to become, the cargo of the truck or a part of
such cargo. This provision shall not be deemed to permit truck travel for the
purpose of reaching a stopping point or a point for parking the truck for any
period of time;
   (b)   The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city;
   (c)   The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city public utilities
or public utilities franchised by the city, or any contractor or supplier of
materials, while engaged in the repair, maintenance, construction or
improvement of streets; or
   (d)   The operation of trucks on any established detour in any case where
such truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which such detour is
established.
(Ord. 206, passed - -)
§ 14-207 SAME; TRUCK TRAFFIC IN CITY.
   (a)   All trucks entering the city for a delivery point in the city shall
proceed only over streets on which truck travel is not prohibited and shall
deviate only at the intersection with a street upon which such traffic is
permitted nearest to the delivery point. Upon leaving the delivery point, a
deviating truck shall return to a street on which truck travel is permitted by
the shortest possible route.
   (b)   All trucks entering the city for multiple delivery or pickup points
shall proceed only over streets on which truck travel is not prohibited and
shall deviate only at the intersection with a street upon which such traffic is
permitted nearest to the first delivery or pickup point. Upon leaving the first
delivery or pickup point, a deviating truck shall proceed to other delivery or
pickup points by the shortest return to a street on which truck travel is
permitted by the shortest possible route.
   (c)   All trucks on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city
for a delivery or pickup point outside the city shall proceed by the shortest
direction over streets on which such traffic is permitted to the corporate
limits of the city.
   (d)   All trucks on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city
for delivery or pickup points in the city shall proceed only over streets upon
which such traffic is permitted.
(Ord. 206, passed - -)
§ 14-208 SAME; CLERK MAINTAINS MAP.
   The City Clerk shall keep and maintain an accurate map showing the streets
upon which truck traffic is permitted; the map shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk and shall be available for inspection by the public
during regular business hours.
(Ord. 206, passed - -)
§ 14-209 SAME; SIGNING.
   There shall be erected at appropriate locations in the city sufficient signs
to give clear and adequate notice that this article is in effect and that truck
traffic is prohibited on such streets.
(Ord. 206, passed - -)
§ 14-210 SAME; WEIGH-IN AUTHORIZED.
   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to require any person driving
or in control of any commercial vehicle proceeding over a street over which
truck traffic is prohibited to proceed to any public or private scale within a
reasonable distance for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this
article has been complied with.
(Ord. 206, passed - -)
§ 14-211 SAME; PENALTIES.
   Any person who shall violate the provisions of §§
14-205 through
14-214 shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine or not more than
$100, or be imprisoned not exceeding three months, or be both so fined and
imprisoned.
(Ord. 206, passed - -)
§ 14-212 REQUIREMENT TO WEAR SEAT BELTS.
   (a)   Each occupant of a passenger car manufactured with safety belts who is
18 years of age or older shall have a safety belt properly fastened about such
person’s body at all times when the passenger car is in motion.
   (b)   Each occupant of a passenger car manufactured with safety belts who is
at least 14 years of age but less than 18 years of age shall have a safety belt
properly fastened about such person’s body at all times when the passenger car
is in motion.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   An occupant of a passenger car who possesses and displays to the
police officer or the Municipal Court Judge a written statement from a licensed
physician that such person is unable for medical reasons to wear a safety belt
system;
      (2)   Carriers of the United States mail while actually engaged in
delivery and collection of mail along their specified routes; or
      (3)   Newspaper delivery persons while actually engaged in the delivery
of newspapers along their specified routes.
   (d)   Despite any indications to the contrary in prior or contemporaneous
laws of concurrent jurisdiction, law enforcement officers may enforce
violations of this section as primary enforcement laws and may issue citations
to anyone violating this section requiring their appearance in Municipal Court
for violations thereof.
   (e)   Persons violating division (a) above shall be fined $10, which
includes court costs. Persons violating division (b) above shall be fined $60,
which includes court costs.
(Ord. 290, passed - -)
§ 14-213 LOUD SOUND SYSTEMS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   (1)   No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street,
highway, alley, parking lot or driveway shall operate or permit the operation
of any sound amplification system from within the vehicle so that the sound is
plainly audible at a distance of 50 or more feet from the vehicle.
      (2)   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Any sound produced by a sound amplification system from
within the vehicle which clearly can be heard at a distance of 50 feet or more.
Measurement standards shall be the auditory senses, based upon direct line of
sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible and bass reverberations are
included. The motor vehicle may be stopped, standing, parked or moving on a
street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway.
      SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM. Any radio, tape player, compact disc player,
loudspeaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of sound.
   (b)   It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
the operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound
amplification system, and that any of the following apply.
      (1)   The system is being operated to request medical or vehicular
assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition.
      (2)   The vehicle was an emergency or public safety vehicle.
      (3)   The vehicle was owned and operated by the city or a gas, electric,
communications or refuse company having a franchise or a contract to operate
within the city.
      (4)   The system was used for the purpose of giving instructions,
directions, talks, addresses, lectures or transmitting music to any person or
assemblages of persons in compliance with the ordinances of the city.
      (5)   The vehicle was used in authorized public activities, such as
parades, fireworks, sports events, musical productions and other activities
which have the approval of the department of the city authorized to grant such
approval.
(Ord. 197, passed - -)
§ 14-214 PENALTY.
   Any person that violates §
14-213 shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance traffic infraction and, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of up to $500, but the standard fine
for such an offense shall be $40, plus court costs.
(Ord. 297, passed - -)
§ 14-215 ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKING BY TRUCKS OR TRUCK-TRACTORS.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any truck or truck-tractor to use an
engine compression brake at any time on a public street unless the noise
created by the use of such braking procedure is effectively muffled such that
there is no significant increase in engine noise caused by the braking
maneuver. This prohibition shall not apply to a public safety emergency
vehicle.
(Ord. 256, passed - -)
§ 14-216 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKE. A motor vehicle brake which is activated or worked
by the compression of the engine of a motor vehicle.
   ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKING. The use of an engine compression brake upon a
truck or truck-tractor by the operator thereof in such a manner that results in
a substantial increase in engine noise to the public.
(Ord. 256, passed - -)
ARTICLE 3: RESERVED
ARTICLE 4: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Section
   
14-401   Hazardous material defined
   
14-402   Same; exceptions
   
14-403   Transportation of hazardous materials
   
14-404   Hazardous materials routes
   
14-405   Parking of vehicles or trailers carrying hazardous materials
   
14-406   Removal of illegally parked trailers
§ 14-401 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL DEFINED.
   As used in this article, the term HAZARDOUS MATERIAL shall mean any material
or combination of materials that, because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical, biological or infectious characteristics, poses a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health or safety or the
environment if released into the workplace or environment, or when improperly
treated, stored, transported or disposed of or otherwise managed.
§ 14-402 SAME; EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this article shall not apply to any container that shall
have a capacity of 150 gallons or less that shall be used for the purpose of
supplying fuel for the vehicle on which it is mounted. These provisions shall
also not apply to vehicles, trailers, containers or tanks containing anhydrous
ammonia or other material primarily used by farmers for fertilizer purposes
when such vehicles, trailers, containers or tanks are parked or housed upon
property designated for the placement of such vehicle, trailer, container or
tank by any farmers cooperative, elevator company or farm supply store located
within the city limits.
§ 14-403 TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   Except as provided in §
14-404, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity
to transport any hazardous material upon any street, avenue, highway, road,
alley or any other public right-of-way in the city.
§ 14-404 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ROUTES.
   (a)   The provisions of §
14-403 shall apply to all streets, avenues, highways, roadways, alleys or other
public rights-of-way within the city, except those specified within this
section where transportation of hazardous materials shall be allowed.
   (b)   Transportation of hazardous materials shall be allowed upon the
following streets, avenues, highways or roadways:
      (1)   Sumner Street anywhere within the city limits; and
      (2)   State Highway 160.
§ 14-405 PARKING OF VEHICLES OR TRAILERS CARRYING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   (a)   Except as provided in divisions (b) and (c) below, it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to park any vehicle,
trailer or semi-trailer carrying any hazardous material within any city zoning
districts as defined in the city’s Zoning Ordinance.
   (b)   Division (a) above shall not apply to vehicles, trailers or semi-
trailers parked for continuous periods of time, not to exceed one hour, where
such vehicles, trailers or semi-trailers are parked along those routes
specified in §
14-404 of this code.
   (c)   Division (a) above shall not apply to any vehicle, trailer or semi-
trailer carrying any hazardous material where such vehicle, trailer or semi-
trailer is not parked within 500 feet of any structure used for human
habitation.
§ 14-406 REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED TRAILERS.
   If any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer is found parked in violation of the
provisions of this article, the Fire Chief or Assistant Chief or any law
enforcement officer may require the owner, operator or lessee of the trailer to
move it within two hours. If such removal is not accomplished on the order of
any such officer, it may be accomplished by any such officer by any reasonable
means if the continued presence of the trailer or semi-trailer at its parked
location constitutes, adds to or prevents the correction of a situation
threatening imminent injury or damage to persons or property.
ARTICLE 5: MICRO-UTILITY TRUCKS AND WORK-SITE VEHICLES
Section
   
14-501   Definitions
   
14-502   Operation of special purpose vehicles on city streets; special
conditions and restrictions on operation
   
14-503   Same; valid driver’s license required; penalty; duties and
responsibilities
   
14-504   Same; insurance required; penalty
   
14-505   Same; registration and license; fee; application; inspection; penalty
 
   
14-506   Penalty
§ 14-501 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOLF CART. A motor vehicle that has not less than three wheels in contact
with the ground, an unladen weight of not more than 1,800 pounds, is designed
to be operated at not more than 25 mph and is designed to carry not more than
four persons, including the driver.
   MICRO-UTILITY TRUCK. Any motor vehicle which is not less than 48 inches in
width, has an overall length, including the bumper, of not more than 160
inches, has an unladen weight, including fuel and fluids, of more than 1,500
pounds, can exceed 40 mph as originally manufactured and is manufactured with a
metal cab.
   SPECIAL PURPOSE VEHICLE. Golf cart, work-site utility vehicle and micro-
utility vehicle, either individually or collectively.
   WORK-SITE UTILITY VEHICLES. Any motor vehicle which is not less than 48
inches in width, has an overall length, including the bumper, of not more than
135 inches, has an unladen weight, including fuel and fluids, of more than 800
pounds and is equipped with four or more low-pressure tires, a steering wheel
and bench- or bucket-type seating allowing at least two people to sit side-by-
side, and may be equipped with a bed or cargo box for hauling materials. WORK
SITE UTILITY VEHICLE does not include a micro-utility truck.
(Ord. 315, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 14-502 OPERATION OF SPECIAL PURPOSE VEHICLES ON CITY STREETS; SPECIAL
CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATION.
   (a)   Golf carts may be operated upon the public highways, streets, roads
and alleys within the corporate limits of the city, except as follows.
      (1)   No golf cart may be operated upon any public highway, street, road
and alley with a posted speed limit in excess of 30 mph.
      (2)   No golf cart shall be operated on any interstate highway, federal
highway or state highway; provided, however, that the provisions of this
division (a)(2) shall not prohibit a golf cart from crossing a federal or state
highway with a posted speed limit greater than 30 mph.
      (3)   No golf cart shall be operated on any public highways, streets,
roads and alleys between sunset and sunrise unless equipped with lights.
      (4)   No golf cart shall be operated on any public highways, streets,
roads and alleys without a windshield unless eye protection is worn by all
occupants.
   (b)   Work-site utility vehicles may be operated upon the public highways,
streets, roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the city except as
follows.
      (1)   No work-site utility vehicle may be operated on any public highway,
street, road and alley with a posted speed limit in excess of 65 mph.
      (2)   No work-site utility vehicle may be operated on any public highway,
street, road and alley between sunset and sunrise unless such vehicle is
equipped with lights as required for motor vehicles under K.S.A. Chapter 8,
Article 17, and amendments thereto.
      (3)   No work-site utility vehicle may be operated on any interstate
highway.
      (4)   No work-site utility vehicle shall be operated on any federal or
state highway unless the following conditions are met.
      (A)   The operator of the work-site utility vehicle is a licensed driver
and operating within the restrictions of the operator’s license.
      (B)   The federal or state highway must have a posted speed limit of 65
mph or less.
      (C)   The operator of the work-site utility vehicle must operate the
work-site utility vehicle as near to the right side of the roadway as
practicable except when making or preparing to make a left turn.
      (D)   The purpose of the trip using the work-site utility vehicle must be
for agricultural purposes.
      (5)   The provisions of division (b)(4) above do not prohibit a work-site
utility vehicle from crossing a federal or state highway.
      (6)   No work-site utility vehicle shall be operated on any public
highway, street, road and alley without a windshield unless eye protection is
worn by all occupants.
   (c)   Micro-utility trucks may be operated upon the public highways,
streets, roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the city, except as
follows.
      (1)   No micro-utility truck may be operated upon any public highway,
street, road and alley with a posted speed limit in excess of 30 mph.
      (2)   No micro-utility truck shall be operated on any public highway,
street, road or alley unless such truck complies with the equipment
requirements under K.S.A. Chapter 8, Article 17, and amendments thereto.
      (3)   No micro-utility truck shall be operated on any interstate highway,
federal highway or state highway; provided, however, that the provisions of
this division (c)(3) shall not prohibit a micro-utility truck from crossing a
federal or state highway with a posted speed limit greater than 30 mph.
(Ord. 347, passed 8-23-2022)
§ 14-503 SAME; VALID DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED; PENALTY; DUTIES AND
RESPONSIBILITIES.
   No person shall operate a golf cart, work-site utility vehicle or a micro-
utility truck on any public highway, street, road or alley within the corporate
limits of the city unless such person is a licensed driver and is operating
within the restrictions of the operator’s license. Violation of this section is
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment for not more
than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 347, passed 8-23-2022)
§ 14-504 SAME; INSURANCE REQUIRED; PENALTY.
   (a)   Every owner of a golf cart, work-site utility vehicle or micro-utility
truck shall provide and carry proof of liability coverage in accordance with §
200 of the currently adopted version of the Standard Traffic Ordinance, and
amendments thereto, and the State Automobile Injury Reparations Act, K.S.A. 40-
3101 et seq., and amendments thereto.
   (b)   All provisions of § 200 of the currently adopted version of the
Standard Traffic Ordinance, and amendments thereto, including penalty
provisions, shall be applicable to all owners and operators of golf carts or
work-site utility vehicles.
(Ord. 315, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 14-505 SAME; REGISTRATION AND LICENSE; FEE; APPLICATION; INSPECTION; PENALTY.
   (a)   Before operating any golf cart, work-site utility vehicle or micro-
utility truck on any public highway, street, road or alley within the corporate
limits of the city, and each calendar year thereafter, the vehicle shall be
registered with the city and a license shall be obtained and placed on the
vehicle. The license fee shall be $15 per calendar year, payable in advance to
the City Clerk or other person designated by the city. The full amount of the
license fee shall be required regardless of the time of year that the
application is made.
   (b)   Application for registration of a special purpose vehicle shall be
made by the owner, or the owner’s agent, in the office of the City Police
Department. The application shall be made upon forms provided by the city, and
each application shall contain the name of the owner, the owner’s residence
address, or bona fide place of business, and a brief description of the vehicle
to be registered (including make, model and serial number, if applicable).
Proof of insurance, as required herein, shall be furnished at the time of
application for registration.
   (c)   Prior to the issuance of the registration and license, each applicant
for a special purpose vehicle license shall first present such vehicle for an
official inspection. If, upon inspection, such vehicle is found to be in safe
mechanical condition, and upon completion of the registration application,
establishing proof of insurance and payment of the fees herein provided, a
license shall be issued to the owner, who shall attach it to the vehicle. The
license shall be attached and displayed in such a manner as to be clearly
visible from the rear of the vehicle. The license number on the application
will be recorded and then filed in the Police Department.
   (d)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter such license during the time in which the same is
operative.
   (e)   The license issued hereunder is transferrable. In the event of sale or
other transfer of ownership of any golf cart, work-site utility vehicle or
micro-utility truck license under the provisions of this section, the existing
license and the right to use shall pass on to the new owner for the balance of
the calendar year during which such license was issued.
   (f)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Operate, or for the owner thereof knowingly to permit the
operation, upon a public street, road, highway or alley within the corporate
limits of the city, any golf cart, work-site utility vehicle or micro-utility
truck which is not registered and which does not have attached thereto and
displayed thereon the license assigned thereto by the city for the current
registration year;
      (2)   Display, cause or permit to be displayed, or to have in possession,
any registration receipt, registration license or registration decal knowing
the same to be fictitious or to have been canceled, revoked, suspended or
altered. A violation of this division (f)(2) shall constitute an unclassified
misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 and forfeiture of the item.
A mandatory court appearance shall be required of any person violating this
division (f)(2);
      (3)   Lend to or knowingly permit the use by one not entitled thereto any
registration receipt, registration license plate or registration decal issued
to the person so lending or permitting the use thereof;
      (4)   Remove, conceal, alter, mark or deface the license number plate,
plates or decals, or any other mark of identification, upon any special purpose
vehicle. Licenses shall be kept clean and placed as required by law so as to be
plainly visible and legible; or
      (5)   Carry, attach or display a registered number plate or plates or
registration decal upon any special purpose vehicle not lawfully issued for
such vehicle.
(Ord. 315, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 14-506 PENALTY.
   Unless specifically provided for herein, a violation of this section shall
be deemed an ordinance traffic infraction. Upon an entry of a plea of guilty or
no contest or upon being convicted of such violation, the penalty imposed shall
be in accordance with § 201, currently adopted version of the Standard Traffic
Ordinance, and amendments thereto, or such other similar provision as the city
may then have in effect.
(Ord. 315, passed 9-5-2017)
CHAPTER XV: UTILITIES
   Article
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   WATER
      
3.   ELECTRICITY
      
4.   SEWERS
      
5.   SOLID WASTE
      
6.   WATER CONSERVATION
      7.   BACK-UP POWER GENERATION
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
15-101   Definition
   
15-102   Delinquent accounts
   
15-103   Notice; hearing
   
15-104   Same; finding
   
15-105   Reserved
   
15-106   Delinquent accounts; refusal of service; termination of service
   
15-107   Reserved
   
15-108   Petty Cash Fund
   
15-109   Same; deposits
   
15-110   Same; vouchers
   
15-111   Changes of names on utility services; fee
   
15-112   Change of names on utility services for rental properties
§ 15-101 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   UTILITY SERVICES. Includes water, electrical, sewer, solid waste (refuse)
and other utility services provided by the city.
§ 15-102 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   Unless otherwise provided, water, electric, sewer, solid waste (refuse) or
other utility service shall be terminated for nonpayment of service fees or
charges in accordance with §§
15-103 and
15-104.
§ 15-103 NOTICE; HEARING.
   (a)   If a utility bill has not been paid on or before the due date as
provided in this chapter, a delinquency and termination notice shall be issued
by the City Clerk within five days after the delinquency occurs and mailed to
the customer at his or her last known address. A copy also shall be mailed to
the occupant of the premises if the occupant and the customer are not the same
person.
   (b)   The notice shall state:
      (1)   The amount due, plus delinquency charge;
      (2)   Notice that service will be terminated if the amount due is not
paid within ten days from the date of the notice, unless the date on the notice
to pay the charges due shall be on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in
which event, such notice will give the consumer until the close of the next
business day in which to pay the charges;
      (3)   Notice that the customer has the right to a hearing before the
designated Hearing Officer; and
      (4)   Notice that the request for a hearing must be in writing and filed
with the City Clerk no later than three days prior to the date for termination
of service.
   (c)   Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the City Clerk shall advise the
customer of the date, time and place of the hearing that shall be held within
three working days following receipt of the request.
§ 15-104 SAME; FINDING.
   Following the hearing, if the Hearing Officer shall find that service should
not be terminated, then notice of such finding shall be presented to the City
Clerk. If the Officer finds that service should be terminated, an order shall
be issued terminating service five days after the date of the order. The
customer shall be notified either in person or by mailing a letter to his or
her last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested; however, if
the order is made at the hearing in the presence of the customer, then no
further notice need be given. The Hearing Officer has a right, for good cause,
to grant an extension, not to exceed ten days, for the termination of such
service.
§ 15-105 RESERVED.
§ 15-106 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS; REFUSAL OF SERVICE; TERMINATION OF SERVICE.
   (a)   Notice; hearing.
      (1)   If a utility bill has not been paid on or before the due date as
provided in this chapter, a delinquency and termination notice shall be issued
by the City Clerk within five days after the delinquency occurs and mailed to
the customer at his or her last known address. A copy also shall be mailed to
the occupant of the premises if the occupant and the customer are not the same
person.
      (2)   The notice shall state:
         (A)   The amount due, plus delinquency charge;
         (B)   Notice that service will be terminated if the amount due is not
paid within ten days from the date of the notice unless the date on the notice
to pay the charges due shall be on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in
which event such notice will give the consumer until the close of the next
business day in which to pay the charges;
         (C)   Notice that the customer has the right to a hearing before the
designated hearing officer;
         (D)   Notice that the request for a hearing must be in writing and
filed with the City Clerk no later than three days prior to the date for
termination of service.
         (3)   Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the City Clerk shall
advise the customer of the date, time and place of the hearing which shall be
held within three working days following receipt of the request.
   (b)   Same; finding. Following the hearing, if the hearing officer shall
find that service should not be terminated, then notice of such finding shall
be presented to the City Clerk. If the officer finds that service should be
terminated, an order shall be issued terminating service five days after the
date of the order. The customer shall be notified either in person or by
mailing a letter to his or her last known address by certified mail, return
receipt requested. However, if the order is made at the hearing in the presence
of the customer, then no further notice need be given. The hearing officer has
a right, for good cause, to grant an extension, not to exceed ten days, for the
termination of such service.
§ 15-107 RESERVED.
§ 15-108 PETTY CASH FUND.
   A Petty Cash Fund in the amount of $1,000 is established for the use of the
City Utilities Department, for the purpose of paying postage, freight,
temporary labor and other emergency expenses, including refund of deposits made
to secure payment of accounts.
§ 15-109 SAME; DEPOSITS.
   The Petty Cash Fund shall be deposited in the regular depository bank of the
city and paid out on the order of the City Clerk by check, which shall state
clearly the purpose for which issued.
§ 15-110 SAME; VOUCHERS.
   Whenever the Petty Cash Fund becomes low or depleted, the City Clerk shall
prepare vouchers covering expenses as have been paid from the Petty Cash Fund
and shall submit such vouchers, together with the paid checks, to the governing
body for review and allowance of the amounts from the regular funds of the
utilities. Warrants issued therefor shall be payable to the Petty Cash Fund and
shall be deposited therein to restore said Petty Cash Fund to its original
amount.
§ 15-111 CHANGES OF NAMES ON UTILITY SERVICES; FEE.
   Any person desiring to have any existing utility service changed from the
name of another to his or her name on the records of the city without a removal
and resetting of a meter shall request such change in writing at the Utility
Office of the city; shall furnish such information and complete such forms as
may be required by the Utility Office; and pay the fee herein established.
Thereupon, the meter or meters shall be read and the change of name made on the
records of the utility. Thereafter, all utility service furnished shall be
billed in the name of the new customer, who shall be liable therefor. A charge
of $20 shall be made to cover the costs of the utility in sending an employee
out to read the meter or meters and the administrative costs in changing the
records in the Utility Office. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to
in any way affect charges of the utility in cases where a service is
disconnected for any reason, the meter removed and a meter subsequently reset.
(Ord. 350, passed 1-2-2024)
§ 15-112 CHANGE OF NAMES ON UTILITY SERVICES FOR RENTAL PROPERTIES.
   The owner of any rental property desiring to have utility service
automatically transferred into the landlord’s name upon the tenant vacating
said premises and terminating utility service shall file notice to that effect
with the City Utility Office upon a form maintained in said office for that
purpose. In the event a tenant is disconnected due to nonpayment of a utility
bill, the standard reconnect fee of $50 will be imposed regardless of whether
the landlord or the tenant has the service reconnected. Otherwise, the $20
meter reading fee, pursuant to §
15-111, shall apply. Prior to disconnecting service at a rental property, an
attempt will be made by the Utility Clerk to contact the landlord before
shutting off the service so that the landlord may elect to have the service
transferred into his or her name to avoid the disconnect order. Such notice may
be made by either mail or telephone contact. The landlord may have the option
of not participating in this program so that there will be no automatic
transfer into the landlord’s name. If no election is made by the landlord on
the appropriate designated form, then the city shall not automatically transfer
the service into the landlord’s name. In the event that the same tenant with
the delinquent bill continues to reside on the premises, then the landlord may
prevent the disconnect for nonpayment only by paying the delinquent bill. If
the delinquent tenant has moved out, then the landlord must notify the City
Clerk in writing that the tenant has vacated the property in order to have the
utility service transferred into the landlord’s name without being
disconnected.
(Ord. 350, passed 1-2-2024)
ARTICLE 2: WATER
Section
   
15-201   Superintendent of Public Works
   
15-202   Regulations
   
15-203   Service not guaranteed
   
15-204   Service connections required
   
15-205   Application for service
   
15-206   City to make connections
   
15-207   Connection fees
   
15-208   Curb cocks
   
15-209   Check valves
   
15-210   Unauthorized service
   
15-211   Meters
   
15-212   Same; testing
   
15-213   Tampering with meter
   
15-214   Water leak refund policy
   
15-215   Disconnection, reconnection charge
   
15-216   Reserved
   
15-217   Interrupt service
   
15-218   Prohibited acts
   
15-219   Wasting water
   
15-220   Right of access
   
15-221   Rates
   
15-222   Payment of bills
   
15-223   Delinquent accounts; notice; hearing; finding; liability
   
15-224   Use during fire
   
15-225   Cross-connections prohibited
   
15-226   Same; protective backflow devices required
   
15-227   Same; inspection
   
15-228   Same; protection from contaminants
   
15-229   Rates for large customers
§ 15-201 SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The general management, care, control and supervision of the city water
system shall be in the Superintendent of Public Works, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the consent of the governing body.
§ 15-202 REGULATIONS.
   The furnishing of water to customers by the city through its waterworks
system shall be governed by the regulations set out in this article.
§ 15-203 SERVICE NOT GUARANTEED.
   The city does not guarantee the delivery of water through any of its mains
and connecting services at any time except only when its mains, pumping
machinery and power service connection are in good working order, and the
supply of water is sufficient for the usual demand of its consumers.
§ 15-204 SERVICE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.
   (a)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or
may in the future be located near, public water mains is hereby required at his
or her own expense to make connection to such public water main.
   (b)   Before any connection is made to the city’s water system, an
application must be made in writing to the City Clerk by the owner of the
premises, or his or her authorized representative, for a permit to make such
connection.
§ 15-205 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (a)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring a connection with the
municipal water system shall apply in writing to the City Clerk, on a form
furnished by the city for that purpose, for a permit to make the connection.
   (b)   The application shall:
      (1)   Contain an exact description, including street address, of the
property to be served;
      (2)   State the size of tap required;
      (3)   State the size and kind of service pipe to be used;
      (4)   State the full name of the owner of the premises to be served;
      (5)   State the purpose in which the water is to be used;
      (6)   State any other pertinent information required by the City Clerk;
and
      (7)   Be signed by the owner or occupant of the premises to be served, or
his or her authorized agent.
   (c)   Each application for a connection permit shall be accompanied by
payment of fees and/or costs specified in §
15-207.
§ 15-206 CITY TO MAKE CONNECTIONS.
   All taps shall be given, street excavations made, corporation cocks
inserted, pipes installed from main to curb and the curb cock installed in a
meter box to which the service pipe is to be connected only by city employees.
§ 15-207 CONNECTION FEES.
   The fees for connection to the city waterworks system shall be as follows:
   (a)   For connecting water main with three-fourths-inch tap, three-fourths-
inch service line and installing three-fourths-inch meter: $50 plus tax; and
   (b)   For connecting water main with larger than a three-fourths-inch tap,
service line or meter; material cost city incurs plus tax.
(Ord. 342, passed 12-7-2021)
§ 15-208 CURB COCKS.
   There shall be a curb cock in every service line attached to the city main,
the same to be placed within the meter box. Curb cocks shall be supplied with
strong and suitable “T” handles.
§ 15-209 CHECK VALVES.
   Check valves are required on all connections to steam boilers or on any
other connection deemed necessary by the Water Superintendent. Safety and
relief valves shall be placed on all boilers or other steam apparatus connected
with the water system where the steam pressure may be raised in excess of 40
pounds per square inch.
§ 15-210 UNAUTHORIZED SERVICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, other than duly
authorized city officials or employees, to turn water on or off at the water
meter or curb cock shutoff with a key, or in any other manner, without first
obtaining written permission from the Mayor or the governing body.
§ 15-211 METERS.
   (a)   All water furnished to customers shall be metered.
   (b)   Meters shall be located between the sidewalk or property line and
curbing when the main is in the street and on private property within three
feet of the alley line when the main is in the alley. In the business district,
the meters may be installed in the basement at a location specified by the
city.
   (c)   The city’s responsibility stops at the property line.
§ 15-212 SAME; TESTING.
   Meters shall be tested before being set and at any other time thereafter
when they appear to be measuring incorrectly. If a test is requested by the
customer and the meter is found to be accurate within 2%, the meter will be
deemed correct and a charge of $10 will be made to the customer.
§ 15-213 TAMPERING WITH METER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to break the seal of any meter, to alter
the register or mechanism of any meter or to make any outlet or connection in
any manner so that water supplied by the city may be used or wasted without
being metered. It shall be unlawful for any person except an authorized
employee of the Water Department to turn any curb cock on or off.
§ 15-214 WATER LEAK REFUND POLICY.
   (a)   The city may, upon the approval of the governing body, provide a
refund on utility bills for high consumption or overage of water that is caused
by a leak in the plumbing from the service line on the consumer’s side of the
water meter.
      (1)   Types of leaks that will be considered for a refund include: breaks
in the underground service line between the water meter and the foundation of
the structure on residential properties, only.
      (2)   Types of leaks that will not be considered for an allowance
include:
      (A)   Breaks in any plumbing located in a crawl space or basement;
      (B)   Breaks in any plumbing located in an interior wall of a structure;
      (C)   Breaks in the underground plumbing of an irrigation or sprinkler
system;
      (D)   Leaks caused by any defective part of a toilet, hot water heater,
ice maker, water softener or any other appliance or item connected to the
plumbing of the structure; and
      (E)   Commercial properties will not be considered for any water leak
refund.
   (b)   To qualify for a water leak refund:
      (1)   The leak in the underground service line between the water meter
and the foundation of the structure must be fully replaced by a licensed
plumber;
      (2)   The property owner must provide evidence that the water line has
been replaced (e.g., copy of a paid invoice from a licensed plumber);
      (3)   The property owner must complete the water leak refund request form
and agree that the property will not qualify for any additional leak allowances
for the remainder of the ownership of the property. A leak refund will only be
considered for one billing cycle. A tenant cannot submit a leak refund request
form on behalf on an owner/landlord;
      (4)   The water leak refund request must be turned in to the City Office
for approval before the next utility billing cycle; and
      (5)   The water leak refund request must be approved by the Governing
Body.
   (c)   (1)   The water leak adjustment will be calculated as follows:
      (A)   Water consumed during the current billing the leak is reported:
   ________
      (B)   Average water consumption, based on 12 months prior to leak:
   ________
      (C)   Water consumption overage less the 12-month average:
      =   ________
      (D)   Multiplied by the current water rate:      x   ________
      (E)   Equals total water leak refund to be credited to bill:
      =   ________
      (2)   The total water leak refund will be credited to the water
consumption charge on the next utility billing.
   (d)   Utility customers are responsible for monitoring their own water
usage. The city accepts no responsibility or liability for notifying a utility
customer that they may have a leak or that they may qualify for a leak
allowance.
(Res. 438, passed 3-5-2024)
§ 15-215 DISCONNECTION, RECONNECTION CHARGE.
   (a)   The governing body shall establish, by ordinance, a water service
disconnection and reconnection charge.
   (b)   Any service disconnected for nonpayment of a delinquent bill shall be
reconnected only upon payment of the delinquent bill, interest penalty thereon,
and the reconnection charge of $50.
(Ord. 342, passed 12-7-2021)
§ 15-216 RESERVED.
§ 15-217 INTERRUPT SERVICE.
   The city reserves the right to interrupt water service for the purpose of
making repairs or extensions to water lines or equipment.
§ 15-218 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It shall be a violation of this article for any unauthorized person to:
   (a)   Perform any work upon the pipes or appurtenances of the city’s
waterworks system beyond a private property line unless such person is employed
by the city;
   (b)   Make any connections with any extension of the supply pipes of any
consumer without written permission to do so having been first obtained from
the governing body; and
   (c)   Remove, handle or otherwise molest or disturb any meter, meter lid,
cutoff or any other appurtenances to the water system of the city.
§ 15-219 WASTING WATER.
   (a)   (1)   Water users shall prevent unnecessary wastes of water and shall
keep sprinklers, hydrants, faucets and all apparatus, including the service
line leading from the property to the meter, in good condition at their
expense.
      (2)   Wasting water may include, but is not limited to:
      (A)   Permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch or other surface
drain;
      (B)   Failing to repair an irrigation system’s malfunction; or
      (C)   Failing to repair a controllable water leak due to defective
plumbing.
   (b)   It shall be a violation of this article and unlawful for any owner,
occupant or manager of real property served by the city water utility to waste
water or to permit the willful waste of water to occur.
   (c)   In the event of a violation of this section, the Superintendent of
Water, or such other person as may be designated by the city, shall give
written notice of the violation and opportunity for hearing in accordance with
§
15-608.
   (d)   The penalties for violating this section shall be the same as those
set forth in §
15-608.
§ 15-220 RIGHT OF ACCESS.
   Authorized employees of the city may enter upon any premises at reasonable
hours for the purpose of reading the meter or servicing or inspecting meters or
water lines.
§ 15-221 RATES.
   The rates to be charged for water sold from the municipal water system of
the city shall be as follows:
   (a)   The minimum charge for all water sold to individual customers, whether
within or outside of the city, shall be $10 per month;
   (b)   First 1,000 gallons, per month, is $10; and
   (c)   All over 1,000 gallons, per month, per 1,000 gallons, is $3.50.
(Ord. 313, passed 10-3-2017)
§ 15-222 PAYMENT OF BILLS.
   All water bills for the previous month’s water service shall be paid on or
before the twentieth day of the month following service. For any billing not
paid when due, a late charge of 10% will be added to the bill, excluding
service to any local, state or federal entities.
(Ord. 313, passed 10-3-2017)
§ 15-223 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS; NOTICE; HEARING; FINDING; LIABILITY.
   Water service shall be terminated for nonpayment of service fees or charges
as provided in §§
15-102 through
15-104.
§ 15-224 USE DURING FIRE.
   No person owning or occupying premises which are connected to the municipal
water system shall use or allow to be used during a fire any water from the
water system except for the purpose of extinguishing the fire. Upon the
sounding of a fire alarm, it shall be the duty of every such person to see that
all water services are tightly closed and that no water is used except in
extraordinary cases of emergency during the fire.
§ 15-225 CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall establish or permit to be established, or maintain or
permit to be maintained, any cross connection whereby a private, auxiliary or
emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the city
may enter the supply and distribution system of the city unless specifically
approved by the State Department of Health and Environment and the governing
body.
   (b)   Approved devices to protect against backflow or backsiphonage shall be
installed at all fixtures and equipment where backflow and/or backsiphonage may
occur and where there is a hazard to the potable water supply in that polluted
water or other contaminating materials may enter into the public water supply.
Any situation in which a heavy withdrawal of water, such as a sudden break in
the main or water being used from a fire hydrant, may cause a negative pressure
to develop which would lead to backsiphonage of polluted water into the system
shall be improper and must be protected by approved backflow preventive valves
and systems as determined by the Water Superintendent of the city.
   (c)   The City Water Superintendent or other designee of the governing body
shall have the right of entry into any building or premises in the city as
frequently as necessary, in his or her judgment, in order to ensure that
plumbing has been installed in accordance with the ordinances of the city so as
to prevent the possibility of pollution of the water supply of the city.
   (d)   Pursuant to the city’s constitutional home rule authority and K.S.A.
65-163a, the city may refuse to deliver water through pipes and mains to any
premises where a condition exists which might lead to the contamination of the
public water supply system and it may continue to refuse the delivery of water
to the premises until that condition is remedied. In addition, the city may
terminate water service to any property where the cross-connections or
backsiphonage condition creates, in the judgment of the Water Superintendent,
an emergency danger of contamination to the public water supply.
(Ord. 194, passed - -)
§ 15-226 SAME; PROTECTIVE BACKFLOW DEVICES REQUIRED.
   Approved devices to protect against backflow or backsiphonage shall be
installed at all fixtures and equipment where backflow and/or backsiphonage may
occur and where there is a hazard to the potable water supply in that polluted
water or other contaminating materials may enter into the public water supply.
Any situation in which a heavy withdrawal of water, such as a sudden break in
the main or water being used from a fire hydrant, may cause a negative pressure
to develop that could lead to backsiphonage of polluted water into the system
shall be improper and must be protected by approved backflow preventive valves
and systems as determined by the Superintendent.
§ 15-227 SAME; INSPECTION.
   The City Utility Superintendent or other designee of the governing body
shall have the right of entry into any building or premises in the city as
frequently as necessary, in his or her judgment, to ensure that plumbing has
been installed in accordance with the laws of the city so as to prevent the
possibility of pollution of the city’s water supply.
§ 15-228 SAME; PROTECTION FROM CONTAMINANTS.
   Under the city’s constitutional home rule authority and K.S.A. 65-163a, the
city, by its Utility Superintendent, may refuse to deliver water through pipes
and mains to any premises where a condition exists that might lead to the
contamination of the public water supply system, and it may continue to refuse
the delivery of water to the premises until that condition is remedied. In
addition, the City Utility Superintendent may terminate water service to any
property where the cross-connections or backsiphonage condition creates, in the
judgment of the Superintendent, an emergency danger of contamination to the
public water supply.
§ 15-229 RATES FOR LARGE CUSTOMERS.
   The city hereby reserves the right to contract with large customers of water
on such rates as may be agreed upon between the city and the customer.
(Ord. 313, passed 10-3-2017)
ARTICLE 3: ELECTRICITY
Section
   
15-301   Application for service
   
15-302   Permit
   
15-303   Newly constructed buildings; insulation
   
15-304   All electricity to be metered
   
15-305   Every premises to have separate connection
   
15-306   Access to property
   
15-307   Taking electricity without authority
   
15-308   City reserves right to disconnect service
   
15-308A   ADiscontinuance of electric service; special circumstances
   
15-309   Payment of electric bills
   
15-310   Electric rates; residential service
   
15-311   Electric rates; commercial and small power service
   
15-312   Electric rates; power service
   
15-313   Electric rates; nonprofit organizations
   
15-314   Fuel and energy cost adjustment
   
15-315   Rates for large customers
   
15-316   Special-type electrical installations; cost
   
15-317   Electric installations outside city; cost
   
15-318   Electrical equipment of customer; repairs
   
15-319   Distributed generation
   
15-320   Interconnection standards for customer-owned distributed energy
systems
§ 15-301 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   Any person desiring a connection with the electric distribution system of
the city shall apply in writing to the City Clerk on a form furnished for that
purpose for a permit to connect to such system. The application shall contain a
description of the property to be served, the estimated amount of electricity
to be used per month and the uses to which the electricity is to be put, and
shall be accompanied by a connection fee of $50.
(Ord. 342, passed 12-7-2021)
§ 15-302 PERMIT.
   Upon receipt of an application as provided for in this article, if the same
is in proper form, the City Clerk shall refer the same to the Superintendent of
Utilities, who shall promptly inspect all wiring to be connected to the city
system under the application and endorse his or her approval or disapproval on
the application and return it to the City Clerk. If the Superintendent of
Utilities shall have endorsed his or her approval on the application, the City
Clerk shall then issue a permit to connect. No connection shall be made to the
electric distribution system of the city until a permit has been issued as in
this article provided.
(Prior Code, § 15-302)
§ 15-303 NEWLY CONSTRUCTED BUILDINGS; INSULATION.
   Before any newly constructed dwelling or commercial building is connected to
the electric distribution system of the city, the owner shall furnish the
Superintendent of Utilities a certificate of the owner, with attached
supporting statements of the architect and contractor if either or both were
employed in the design and construction of such structure, certifying that the
dwelling or building to be connected to the city’s system meets the following
standards.
   (a)   A new residential dwelling must be equipped with storm windows and
storm doors or other satisfactory window and door thermal treatment. Total heat
loss, based on the “ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals,” of a new residential
dwelling shall not exceed 35 BTUs per square foot per hour of floor area of
heated finished living space at a design temperature differential of 80°F with
a maximum of one and one-half air changes per hour.
   (b)   New commercial buildings must be constructed so heat transmission loss
of heated areas, based on the “ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals,” does not
exceed 35 BTUs per square foot per hour of floor area based on a design
temperature differential of 80°F.
   (c)   All installed air conditioning systems shall have an energy efficiency
ratio of 8.0 BTUs or more of cooling capacity per watt hours of input based on
the current ARI Standards. All heat pump systems shall have an energy
efficiency ratio of 7.5 BTUs or more of cooling capacity per watt hours of
input based on current ARI Standards.
(Prior Code, § 15-303)
§ 15-304 ALL ELECTRICITY TO BE METERED.
   All electricity furnished by the electrical distribution system of the city
shall be measured by meters furnished by the city for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 15-304)
§ 15-305 EVERY PREMISES TO HAVE SEPARATE CONNECTION.
   Unless special permission is granted by the Superintendent of Utilities,
each premises shall have a separate and distinct service connection, and where
permission is granted for branch services, each service must have a separate
meter and cutoff.
(Prior Code, § 15-305)
§ 15-306 ACCESS TO PROPERTY.
   (a)   The Superintendent of Utilities, his or her assistants or any person
authorized by him, her or the Mayor shall have the right of access at all
reasonable hours to any premises connected to the city electric distribution
system for the purpose of reading meters, inspecting the location and condition
of all wiring and fixtures therein and seeing that the rules and regulations of
this article are being observed.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or delay the
Superintendent of Utilities, his or her assistants or other persons authorized
by him or her in the discharge of their duties under the provisions of this
article.
(Prior Code, § 15-306)
§ 15-307 TAKING ELECTRICITY WITHOUT AUTHORITY.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to take any electricity from the
electrical distribution system of the city except through a meter installed by
the city or to turn on electricity on any premises where, because of violation
of ordinances of the city, such electricity has been turned off by the city, or
its duly authorized agents, without first obtaining written authority from the
Superintendent of Utilities.
   (b)   Any person taking electricity without authority shall be billed at the
highest monthly usage and/or demand rate for the preceding 12 months for the
period the electricity was taken without authority.
(Prior Code, § 15-307)
§ 15-308 CITY RESERVES RIGHT TO DISCONNECT SERVICE.
   The city hereby reserves the right to discontinue service to any or all
customers of the electric distribution system of the city without notice when
the same is necessary for the repair of the system, or after reasonable notice
and an opportunity for a hearing before the City Council, for the nonpayment of
electric bills for a period of more than 30 days after the bill shall become
due and payable, and when such service has been discontinued for nonpayment of
the bill, it shall not be resumed until the bill, plus penalties due thereon,
and a reconnection fee of $50 have been paid.
(Ord. 342, passed 12-7-2021)
§ 15-308A DISCONTINUANCE OF ELECTRIC SERVICE; SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES.
   (a)   If a residential customer notifies the city and establishes that
discontinuance of electric service would be especially dangerous to the health
of the customer, resident member of the customer’s family or other permanent
resident of the premises where service is rendered, and that such customer is
unable to pay for such electric service in accordance with the city’s billing
therefor, or is able to pay for such service only in installments, the city
shall either allow payment in reasonable installments or postpone
discontinuance of service for at least 21 days so that the customer can make
arrangements for reasonable installment payments.
   (b)   In determining whether discontinuance would be especially dangerous to
health, consideration shall be given to the weather and the customer’s or other
resident’s medical condition, age or disability.
(Prior Code, § 15-308A) (Ord. 196, passed - -)
§ 15-309 PAYMENT OF ELECTRIC BILLS.
   All electric bills shall be due and payable at the office of the City Clerk
on the first day of each month for electricity used during the preceding month.
A penalty of 10% of the amount due shall be added to each bill not paid on or
before the twentieth day of the month in which the bill becomes due and payable
and shall be collected at the time the bill is finally paid.
(Prior Code, § 15-309)
§ 15-310 ELECTRIC RATES; RESIDENTIAL SERVICE.
   The following monthly charges shall be made for electricity used for
residential purposes:
   (a)   Within the corporate limits of the city, a minimum monthly customer
service charge of $10 plus an energy charge of $0.0785 per kWh used during the
month plus a fuel cost adjustment as applicable; and
   (b)   Outside the corporate limits of the city, a minimum monthly customer
charge of $10 plus an energy charge of $0.0847 per kWh used during the month
plus a fuel cost adjustment as applicable.
(Prior Code, § 15-310) (Ord. 268, passed - -)
§ 15-311 ELECTRIC RATES; COMMERCIAL AND SMALL POWER SERVICE.
   The following monthly charges shall be made for electricity used for
commercial and small power purposes:
   (a)   Within the corporate limits of the city, a minimum monthly service
charge of $10 plus an energy charge of $0.076 per kWh used during the month
plus a fuel cost adjustment as applicable; and
   (b)   Outside the corporate limits of the city, a minimum monthly customer
charge of $10 plus an energy charge of $0.0822 per kWh used during the month
plus a fuel cost adjustment as applicable.
(Prior Code, § 15-311) (Ord. 268, passed - -)
§ 15-312 ELECTRIC RATES; POWER SERVICE.
   The following monthly charge shall be made for electricity used for power
purposes:
   (a)   Within the corporate limits of the city, a demand charge of $7.05 per
kW of billing demand plus an energy charge of $0.0550 per kWh plus a fuel cost
adjustment as applicable;
   (b)   Outside the corporate limits of the city, a demand charge of $7.76 per
kW of billing demand plus an energy charge of $0.0610 per kWh plus a fuel cost
adjustment as applicable;
   (c)   The term BILLING DEMAND, as used in this section, shall mean the
maximum kilowatt demand established by the customer for a period of 15
consecutive minutes measured by the demand meter installed for the user’s
service during the billing period for which the bill is rendered. Billing
demand shall apply to all power service, three phase and/or single phase; and
   (d)   The minimum monthly charge for power service shall be $30 per month.
(Prior Code, § 15-312) (Ord. 268, passed - -)
§ 15-313 ELECTRIC RATES; NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   (a)   The monthly rate for electricity used by nonprofit organizations shall
be $0.076 per kWh plus a fuel cost adjustment as applicable.
   (b)   No minimum monthly charge shall be made for such organizations.
(Prior Code, § 15-313) (Ord. 268, passed - -)
§ 15-314 FUEL AND ENERGY COST ADJUSTMENT.
   (a)   The rates for electricity to all users shall be increased in each
month in which the monthly average cost per kWh of fuel and purchased power for
the preceding month exceeds the established base cost of power per kWh by the
amount of such excess.
   (b)   In determining the amount of such increase, the following formula
shall be used:
      Increase per kWh = (A + B) - b
         (C+D)
      Where:
   A = total cost of fuel consumed during preceding month;
   B = total cost of purchased power during preceding month;
   C = net kWh generated (gross generation less plant use) at the city’s power
plant during preceding month;
   D = kWh purchased from other sources during the preceding month; and
   b = the established base cost of power expressed in cents per kWh. The
established base cost is now declared to be $0.03189 per kWh.
(Prior Code, § 15-314) (Ord. 173, passed - -)
§ 15-315 RATES FOR LARGE CUSTOMERS.
   The city hereby reserves the right to contract with large customers of
electric current on such rates as may be agreed upon between the city and the
customer.
(Prior Code, § 15-315)
§ 15-316 SPECIAL-TYPE ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS; COST.
   (a)   All newly constructed residential homes are required to have
underground secondary service lines in three-inch conduit with a slip collar on
the riser pipe to the meter can, with the meter being located on the primary
structure at the closest point to the source of the service. The customer is
required to install a rope in the conduit. The city will provide the meter can
and wire, and install the wire, but all other costs are the responsibility of
the owner. If unusual existing circumstances prevent such type of service from
being constructed, the city can allow alternate service options.
   (b)   The total cost of commercial installations will be the responsibility
of the owner unless otherwise specified by the governing body. The additional
cost of any special-type electrical installations over and above the cost of
normal installations ordinarily provided by the city shall be paid for by the
customer for whom the special-type installation is made.
(Ord. 318, passed 10-3-2017)
§ 15-317 ELECTRIC INSTALLATIONS OUTSIDE CITY; COST.
   The capital investment of all electric installations outside the corporate
limits of the city shall be computed and determined on a cost basis, and the
customer for whom such installation is made shall be charged a monthly rate
that will include income sufficient to amortize such capital investment over a
period of five years.
(Prior Code, § 15-317)
§ 15-318 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT OF CUSTOMER; REPAIRS.
   Electrical equipment related to any electric lines, poles, transformers,
wiring control boxes or stations purchased or provided by the customer shall be
serviced by the customer at his or her expense, and the cost of repairs to or
replacement of the same shall be the responsibility of the customer.
(Prior Code, § 15-319)
§ 15-319 DISTRIBUTED GENERATION.
   (a)   Availability. Distributed generation will be offered on a first-come,
first-served basis to both residential and commercial/industrial customers. In
no case shall the city be obligated to purchase an amount greater than 4% of
the utility’s peak power requirement for the previous year.
   (b)   Distributed generation customer rates.
      (1)   Any residential customer of the city’s electric utility that
installs an energy-producing system or renewable generator with a capacity of
25 kilowatts or less;
      (2)   Any commercial/industrial customer who wishes to install an energy-
producing system or renewable generator with a capacity of 200 kW or less must
first successfully complete and have approved the city’s “Interconnection
Standards for Installation and Distributed Operation of Customer-Owned
Renewable Electric Generation Facilities;” and
      (3)   All distributed generation contracts shall comply with the
requirements of K.S.A. 66-1,184 et seq., as amended. The cost of any equipment
required to be installed for such attachment or metering and installation shall
be the sole responsibility of the customer, and such equipment shall not cause
damage to the city’s electric system or equipment or present an undue hazard to
city personnel.
   (c)   Net monthly rate.
      (1)   Customer charge is determined by customer class, described in §§
15-310 through
15-313 above.
      (2)   Energy rate is determined by customer class, described in §§
15-310 through
15-313 above.
      (3)   Appropriately sized generators (as defined in K.S.A. 66-1,184)
owned by customer- generators will at times either generate more electricity
than the customer can consume on premises or only meet a portion or none of the
customer’s electricity needs. During periods of time when the generator owned
by the customer-generator cannot provide all of the customer’s electricity
needs, the electricity provided by the electric utility will be billed at the
same rate as that established for similar rate class customers that do not own
generation. During periods of time when the generator owned by the customer-
generator produces electricity in excess of its own needs, and such excess
electricity is supplied back to the electric utility, the electric utility
shall compensate the customer for this excess energy at a rate that is 150% of
the utility’s monthly system average costs of energy per kWh, per K.S.A. 66-
1,184.
      (4)   The electric utility may, at its discretion, either pay the
customer for excess energy at the aforementioned rate or calculate such payment
and deduct from the customer’s bill as a credit.
(Ord. 346, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 15-320 INTERCONNECTION STANDARDS FOR CUSTOMER-OWNED DISTRIBUTED ENERGY
SYSTEMS.
   (a)   There is hereby adopted the “Interconnection Standards for
Installation and Parallel Operation of Customer-Owned Distributed Energy
Systems, dated September 2, 2025.”
   (b)   The adopted “Interconnection Standards for Installation and Parallel
Operation of Customer- Owned Distributed Energy Systems, dated September 2,
2025,” may be amended, and modified in whole or in part by the governing body
of the city, as deemed appropriate by the governing body.
   (c)   No distributed energy system shall be interconnected that would cause
the total interconnected customer-owned generating facility capacity to exceed:
      (1)   Commencing on July 1, 2025, 6% of the utility’s historic peak
demand;
      (2)   Commencing on July 1, 2026, 7% of the utility’s historic peak
demand; and
      (3)   Commencing on July 1, 2027, and each year thereafter, 8% of the
utility’s historic peak demand.
   (d)   All distribution generation contracts shall comply with the
requirements of K.S.A. 66-1,184 et seq., as amended. The cost of any equipment
required to be installed for such attachment or metering and installation shall
be the sole responsibility of the customer and such equipment shall not cause
damage to the city’s electric system or equipment or present an undue hazard to
city personnel.
   (e)   Residential and commercial/industrial customers are subject to a non-
refundable processing fee of $250 and must accompany a completed
interconnection application.
   (f)   (1)   (A)   Base rate: determined by customer class described herein;
and
      (B)   Energy rate: determined by customer class described herein.
      (2)   Appropriately sized generators (as defined in K.S.A. 66-1,184)
owned by customer- generators will at times either generate more electricity
than the customer can consume on premises or only meet a portion or none of the
customers electricity needs. During periods of time when the generator owned by
the customer-generator cannot provide all of the customer’s electricity needs,
the electricity provided by the electric utility will be billed at the same
rate as that established for similar rate class customers that do not own
generation. During periods of time when the generator owned by the customer-
generator produces electricity in excess of its own needs, and such excess
electricity is supplied back to the electric utility, the electric utility
shall compensate the customer for this excess energy at a rate that is 100% of
the utility’s monthly system average cost of energy per kilowatt hour, or
locational marginal price, per K.S.A. 66-1,184.
      (3)   The city may, at its discretion, either pay the customer for excess
energy at aforementioned rate or calculate such payment and deduct from the
customer’s bill as a credit.
(Ord. 356, passed 9-2-2025)
ARTICLE 4: SEWERS
Section
   
15-401   Definitions
   
15-402   Sewer connection required
   
15-403   Permit; connection fee
   
15-404   Application
   
15-405   Costs
   
15-406   Sewer connection
   
15-407   Sewer for each building
   
15-408(1)   Same; specifications
   
15-408(2)   Same; specifications; size and slope of building sewer
   
15-408(3)   Same; specifications; elevation
   
15-408(4)   Same; specifications; lift
   
15-408(5)   Same; specifications; cesspool, septic tank or vault
   
15-408(6)   Same; specifications; excavations
   
15-408(7)   Same; specifications; joints
   
15-409   Sewer excavations: damages
   
15-410   Failure to connect
   
15-411   Privy unlawful
   
15-412   Private sewer system
   
15-413   Same; permit
   
15-414   Same; inspection
   
15-415   Same; discharge
   
15-416   Same; additional requirements
   
15-417   Disposal of sewage
   
15-418   Damage to sewers
   
15-419   Natural outlet
   
15-420   Standards
   
15-421   Old building sewers
   
15-422   Mud, grease traps
   
15-423   Roof, foundation drains
   
15-424   Same; exception
   
15-425   Prohibited discharges
   
15-426   Bills
   
15-427   Delinquent accounts; lien against property; other remedies
   
15-428   Sewer service charge
§ 15-401 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   B.O.D. (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in parts per million by weight.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system that receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from building drain to public sewer, or other
place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWERS. Sewers receiving both surface runoff and sewage are not
permitted.
   INDIVIDUAL DOMESTIC. Any single-family residence, commercial business,
office, institution, school, church or public entity having an individual
direct or indirect connection to the wastewater facilities of the city and on
individual city or private water service meter, or connection to any such water
service.
   INDUSTRIAL. Any industrial business engaged in the manufacturing or
processing of one or more products, and in which wastewaters are produced from
such manufacturing or processing and said wastewaters are discharged directly
or indirectly to the wastewater facilities of the city.
   MULTI-DOMESTIC. Any multi-family residence, apartment or mobile home and any
commercial business, office, institution, school, church or public entity
having a direct or indirect connection to the wastewater facilities of the city
and not having an individual water service meter, but is served with city or
private metered water by the owner of the property on which it is located.
   NORMAL WASTEWATER. The strength of normal wastewater shall be considered
within the following ranges:
      (1)   A five-day biochemical oxygen demand of 300 milligrams per liter or
less;
      (2)   A suspended solid concentration of 350 milligrams or less; and
      (3)   Hydrogen ion concentration of 5.0 to 9.0.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and is controlled by public authority.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer that carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the city or his or her authorized
deputy, agent or representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   USER. Any person as defined in §
1-102, including an institution, governmental agency or political subdivision
producing wastewater requiring processing and treatment to remove pollutants
and having premises connected to the wastewater facilities.
   WASTEWATER. Sewage, the combination of liquids and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial and industrial buildings, institutions, governmental
agencies, together with any ground, surface or stormwater that may be present.
§ 15-402 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the city and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in
the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required,
at his or her expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this article within 90 days after the date of official
notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within 140 feet of the
property line.
§ 15-403 PERMIT; CONNECTION FEE.
   (a)   No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into,
use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the city.
   (b)   There shall be charged a fee of $20, payable at the time of making
application for the permit.
§ 15-404 APPLICATION.
   (a)   Any person desiring to make a connection to the city sewer system
shall apply in writing to the City Clerk, who shall forward the application to
the Utility Superintendent.
   (b)   The application shall contain:
      (1)   The legal description of the property to be connected;
      (2)   The name and address of the owner or owners of the property;
      (3)   The kind of property to be connected (residential, commercial or
industrial); and
      (4)   The point of proposed connection to the city sewer line.
§ 15-405 COSTS.
   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be paid by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
§ 15-406 SEWER CONNECTION.
   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at
the “Y” branch if such branch is available at a suitable location. Where no
properly located “Y” branch is available, the connection shall be made in the
manner approved by the Utility Superintendent and at a location designated by
the Superintendent.
§ 15-407 SEWER FOR EACH BUILDING.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior
lot and no private sewer is available or can be feasiblely constructed to the
rear building. In such case, the building sewer from the front building may be
extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
§ 15-408(1) SAME; SPECIFICATIONS.
   The building sewer shall be constructed of cast iron pipe, ASTM
specifications A74-42, or approved equal; vitrified clay sewer pipe, ASTM
specifications C13-44T, or approved equal; or an approved plastic pipe. Any
plastic pipe to be installed on any building sewer shall not be approved by the
city until the owner has furnished descriptive literature and a typical sample
section of the plastic pipe proposed for installation to the city for
inspection and review. All joints on all pipe installed shall be tight and
water-proof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of
a water service pipe or city water main shall be constructed of approved cast
iron soil pipe with approved joints. No building sewer shall be installed
within three feet of existing gas lines. If installed in filled or unstable
ground, the building sewer shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe, except
that non-metallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed
or cradle as approved by the city.
§ 15-408(2) SAME; SPECIFICATIONS; SIZE AND SLOPE OF BUILDING SEWER.
   The size and slope of the building sewer to be installed shall be subject to
the approval of the City Inspector, but in no event shall the diameter of the
pipe be less than four inches. The slope at which a six-inch pipe is to be laid
shall be not less than one-eighth inch per foot, and for four-inch pipe, not
less than one-fourth inch per foot. Any grades for the pipe which are proposed
for installation at grades less than these specified shall be approved by the
City Inspector prior to placement.
§ 15-408(3) SAME; SPECIFICATIONS; ELEVATION.
   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to
or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The
depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer
shall be laid at a uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible.
Changes in direction shall be made only with approved curved pipe and fittings,
including cleanout fittings.
§ 15-408(4) SAME; SPECIFICATIONS; LIFT.
   At buildings in which the building drain is too low to permit gravity flow
to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by
approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. The use of any
pumping equipment for which cross-connections with a public water supply system
are needed is prohibited. The total costs of pumping equipment and pumping
equipment operational costs shall be those of the owner.
§ 15-408(5) SAME; SPECIFICATIONS; CESSPOOL, SEPTIC TANK OR VAULT.
   No building sewer shall be laid across a cesspool, septic tank or vault
until the cesspool, septic tank or vault has been well cleaned and filled with
an approved earth or sand fill, then thoroughly tamped and water-settled. Cast
iron pipe may be used across cesspools or septic tanks, if proper bedding and
support for the sewer pipe is acquired.
§ 15-408(6) SAME; SPECIFICATIONS; EXCAVATIONS.
   All excavation required for the installation of the building sewer shall be
open trench work unless otherwise approved by the city. Pipe laying and
backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM specifications C12-19,
except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and
approved.
§ 15-408(7) SAME; SPECIFICATIONS; JOINTS.
   (a)   All joints in the building sewers shall be made water-tight. If
recommended by the City Inspector, a water pressure test shall be made on the
completed sewer to ensure compliance with this requirement, requiring that the
building sewer withstand an internal water pressure of five psi without
leakage.
   (b)   Cast iron pipe with lead joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or
hemp and filled with molten lead, federal specifications QQ-L-156, not less
than one inch deep. Lead shall be run in one pour and caulked and packed tight.
No paint, varnish or other coatings shall be permitted on the jointing material
until after the joint has been tested and approved.
   (c)   All joints in vitrified clay pipe shall be the polyurethane
compression-type joints, approved by the City Inspector.
   (d)   Joints for all plastic pipe used in building sewers shall be the slip-
type joints or solvent weld-type, approved by the city.
   (e)   Joints between any two different types of pipes shall be made with
lead, asphaltic jointing materials or concrete, as approved by the city. All
joints shall be water-tight and constructed to ensure minimum root penetration
and to the satisfaction of the city.
§ 15-409 SEWER EXCAVATIONS: DAMAGES.
   All excavations for buildings sewers shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, curb
and gutters, sidewalks, parkways and other public property removed or damaged
during the installation of the building sewer shall be repaired or replaced in
a manner acceptable to the city and at the total expense of the owner. It is
further agreed that any parties involved in any excavating or installation work
for sewer installations, as above set out, will hold the city harmless from any
and all damages to persons or property resulting from or growing out of any
opening or excavation or any negligent act or from any operation made within
the city.
§ 15-410 FAILURE TO CONNECT.
   (a)   If any person, as defined in §
1-102, shall fail to connect any dwelling or building with the sewer system
after being noticed, the city may cause such building to be connected with the
sewer system as authorized by K.S.A. 12-631.
   (b)   The cost and expense, including inspection fees, shall be assessed
against the property. Until such assessments shall have been collected and paid
to the city, the cost of making such connection may be paid from the General
Fund or through the issuance of no-fund warrants.
§ 15-411 PRIVY UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage
except as provided in this article.
§ 15-412 PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEM.
   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of §
15-402, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of §§
15-411 to
15-416.
§ 15-413 SAME; PERMIT.
   Before commencing construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Utility Superintendent.
The application shall be accompanied by any plans, specifications or other
information deemed necessary by the Utility Superintendent. A permit and
inspection fee of $100 shall be paid to the city at the time the application is
filed.
§ 15-414 SAME; INSPECTION.
   The Utility Superintendent or his or her authorized representative shall be
allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and the applicant
shall notify the Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection or
before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.
§ 15-415 SAME; DISCHARGE.
   (a)   The type, capacities, location and layout of the private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations and requirements of the
water pollution control section of the State Department of Health and
Environment (K.A.R. 28, Art. 16). No permit shall be issued for any private
sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where
the area of the lot is less than one acre. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet.
   (b)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
15-402, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this article, and any septic tank, cesspool and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable and acceptable
materials.
§ 15-416 SAME; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the City or County Health
Officer.
§ 15-417 DISPOSAL OF SEWAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge from any source
whatsoever any sewage or human excrement upon any public or private grounds
within the city, or to permit the contents of any privy, vault or septic tank
to be deposited or discharged upon the surface of any grounds. Any unauthorized
or unapproved privy vault, septic tank or other means or places for the
disposal of sewage, excrement and polluted water may be abated as a public
nuisance upon the order of the City or County Board of Health in accordance
with the laws of the state.
(K.S.A. 12-1617e, 12-1617g)
§ 15-418 DAMAGE TO SEWERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to maliciously, willfully
or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
sewer, structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the municipal
sewer system.
§ 15-419 NATURAL OUTLET.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or
in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sanitary sewage, industrial
wastes or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 15-420 STANDARDS.
   The size, slope, alignment, materials, excavation, placing of pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling shall all conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city.
§ 15-421 OLD BUILDING SEWERS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the Utility Superintendent, to meet
all requirements of this article.
§ 15-422 MUD, GREASE TRAPS.
   All garages, filling stations, milk plants or other commercial or industrial
plants connected to the public sewer shall construct and maintain proper and
sufficient interceptors or traps to prevent the discharge of any sand, mud,
sediment, litter, waste or any substance harmful to the effective operation and
maintenance of the city sewer system into the building sewer.
§ 15-423 ROOF, FOUNDATION DRAINS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to connect downspouts from any roof area, drains
from any building foundation, paved areas, yards or open courts, or to
discharge liquid wastes from any air conditioning unit or cooling device having
a capacity in excess of one ton per hour or one horsepower, into any city
sanitary sewer.
   (b)   All discharges prohibited in division (a) above may be discharged into
the public gutter or storm drains or open drainage ditches provided such
discharge does not create a nuisance. No such liquids may be discharged into
any unpaved street or alley.
§ 15-424 SAME; EXCEPTION.
   Discharges from air conditioning units in excess of one ton per hour or one
horsepower may be permitted into a building sewer upon approval of the Utility
Superintendent where there is a finding that such cooling water cannot be
recirculated and that such waste water does not overload the capacity of the
sewer or interfere with the effective operation of the sewage disposal works of
the city.
§ 15-425 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge any of the following waters or wastes to any
public sewer:
   (a)   Liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F;
   (b)   Water or waste that may contain more than 100 parts per million, by
weight, of fat, oil or grease;
   (c)   Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas;
   (d)   Garbage that has not been properly shredded;
   (e)   Ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous
substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works;
   (f)   Waters or wastes having a ph lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;
   (g)   Waters or wastes containing a toxic poisonous substance in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant;
   (h)   Water or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials
at the sewage treatment plant; and
   (i)   Noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public
nuisance.
§ 15-426 BILLS.
   (a)   Bills shall be rendered monthly as provided in §
15-222 and shall be collected as a combined utility bill.
   (b)   Any person, at the time of beginning or terminating service, who
receives service for a period of less than 17 consecutive days shall be billed
at no less than one-half of the regular minimum monthly rate. For service of 17
consecutive days or more, the charge shall be not less than the full regular
minimum monthly rate.
§ 15-427 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS; LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY; OTHER REMEDIES.
   (a)   In the event any person, except the United States and the state, shall
fail to pay the user charges when due, water service shall be terminated as
provided in §§
15-102 to
15-104.
   (b)   All other remedies regarding delinquent accounts, and exceptions
thereto, contained in §
15-106 shall apply to sewer service fees, charges and services.
§ 15-428 SEWER SERVICE CHARGE.
   (a)   Sewer service charges to be paid by all users of the Oxford Municipal
Wastewater Collection and Treatment System shall be as follows:
      (1)   For residences occupied by only one person, per month: $7.75;
      (2)   For residences occupied by two or more persons in a single-family
unit, per month: $8.75; and
      (3)   Riverview Village I shall be charged $7.75 per month for each of
the 22 living units therein for a total of $170.50 per month, and Riverview
Village II shall be charged $7.75 per month for each of the 11 living units
therein for a total of $85.25 per month.
   (b)   Commercial establishments, industries and schools shall be charged
monthly $2 per 1,000 gallons of its average monthly water usage for the prior
12 months, with a monthly minimum of $7.75. The customer’s charge shall be
adjusted in January of each year based on the prior 12 months’ usage.
Commercial users with no prior water usage shall be assigned a monthly rate,
which shall be averaged each month for the succeeding 12 months.
   (c)   Where more than one water meter is installed for service to one
commercial establishment, industry or school located at a single or adjoining
sites, the monthly charge shall be based on the total water use from all meters
that supply service to the establishment, industry or school.
   (d)   Where it can be established that a user had a water leak, the user
charge may be adjusted by the City Council.
(Ord. 247, passed - -)
ARTICLE 5: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
15-501   Definitions
   
15-502   Collection
   
15-503   Contracts
   
15-504   Duty of owner, occupant
   
15-505   Containers
   
15-506   Bulk containers
   
15-507   Enter private premises
   
15-508   Ownership of solid waste
   
15-509   Wrapping garbage
   
15-510   Heavy, bulky waste
   
15-511   Hazardous materials
   
15-512   Prohibited practices
   
15-513   Objectionable waste
   
15-514   Unauthorized disposal
   
15-515   Private collectors; license required
   
15-516   Reserved
   
15-517   Reserved
   
15-518   Reserved
   
15-519   Closed vehicle
   
15-520   Rules and regulations
   
15-521   Reserved
   
15-522   Charges
   
15-523   Charges for collection and disposal
   
15-524   Billing
§ 15-501 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL WASTE. All refuse emanating from establishments engaged in
business, including, but not limited to, stores, markets, office buildings,
restaurants, shopping centers, theaters, hospitals, governments and nursing
homes.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any enclosure, building, or portion thereof occupied by one
or more persons for and as living quarters.
   GARBAGE. Waste resulting from the handling, processing, storage, packaging,
preparation, sale, cooking and serving of meat, produce and other foods, and
shall include unclean containers.
   MULTI-FAMILY UNIT. Any structure containing more than four individual
dwelling units.
   REFUSE. All garbage and/or rubbish or trash.
   RESIDENTIAL. Any structure containing four or fewer individual dwelling
units; rooming houses having no more than four persons in addition to the
family of the owner or operator; and mobile homes.
   RUBBISH or TRASH.
      (1)   All nonputrescible materials such as paper, tin cans, bottles,
glass, crockery, rags, ashes, lawn and tree trimmings, stumps, boxes, wood,
street sweepings and mineral refuse.
      (2)   RUBBISH or TRASH shall not include earth and waste from building
operations or waste from industrial processes or manufacturing operations.
   SINGLE-DWELLING UNIT. An enclosure, building or portion thereof occupied by
one family as living quarters.
   SOLID WASTE. All non-liquid garbage, rubbish or trash.
§ 15-502 COLLECTION.
   (a)   The city or its authorized contractor shall collect solid waste from
all premises in the city not less than once each week, and from commercial and
industrial premises more frequently if necessary to adequately dispose of the
solid waste accumulated by such business or industry and to keep such premises
in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (b)   Storage containers for the solid waste shall be kept in a convenient
location for the collection, as designated by the city or its authorized
contractor, in order that collection may be made without the collectors
entering buildings, garages, locked gates or fenced yards with dogs.
   (c)   A point of collection other than the one initially designated by the
city or its authorized contractor may be maintained in cases where old age or
physical handicap or other condition creates an unreasonable hardship on any
residential occupant. An authorized representative of the city or contractor
will determine when a point of collection other than the one initially
designated will be allowed. A doctor’s certificate may be required to establish
the necessary point of collection other than the one initially designated.
(Ord. 320, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 15-503 CONTRACTS.
   The city shall have the right to enter into a contract with any responsible
person for the collection and disposal of solid waste.
§ 15-504 DUTY OF OWNER, OCCUPANT.
   (a)   The owner or occupant of every dwelling unit or commercial enterprise
shall provide at his or her own expense a suitable container for the storage of
solid waste as provided in this article.
   (b)   No owner or occupant shall permit to accumulate quantities of refuse
or other waste materials within or close to any structure within the city
unless the same is stored in approved containers and in such a manner as not to
create a health or fire hazard.
§ 15-505 CONTAINERS.
   (a)   Residential containers shall have a capacity of not more than 90
gallons and the total weight shall not exceed 150 pounds. They shall be of non-
rusting material of substantial construction.
   (b)   Each container shall have a tight-fitting lid and shall be leak-proof
and fly-tight. All containers shall be equipped with appurtenances for
attaching mechanical lifting devices which are compatible with the collection
equipment being used.
   (c)   All garbage shall be drained of all liquids before being placed in
containers.
(Ord. 317, passed 10-3-2017)
§ 15-506 BULK CONTAINERS.
   On premises where excessive amounts of refuse accumulate or where cans or
bags are impractical, bulk containers for the storage of refuse may be used.
Containers shall have a capacity and shall be equipped with appurtenances for
attaching mechanical lifting devices that are compatible with the collection
equipment being used. Containers shall be constructed of durable rust- and
corrosion-resistant material that is easy to clean. All containers shall be
equipped with tight-fitting lids or doors to prevent the entrance of insects or
rodents. Doors and lids shall be constructed and maintained so they can be
easily opened. Containers shall be of water-tight, leak-proof and weather-proof
construction.
§ 15-507 ENTER PRIVATE PREMISES.
   Solid waste collectors employed by the city or operating under contract with
the city are hereby authorized to enter in and upon private property for the
purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this article.
§ 15-508 OWNERSHIP OF SOLID WASTE.
   (a)   Ownership of solid waste, when placed in containers by the occupants
or owners of premises upon which refuse accumulates, shall be vested in the
city, and thereafter shall be subject to the exclusive control of the city, its
employees or contractors.
   (b)   No person shall meddle with refuse containers or in any way pilfer or
scatter contents thereof in any alley or street within the city.
(Ord. 141, passed 10-2-1984)
§ 15-509 WRAPPING GARBAGE.
   All garbage shall be drained of all excess liquid and wrapped in paper or
other disposable container before being placed in solid waste containers.
§ 15-510 HEAVY, BULKY WASTE.
   Heavy accumulations such as brush, tree limbs, broken concrete, sand or
gravel, automobile frames, dead trees and other bulky, heavy materials shall be
disposed of at the expense of the owner or person controlling same.
§ 15-511 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   (a)   No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer
for collection any hazardous garbage, refuse or waste.
   (b)   Hazardous material shall include:
      (1)   Explosives;
      (2)   Rags or other waste soaked in volatile and flammable materials;
      (3)   Chemicals;
      (4)   Poisons;
      (5)   Radioactive materials;
      (6)   Highly combustible materials;
      (7)   Animal carcasses;
      (8)   Soiled dressings, clothing, bedding and/or other wastes
contaminated by infectious or contagious disease; or
      (9)   Any other materials which may present a special hazard to
collection or disposal personnel or equipment or to the public.
(Ord. 317, passed 10-3-2017)
§ 15-512 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (a)   Deposit solid waste in any container other than that owned or leased
by him or her or under his or her control without written consent of the owner
and/or with the intent of avoiding payment of the refuse service charge;
   (b)   Interfere in any manner with employees of the city or its contractors
in the collection of solid waste;
   (c)   Burn solid waste except in an approved incinerator, and unless a
variance has been granted and a written permit obtained from the city or the
appropriate air pollution control agency; and
   (d)   Bury refuse at any place within the city, except that lawn and garden
trimmings may be composted.
§ 15-513 OBJECTIONABLE WASTE.
   Manure from cow lots, stables, poultry yards, pigeon lofts and other animal
or fowl pens, and waste oils from garages or filling stations, shall be removed
and disposed of at the expense of the person controlling the same and in a
manner consistent with this article.
§ 15-514 UNAUTHORIZED DISPOSAL.
   No person shall haul or cause to be hauled any garbage, refuse or other
waste material of any kind to any place, site or area within or without the
limits of the city unless such site is a sanitary landfill, transfer point or
disposal facility approved by the State Department of Health and Environment.
§ 15-515 PRIVATE COLLECTORS; LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except a contractor of the city, to
collect or transport any solid waste within the city without securing a license
from the city.
§ 15-516 RESERVED.
§ 15-517 RESERVED.
§ 15-518 RESERVED.
§ 15-519 CLOSED VEHICLE.
   Any vehicle used by any person for the collection and transportation of
solid waste shall be maintained in a good mechanical condition. The vehicle
shall be equipped with an enclosed covered body to prevent the contents leaking
or escaping therefrom. Only tree trimmings or brush may be transported in open-
bodied vehicles provided the material is securely tied in place to prevent
scattering along the streets and alleys.
§ 15-520 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The collection and transportation of trash and waste materials shall be at
all times under the general supervision of the Mayor or his or her duly
authorized agent, who shall have the authority by and with the consent of the
governing body to make additional rules and regulations not inconsistent with
the terms and provisions of this article requiring that the collection and
transportation of trash and waste materials shall be conducted in such a manner
as not to endanger the public health, or to become an annoyance to the
inhabitants of the city, and providing for a proper fee to be charged to the
customer.
§ 15-521 RESERVED.
§ 15-522 CHARGES.
   The city shall establish and collect a service charge to defray the cost and
maintenance of the collection and disposition of solid waste within the city.
§ 15-523 CHARGES FOR COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.
   A trash collection and disposal fee shall be charged and paid by the users
of the solid waste collection system of the city in accordance with the
contractual agreement entered into between the city and the waste services
provider.
(Ord. 320, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 15-524 BILLING.
   Solid waste charges shall be billed monthly and shall be included on water
or utility bills. No payment shall be accepted on utility bills except for the
full amount billed for all services. Delinquent solid waste bills shall carry
the same due dates, grace periods and penalties as water bills.
ARTICLE 6: WATER CONSERVATION
Section
   
15-601   Purpose
   
15-602   Definitions
   
15-603   Declaration of a water emergency
   
15-604   Voluntary conservation measures
   
15-605   Mandatory conservation measures
   
15-606   Emergency water rates
   
15-607   Regulations
   
15-608   Violations, disconnections and penalties
   
15-609   Emergency termination
§ 15-601 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for the declaration of a water
supply emergency and the implementation of voluntary and mandatory water
conservation measures throughout the city in the event such an emergency is
declared.
§ 15-602 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLASSES OF WATER. The following classes of water uses are established:
      (1)   CLASS 1. Water used for outdoor watering, either public or private,
for gardens, lawns, trees, shrubs, plants, parks, golf courses, playing fields,
swimming pools or other recreational areas; or the washing of motor vehicles,
boats, trailers or the exterior of any building or structure;
      (2)   CLASS 2. Water used for any commercial or industrial, including
agricultural, purposes; except water actually necessary to maintain the health
and personal hygiene of bona fide employees while such employees are engaged in
the performance of their duties at their place of employment;
      (3)   CLASS 3. Domestic usage, other than that which would be included in
either Class 1 or Class 2; and
      (4)   CLASS 4. Water necessary only to sustain human life and the lives
of domestic pets and maintain standards of hygiene and sanitation.
   CUSTOMER. The customer of record using water for any purpose from the city’s
water distribution system and for which either a regular charge is made or, in
the case of coin sales, a cash charge is made at the site of delivery.
   WASTE OF WATER. Includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch or other surface
drain; or
      (2)   Failure to repair a controllable leak of water due to defective
plumbing.
   WATER. Water available to the city for treatment by virtue of its water
rights or any treated water introduced by the city into its water distribution
system, including water offered for sale at any coin- operated site.
§ 15-603 DECLARATION OF A WATER EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the governing body of the city finds that an emergency exists by
reason of a shortage of water supply needed for essential uses, it shall be
empowered to declare by resolution that a water supply emergency exists and
that it will encourage voluntary water conservation or impose mandatory
restrictions on water use during the period of the emergency. Such an emergency
shall be deemed to continue until it is declared by resolution of the governing
body to have ended. The resolutions declaring the existence and end of a water
supply emergency shall be effective upon their publication in the official city
newspaper.
§ 15-604 VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION MEASURES.
   Upon the declaration of a water supply emergency as provided in §
15-603, the Mayor is authorized to call on all water consumers to employ
voluntary water conservation measures to limit or eliminate nonessential water
uses, including, but not limited to, limitations on the following uses:
   (a)   Sprinkling of water on lawns, shrubs or trees (including golf
courses);
   (b)   Washing of automobiles;
   (c)   Use of water in swimming pools, fountains and evaporative air
conditioning systems; and
   (d)   Waste of water.
§ 15-605 MANDATORY CONSERVATION MEASURES.
   Upon the declaration of a water supply emergency as provided in §
15-603, the Mayor is also authorized to implement certain mandatory water
conservation measures, including, but not limited to, the following:
   (a)   Suspension of new connections to the city’s water distribution system,
except connections of fire hydrants and those made pursuant to agreements
entered into by the city before the effective date of the declaration of the
emergency;
   (b)   Restrictions on the uses of water in one or more classes of water use,
wholly or in part;
   (c)   Restrictions on the sales of water at coin-operated facilities or
sites;
   (d)   The imposition of water rationing based on any reasonable formula,
including, but not limited to, the percentage of normal use and per capita or
per consumer restrictions;
   (e)   Complete or partial bans on the waste of water; and
   (f)   Any combination of the foregoing measures.
§ 15-606 EMERGENCY WATER RATES.
   (a)   Upon the declaration of a water supply emergency as provided in §
15-603, the governing body of the city shall have the power to adopt emergency
water rates by ordinance designed to conserve water supplies.
   (b)   Such emergency rates may provide for, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Higher charges for increasing usage per unit of the use (increasing
block rates);
      (2)   Uniform charges for water usage per unit of use (uniform unit
rate); or
      (3)   Extra charges in excess of a specified level of water use (excess
demand surcharge).
§ 15-607 REGULATIONS.
   During the effective period of any water supply emergency as provided for in
§
15-603, the Mayor is empowered to promulgate such regulations as may be
necessary to carry out the provisions of this article, any water supply
emergency resolution or emergency water rate ordinance. Such regulations shall
be subject to the approval of the governing body at its next regular or special
meeting.
§ 15-608 VIOLATIONS, DISCONNECTIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   If the Mayor, Water Superintendent or other city official or officials
charged with implementation and enforcement of this article or a water supply
emergency resolution or ordinance learn of any violation of any water use
restrictions imposed pursuant to §§
15-605 or
15-607, a written notice of the violation shall be affixed to the property
where the violation occurred, and the customer of record, and any other person
known to the city who is responsible for the violation or its correction, shall
be provided with either actual or mailed notice. The notice shall describe the
violation and order that it be corrected, cured or abated immediately or within
such specified time as the city determines is reasonable under the
circumstances. If the order is not complied with, the city may terminate water
service to the customer subject to the following procedures.
      (1)   The city shall give the customer notice by mail or actual notice
that water service will be discontinued within a specified time due to the
violation and that the customer will have the opportunity to appeal the
termination by requesting a hearing scheduled before the city governing body or
a city official designated as a hearing officer by the governing body.
      (2)   If such a hearing is requested by the customer charged with the
violation, he or she shall be given a full opportunity to be heard before
termination is ordered.
      (3)   The governing body or hearing official shall make findings of fact
and order whether service should continue or be terminated.
   (b)   A fee of $50 shall be paid for the reconnection of any water service
terminated pursuant to division (a) above. In the event of subsequent
violations, the reconnection fee shall be $200 for the second violation and
$300 for any additional violations.
   (c)   (1)   Violation of this article shall be a municipal offense and may
be prosecuted in Municipal Court. Any person so charged and found guilty in
Municipal Court of violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of
a municipal offense. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate offense.
The penalty for an initial violation shall be a mandatory fine of $100. In
addition, such customer may be required by the Court to serve a definite term
of confinement in the City or County Jail, which shall be fixed by the Court
and which shall not exceed 30 days.
      (2)   The penalty for a second or subsequent conviction shall be a
mandatory fine of $200. In addition, such customer shall serve a definite term
of confinement in the City or County Jail, which shall be fixed by the Court
and which shall not exceed 30 days.
§ 15-609 EMERGENCY TERMINATION.
   Nothing in this article shall limit the ability of any properly authorized
city official from terminating the supply of water to any or all service
connections as required to protect the health and safety of the public.
ARTICLE 7: BACK-UP POWER GENERATION
Section
   
15-701   Adoption of policy
   
15-702   Authority and administration
   
15-703   Inspection and maintenance
§ 15-701 ADOPTION OF POLICY.
   The Back-Up Power Generation Policy, as set forth in the resolution codified
herein, is hereby adopted and shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage, approval and publication as required by law.
(Res. 447, passed 10-7-2025)
§ 15-702 AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION.
   The Superintendent of Public Works, or his, her or their designee, is
responsible for implementing this policy, monitoring power outages,
coordinating with utility providers, authorizing the use of backup generators
and maintaining documentation related to any outage and generator activation.
(Res. 447, passed 10-7-2025)
§ 15-703 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   Back-up generators shall be inspected, tested and maintained on a regular
basis according to the city’s equipment maintenance schedule to ensure
operational readiness.
(Res. 447, passed 10-7-2025)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   CHARTER ORDINANCES
      
II.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: CHARTER ORDINANCES
 
C.O. No. Date Passed Description
1        - -         -
                     Exempts the city from the provisions of K.S.A. 15-201,
12       2-2-2016    relating to the election of officers, their terms of
                     office, transitions to November elections, the filing of
                     governing body vacancies and nominal petitions.
                     Exempts the city from the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1651 et
13       2-2-2021    seq., relating to the naming of an official city
                     newspaper, being the Oxford City website.
                    
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
   [Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Kansas Statutes Annotated
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Charter Ordinances
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO KANSAS STATUTES ANNOTATED
K.S.A. Cite Code Section
K.S.A. Cite           Code Section
Ch. 2, Art. 13        8-407
2-1314                8-407
8-1102                8-311
8-126- 8-149          8-2A05;
                      8-303
8-1599                3-107
Ch. 8, Art. 17        14-502
Supp. 8-2118          14-102
9-1401 et seq.        1-806
9-1402                1-704
9-2107                1-704
10-803                1-310
10-804                1-310
10-1101 et seq.       1-806
10-1101               1-704
12-103                1-202
12-120-12-121         1-113
                      4-611;
                      8-210;
12-1,115              8-2A14;
                      8-313;
                      8-404
12-631                15-410
12-1608               1-310
12-1617               5-105;
                      5-206
                      8-205;
                      8-206;
12-1617e              8-210;
                      8-2A09;
                      8-307;
                      15-417
12-1617f              8-403;
                      8-404
12-1617g              15-417
12-1675               1-704;
                      1-806
12-1675a              1-703
12-1675a(g)           1-704
12-1677a              1-704
12-1677b              1-704
12-1740 et seq.       3-105
12-1750 et seq.       8-707;
                      8-708
12-1750               4-602
12-1750- 12-1756      4-614
12-1751               4-601
12-1752               4-604 
                      4-606
12-1753               4-607
12-1754               4-610
12-1755               4-609;
                      4-611
12-1756               4-612;
                      8-709
12-1801               13-102
12-1802               13-103
12-1803               13-104
12-1804               13-105
12-1805               13-106
12-1806               13-107
12-1807               13-102
12-1808               13-108
12-3002               1-108
12-3007               1-110
12-3008               1-111
                      4-202;
                      4-302;
12-3009- 12-3012      4-402;
                      7-401;
                      7-402
12-3014               1-106
12-3015               1-106
Ch. 12, Art. 41       9-108
12-4101 et seq.       9-102;
                      9-106
12-4107               9-105
12-4108               9-108
12-4116               9-112
12-4117               9-112
12-5901 et seq.       1-801;
                      1-802
15-106                1-203;
                      1-204
15-204                10-101
15-310                1-206
17-12a401             1-704
17-1914               4-502
17-1915               4-503
17-1916               4-508
17-1917               4-509
17-1918               4-510
20-2801               10-202
21-5401               10-203
21-5402               10-203
21-5403               10-203
21-5404               10-203
21-5405               10-203
21-5701- 21-5717      10-203
21-6204               8-201
22-2512               10-203
25-106                6-102
25-205                6-104
25-2101 et seq.       6-101
25-2111               6-102
25-2120               6-103
Ch. 27                3-105
32-1047               10-203
38-101                11-203
40-2404               8-711
40-3101 et seq.       14-504
40-3901 et seq.       4-611;
                      8-701
41-308d               3-305
41-310                3-302
41-713                3-305
41-715                3-305
41-719                3-105;
                      3-107
41-1201               Ch. III, Art. 7
41-2601 et seq.       3-207;
                      3-215
                      3-403;
41-2614               3-503;
                      3-603
41-2637               3-101
41-2659               3-106
41-2701               3-101
41-2702               3-802
41-2703               3-801;
                      3-804
41-2708               3-207
45-210 et seq.        1-113
45-216 et seq.        1-806
50-6,121 et seq.      4-211;
                      4-221
50-6,122              4-211;
                      4-221
50-6,129(a)(1) (a)(8) 4-211
54-104                1-501
54-106                1-501;
                      6-103
60-1111               13-109
60-2101               8-2A13
60-4101- 60-4126      10-203
65-163a               15-225;
                      15-228
65-3410               15-525
66-1,184 et seq.      15-319;
                      15-320
66-1,184              15-319;
                      15-320
75-4301a et seq.      1-315
75-4308               1-501
75-4317 et seq.       1-804
78-111                1-504
79-2803               1-805
79-2804               1-805
79-3321               11-102
79-3322               11-102
                      
 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2025 Code
Prior Code 2025 Code
15-302     15-302
15-303     15-303
15-304     15-304
15-305     15-305
15-306     15-306
15-307     15-307
15-308A    15-308A
15-309     15-309
15-310     15-310
15-311     15-311
15-312     15-312
15-313     15-313
15-314     15-314
15-315     15-315
15-317     15-317
15-319     15-318
           
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
382      11-8-2016   1-401
393      11-6-2018   1-401
416      7-6-2021    12-112
425      5-4-2022    12-113
438      3-5-2024    15-214
447      10-7-2025   15-701 -
                     15-703
                    
 
REFERENCES TO CHARTER ORDINANCES
 
C.O. No. Date Passed Code Section
1        - -         1-208;
                     6-104
12       2-2-2016    6-104,
                     TSO Table I
13       2-2-2021    TSO Table I
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
119      - -         11-201
151      - -         11-202
154      - -         2-211;
                     2-212
                     4-422;
162      - -         4-424;
                     4-425
163      - -         4-327
166      - -         14-202
173      - -         15-314
190      - -         2-204
194      - -         15-225
195      - -         13-302 -
                     13-306
196      - -         15-308A
197      - -         14-213
198      - -         4-701 -
                     4-703
199      - -         11-203 -
                     11-206
205      - -         13-301
206      - -         14-205 -
                     14-211
209      - -         14-204
212      - -         7-304
214      - -         7-305
235      - -         14-102
244      - -         14-203
247      - -         15-428
256      - -         14-215;
                     14-216
268      - -         15-310 -
                     15-313
                     2-201;
287      - -         2-213;
                     2-214
290      - -         14-212
297      - -         14-214
303      - -         13-110
141      10-2-1984   15-508
216      7-7-1998    10-401;
                     10-402
260      4-2-2005    4-227
296      6-5-2012    11-207
298      6-5-2012    11-208
308      2-2-2016    1-203;
                     1-208
310      8-2-2016    9-112
311      11-8-2016   13-203
                     4-221;
312      12-6-2016   4-325;
                     4-423
                     14-501;
315      9-5-2017    14-504 -
                     14-506
                     15-221;
313      10-3-2017   15-222;
                     15-229
317      10-3-2017   15-505;
                     15-511
318      10-3-2017   15-316
319      11-7-2017   2-109
320      5-8-2018    15-502;
                     15-523
322      7-3-2018    2-302
                     3-101;
324      3-5-2019    3-201 -
                     3-217
325      5-7-2019    5-206 -
                     5-212
329      4-7-2020    1-209
331      6-2-2020    7-401;
                     7-402
333      9-1-2020    1-203
                     4-202;
                     4-302;
336      10-6-2020   4-402;
                     4-801;
                     7-201
339      7-6-2021    8-402;
                     8-403
332      8-4-2021    1-801 -
                     1-806
341      9-7-2021    3-215;
                     3-304
                     15-207;
342      12-7-2021   15-215;
                     15-301;
                     15-308
346      6-7-2022    15-319
347      8-23-2022   14-502;
                     14-503
                     2-117;
348      7-11-2023   2-206;
                     2-207
350      1-2-2024    15-111;
                     15-112
352      10-1-2024   8-403
353      7-1-2025    11-101;
                     14-101
354      7-1-2025    7-303
355      8-19-2025   4-901 -
                     4-906
356      9-2-2025    15-320
                    
 
 
OXFORD, KANSAS
ZONING AND PLANNING CODE
Current through Ordincance 345 published 6-7-2022
CHAPTER I: ZONING ORDINANCE
   Article
   
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
2.   INTERPRETATION AND CONSTRUCTION
   
3.   DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
   
4.   “F–P” FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
   
5.   “A–L” AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
   
6.   “R–S” RESIDENTIAL SUBURBAN DISTRICT
   
7.   “R–1” SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
   
8.   “R–2” TWO-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
   
9.   “R–3” MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
   
10.   “PUD” PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
   
11.   “M–H” MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT
   
12.   “M–P” MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT
   
13.   “C–S” HIGHWAY SERVICE DISTRICT
   
14.   “C–1” CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
   
15.   “C–2” GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
   
16.   “C–3” ADULT ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT
   
17.   “I-1” LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
   
18.   “I–2” HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
   
19.   SIGN REGULATIONS
   
20.   PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
   
21.   LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
   
22.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
   
23.   BUILDINGS AND USES AFFECTED
   
24.   ADDITIONAL HEIGHT, AREA AND USE REGULATIONS
   
25.   NONCONFORMING USES
   
26.   ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND PENALTY
   
27.   PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD
   
28.   AMENDMENTS
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
1-101   Title
   
1-102   Purpose and intent
   
1-103   Authority and jurisdiction
   
1-104   Validity
   
1-105   Definitions
   
Appendix A: Block Diagram Showing Lot Types, Setbacks and Terms
§ 1-101 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance for
the City of Oxford, Kansas,” and shall repeal and replace Ord. 136 and all
amendments thereto.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-102 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The provisions of these regulations are adopted for the purposes and intent
of providing for the health and welfare of the citizens of the city’s zoning
jurisdiction through the promotion of appropriate patterns and practices of
urban development. Within this general purpose, the Zoning Regulations are
intended to:
   (a)   Promote the health and general welfare of the citizens;
   (b)   Provide for adequate light, air and acceptable noise levels;
   (c)   Encourage the most productive use of urban land resources through the
promotion of compatible land use patterns;
   (d)   Prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
population;
   (e)   Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage,
schools, parks and other public requirements;
   (f)   Protect property values and conserve energy resources;
   (g)   Regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings and the uses
of land within each district for residential, commercial, industrial and other
purposes;
   (h)   Regulate and restrict the height, number of stories and size of
buildings; the percentage of the lot that may be occupied by buildings and
other structures; and the size of yards and other open spaces;
   (i)   Guard against loss of life and damage to property due to flooding
through the protection of natural drainage features;
   (j)   Preserve features of historical significance and the conservation of
natural resources; and
   (k)   Implement goals, policies and proposals of the Comprehensive Plan for
the zoning jurisdiction.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-103 AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.
   (a)   Authority. The regulations set forth herein are adopted under
authority of state statutes and in accordance with the adopted Comprehensive
Community Plan for the city.
   (b)   Jurisdiction. These regulations shall apply to all structures and land
within the incorporated area of the city, plus such unincorporated areas as may
be added to the zoning jurisdiction by ordinance (one- mile radius of the city
limits).
   (c)   Notice to the county. Whenever amendments to the text of these
regulations or to the Zoning District Map are proposed which will affect
property located outside the corporate boundary of the city, written notice of
such proposed action shall be given to the governing body of the county at
least 20 days prior to the proposed action.
   (d)   Agricultural exclusion. Except for feedlots and floodplain regulations
in areas designated as a floodplain district, the regulations contained in this
chapter shall not apply to land and buildings under one ownership which are
used exclusively for agricultural purposes so long as such land and buildings
are used for agricultural purposes and not otherwise.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-104 VALIDITY.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for
any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-105 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Words or terms not herein defined shall have their ordinary meaning in
relation to the context.
   (b)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building or portion of the main
building, the use of which customarily is incidental to that of the main
building or to the main use of the premises. For the purposes of this chapter,
the term ACCESSORY BUILDING shall include garages, tool sheds and similar
structures.
      ACCESSORY USE. A use of land customarily incidental and subordinate to
the use of the principal building on the same lot or tract.
      ADULT. Any person aged 18 years or older.
      ADULT BOOK AND/OR VIDEO STORE. An establishment which offers for sale or
rental books, magazines, photographs, films, videos or other visual
representations, and other materials oriented toward, the representation of
sexual activity of any kind.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. Any premises which provides adult
sexually-oriented entertainment, whether live or by motion pictures, videos,
photographic reproductions or other means.
      ADULT NOVELTY STORE. A commercial establishment offering for sale visual
materials, printed matter, instruments, devices and other paraphernalia
designed and intended for use in connection with sexual activities.
      AGRICULTURE. The use of a tract of land where the principal activity is
to produce income from the growing of crops, horticulture, nurseries, truck
farms or the raising of fish, poultry and cattle, or other livestock, including
commercial feed lots. Such definition includes the structures necessary for
carrying on farming operations and, as accessory uses, the dwelling(s) of those
owning and/or operating the premises, including single-wide manufactured homes.
The retail sale of items produced as part of the farming operation is
permitted, including the operation of commercial greenhouses and hydroponic
farming.
      ALLEY. A strip of land along the side of or in the rear of lots intended
to provide a secondary means of access to and from streets and such lots.
      ALLEY LINE. The line of division between the public travelway comprising
the alley and the private lot.
      ALTERATION. As applied to a building or structure, is a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts of an existing building or structure.
ENLARGEMENT, whether by extending a side, increasing the height or the moving
from one location or position to another, shall be considered an ALTERATION.
      ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR CLINIC. An establishment where animals are admitted
principally for examination and treatment by a doctor of veterinary medicine.
The boarding of animals shall be limited to that necessary for the treatment of
the sick animals. This does not include open kennels or runs.
      APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms in an apartment house or other
building intended, designed, used or suitable for use by one or more persons as
a place of residence with culinary accommodations.
      APARTMENT HOUSE. A building or portion thereof intended, designed, used
or suitable for use as a residence for three or more families living in
separate apartments.
      APPROVED PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM. A sewage disposal plant, main
sanitary sewer lines and other lines approved by the governing body of the city
and the State Department of Health.
      APPROVED PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. Water treatment plant and service lines
approved by the governing body of the city and the State Department of Health.
      ATTACHED ACCESSORY BUILDING. A building which has approximately 50% of
any wall in common with a wall or portion of a principal building or is built
as an integral part of the principal building.
      AUCTION HOUSE. A firm that conducts the public sale of a property
(excluding the sale of livestock and domestic or exotic animals) in which
properties or items of merchandise are sold to the highest bidder.
      AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A structure and surrounding land used for the
storage and sale of petroleum fuel, including self-service, primarily to
passenger vehicles and/or for accessory uses, such as the sale of lubricants,
accessories or supplies; the incidental washing of motor vehicles and the
performing of minor repairs; but not including tire recapping, body repairs,
major overhaul or open sales lots.
      BASEMENT. A story of a building having more than one-half of its height
below grade and which serves as substructure or foundation for the remainder of
the building.
      BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A residential structure other than a hotel or
boarding house, where for compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite
short-term periods, sleeping rooms and meals are provided for one or more
persons, provided that when the inn is located in a residential district, the
number of such sleeping rooms shall not exceed a maximum of six sleeping rooms.
      BLOCK. A series of lots entirely surrounded by public rights-of-way,
railroad rights-of-way, parks, greenstrips, open land or waterways.
      BOARD or PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD. Referred to herein as the BOARD,
which has been appointed by the governing body and which has the statutory
authority to hear and determine appeals, special uses, exceptions and variances
to these zoning regulations.
      BOARDING HOME FOR CHILDREN. A residential facility where children not
related to the family by blood, marriage or adoption are cared for 24 hours a
day by adult supervision, which is licensed by the State Department of Health
and Environment.
      BOARDING OR LODGING HOUSE. A building or place, other than a hotel,
where, by prearrangement and for compensation, lodging and meals for a definite
period are provided for three or more persons, but not exceeding 20 persons,
and such accommodations are not furnished to transient or overnight customers.
Individual cooking facilities shall not be provided.
      BUILDABLE AREA. That area of a parcel or lot within which a structure can
be constructed without conflicting with any requirements established by these
regulations.
      BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
intended, designed, used or suitable for use for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection of persons, animals or property; and when separated by
fire walls, each portion of such structure so separated shall be deemed a
separate BUILDING.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished lot grade to the highest point of a coping or a flat
roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height between
eaves and ridge of a gable, hip, curved or gambrel roof.
      BUILDING, MAIN. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the
lot or parcel upon which it is situated. Every dwelling in a residential
district is a MAIN BUILDING.
      BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person or persons designated to administer this
Zoning Ordinance, whether such person or persons be entitled Building Official,
Building Inspector, Administrative Official, City Engineer, City Administrator,
City Clerk or Zoning Official.
      BUILDING SITE. The land area, consisting of one or more lots or parcels
of land under common ownership or control, considered as the unit of land
occupied or to be occupied by a main building or buildings and accessory
building, or by a principal use or uses accessory thereto, together with such
parking and loading spaces, yards and open spaces as are required by these
regulations.
      BULK REGULATIONS. Regulations controlling the size of structures and the
relationships of structures and uses to each other and to open areas and lot
lines. BULK REGULATIONS include regulations controlling:
         (A)   Maximum height;
         (B)   Maximum lot coverage; and
         (C)   Minimum size of yard and setbacks.
      BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. The office of an architect, engineer,
dentist, doctor, attorney, real estate or insurance agent, or other similar
professional person, and any office used primarily for accounting,
correspondence, research, editing or administration.
      CAMPGROUNDS. Any parcel of ground which provides space for transient
occupancy and is used or intended to be used for the parking of one or more
camping trailers, tents or similar recreational vehicles. No camper shall
occupy a campground for a period exceeding 30 days on a temporary basis. The
term CAMPGROUNDS does not include sales lots of which unoccupied camping
trailers, whether new or used, are parked for the purpose of storage,
inspection or sale. Private camps are included.
      CANOPY. Any structure, movable or stationary, attached to and deriving
its support from framework or posts or other means independent of a connected
structure for the purpose of shielding a platform, stoop or sidewalk from the
elements, or a roof-like structure of a permanent nature which projects from
the wall of a structure and overhangs the public way.
      CAR WASH. An establishment having facilities designed or used exclusively
for washing or cleaning motor vehicles.
      CELLAR. A room having more than one-half of its height below grade.
      CHILD CARE. The process of caring for unrelated minor children as a
service with or without financial arrangements. CHILD CARE shall include the
term BABY-SITTING but shall not include preschools.
      CHILD CARE CENTER. A day nursery providing care for four or more children
for part or all of a day or night away from the home of the parent or legal
guardian; and including full-day group care, nursery schools, play groups, head
start centers giving emphasis to special programming for children,
kindergartens not operated by the public schools and other establishments
offering care to groups of children. Such centers shall meet all requirements
of the State Department of Health and Environment for licensing.
      CLINIC. An establishment where patients who are normally not lodged
overnight are admitted for examination and treatment. This definition does not
include animal hospitals or animal clinics.
      CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE. A nonprofit association or organization formed
for either fraternal, social, educational, philanthropic or other similar
purpose, including professional organizations, unions and other similar
organizations.
      COMMON OPEN SPACE. An area of land or water or combination thereof
planned for passive or active recreation, but does not include areas utilized
for streets, alleys, driveways or private roads, off-street parking or loading
areas. However, the area of recreational activities, such as swimming pools,
tennis courts, shuffleboard courts and the like, may be included as COMMON OPEN
SPACE.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The duly adopted comprehensive plan for the
development of the city.
      CONDOMINIUM. A multiple-family dwelling structure wherein the separate
dwelling units are individually owned as opposed to rental units in an
apartment or units with lots in a townhouse.
      CONVENIENCE STORE. A retail establishment offering food, drink, fuel and
other convenience goods where fuel sales are incidental to sales of convenience
merchandise.
      DENSITY. Restrictions on the number of dwelling units that may be
constructed per acre or per square foot of a zoning lot area.
      DEVELOPER. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all of the land
proposed to be included in a planned development or the duly authorized agent
thereof. The holder of an option or contract of purchase, a lessee having a
remaining term of not less than 40 years or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land shall be deemed to be a DEVELOPER for the
purpose of these regulations.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
      DISTRICT or ZONE. A section or sections of the city specifically declared
within which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises are
uniform.
      DOG. Any canine species over six months of age.
      DRIVE-IN SERVICE. A type of retail sales establishment which encourages,
recognizes or permits patrons or customers to call for service by remote
communicator, flashing of lights or by parking of motor vehicles at a
particular place, intended to result in a cash sale and delivery outside of the
places of business to such patrons or customers of food or beverage ready and
intended for immediate human consumption without cooking or further
preparation.
      DUMP. A lot or land or part thereof used primarily for the disposal by
abandonment, dumping, burial, burning or any other means, and for whatever
purpose, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles
or parts thereof, or waste material of any kind.
      DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof which is designed and used
primarily for residential purposes.
      DWELLING, ATTACHED. A residential building which is joined to another
dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or walls.
      DWELLING, DETACHED. A residential building which is entirely surrounded
by open space on the same lot.
      DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.
         (A)   A building or portion thereof designed with accommodations for
or occupied by three or more families living independently of each other who
may or may not have joint services or facilities, or both.
         (B)   The term includes DORMITORIES and LODGING AND ROOMING HOUSES but
does not include hotels, motels, tourist inns or bed and breakfast
establishments.
      DWELLING, SEASONAL. A residence intended for occasional occupancy.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building or portion thereof designed
for or occupied exclusively by one family.
      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building or semi-detached building or portion
thereof designed or occupied exclusively by two families living independently
of each other.
      DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a residential building or residential
portion of a building which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use by
one family, and which includes cooking space and lawful sanitary facilities
reserved for the occupants thereof.
      ESCORT AGENCY. A business which furnishes a person to act as a companion,
guide or date for another person and/or who agrees or offers to privately model
lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
      EXCEPTION. The allowance of a use within a given district by the Planning
and Zoning Board. EXCEPTIONS shall be limited to only those specifically
authorized and listed in this Zoning Ordinance.
      FAMILY. Either an individual or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit in a
dwelling unit; or a group of not more than four persons who need not be related
by blood, marriage or adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit in
a dwelling unit; plus, in either case, domestic servants. A FAMILY may include
any number of gratuitous guests or minor children not related by blood,
marriage or adoption.
      FENCE. A free-standing structure of new materials such as chain-link,
painted metal, masonry, glass blocks, wood, vinyl or any combination thereof
resting on or partially buried in the ground and rising above ground level and
used for confinement, screening or partition purposes.
      FILLING STATION. Any building or premises used for the dispensing and
sale at retail of any automobile fuels or oils when the dispensing and sale are
incidental to the conduct of a public garage. Where fuel sales are incidental
to convenience merchandise, the premises are classified as a convenience store.
      FLOOD. A temporary rise in streams flow or stage that results in water
overlapping its banks and inundating areas adjacent to the channel. An unusual
and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from any source.
      FLOODPLAIN. Land area subject to inundation from surplus stormwater as
defined by a Housing and Urban Development (HUD) flood insurance study and as
depicted on a flood insurance rate map.
      FLOOR AREA. The gross floor area of all floors in the building,
including:
         (A)   Stairwells, elevator shafts and mechanical equipment enclosures,
except roof-mounted mechanical equipment;
         (B)   Penthouses;
         (C)   One-half the basement floor area;
         (D)   Interior balconies and mezzanines;
         (E)   Enclosed porches;
         (F)   Floor area devoted to accessory uses; and
         (G)   Interior and exterior walls, except where adjoining units share
a common wall. In such case, measurement shall be from the center of the common
wall.
      FOSTER HOME. A residence or building in which more than 12-hour care is
provided to no more than five children, two or more of which are unrelated to
the foster parents. Foster homes shall be permitted in all residential
structures, the same as would a family.
      FRATERNAL AND/OR SERVICE CLUBS. An association formally organized for
either fraternal, social, educational, philanthropic or other similar purposes,
including union and professional organizations, and operated not-for-profit for
persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or
leases premises, the use of which premises is restricted to such members and
their guests. The affairs and management of such association are conducted by a
board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members
at their annual meeting. Food, meals and beverages may be served on such
premises provided adequate dining space and kitchen facilities are available.
Alcoholic beverages may be sold or served to members and their guests provided
such service is secondary and incidental to the promotion of some other common
objective of the organization, and further provided that such sale or service
of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with all federal, state, county and
local laws.
      FRONTAGE. The length of the property abutting on one side of a street
measured along the dividing line between the property and the street right-of-
way.
      GARAGE, PRIVATE. Any accessory building designed or used only for the
housing and storage of automobiles which are the property of, or provided for
the exclusive use of, the occupants of the lot or premises upon which such
building is located and having no provisions for the commercial repair or
equipping of such vehicles.
      GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building, portion of a building or premises designed,
operated or used for commercial purposes in the storage, sale, hiring, care or
repair of motor vehicles.
      GARAGE, STORAGE. A building, or portion thereof, designed or used
exclusively for housing four or more motor-driven vehicles.
      GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. A SERVICE STATION shall consist of a building
or group of buildings and surfaced area where automotive vehicles may be
refueled, and service, self-service pumps without buildings shall also be
included. Such service shall not include tire recapping, body repairs or major
overhaul. (Also see FILLING STATION.)
      GOVERNING BODY or LEGISLATIVE BODY. Unless otherwise specified, GOVERNING
BODY shall mean the City Council of the City of Oxford, Kansas.
      GRADE.
         (A)   For buildings having walls facing one street only, the elevation
of the sidewalk at the center of the wall facing the street shall be the GRADE.
         (B)   For buildings having walls facing more than one street, the
GRADE shall be the average of the grades (as defined in division (A) above) of
all walls facing each street.
         (C)   For buildings having no wall facing a street, the average level
of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the
building shall be the GRADE.
         (D)   Any wall approximately parallel to a street line is considered
as facing the street.
      GROUP HOMES. Any dwelling occupied by not more than ten persons,
including eight or fewer persons with a disability, who need not be related by
blood or marriage, and not to exceed two staff residents, who need not be
related by blood or marriage to each other or to the residents of the home,
which dwelling is licensed by a regulatory agency of this state.
      HOME OCCUPATION. Any lawful activity conducted within the principal
building (dwelling) or accessory buildings by members of the immediate family
residing on the premises for the purpose of earning income, except as expressly
prohibited below, which requires personal appearances by customers or delivery
of their personal property at the dwelling for the purpose of providing goods
and/or services. HOME OCCUPATIONS shall meet all of the following conditions.
         (A)   The residential character of the property is maintained.
         (B)   The activity is conducted in such a manner as not to give an
outward appearance nor manifest any characteristic of a business in the
ordinary meaning of the term, nor infringe upon the right of neighboring
residents to enjoy the peaceful occupancy of their homes.
         (C)   No display or storage shall indicate from the exterior of the
buildings that they are being used in part for any purpose other than a
dwelling or accessory building.
         (D)   Not more than one non-illuminated nameplate is used. The
nameplate shall be attached to the building and shall not exceed three square
feet in area.
         (E)   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation
which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses of a person off the lot if the occupation is
conducted in a residence, or outside the individual dwelling unit if conducted
in other than a residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment
or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any
radio or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in line
voltage off the premises.
         (F)   No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in
substantially greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood.
         (G)   There shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk a consent
agreement to the proposed home occupation signed by 75% of all owners of
property within 200 feet of the property whereon such use is to be operated.
         (H)   A letter of consent shall also be required from the owner of
record for a property to be used for home occupation purposes. This shall
specifically apply to rental properties. This letter of consent shall be
submitted with the consent petition required in division (G) above.
         (I)   The owner shall have received from the City Planning and Zoning
Board a special use permit to operate such home occupation in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and other applicable rules and regulations. Such
permit shall be personal to the applicant thereof and shall not be assignable.
         (J)   A special use permit shall be reconsidered by the City Planning
and Zoning Board, with regard to revoking the permit if a review petition
stating problems regarding the home occupation has been submitted and signed by
50% of all owners of property within 200 feet of the premises whereon the home
occupation is conducted.
         (K)   The following uses shall not in any event be considered HOME
OCCUPATIONS within this definition:
            (i)   Funeral homes;
            (ii)   Restaurants;
            (iii)   Grocery stores;
            (iv)   Stables, animal kennels or hospitals;
            (v)   Tourist accommodations, including bed and breakfast
establishments, unless specifically permitted in the district;
            (vi)   Renting of trailers or equipment; and
            (vii)   Auto and other vehicle repair.
      HOSPITAL. An establishment used primarily for in-patient care and to
provide health, medical, mental and surgical care of the sick or injured,
excluding animal hospitals.
      HOTEL or MOTEL. A commercial building used as a temporary abiding place
for persons who are being lodged for compensation with or without meals.
      INSTITUTION (NONPROFIT). A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation
or a nonprofit establishment for public use.
      INSTITUTION OF HIGHER LEARNING. A college, university or incorporated
academy providing general academic instruction equivalent to the standards
prescribed by the State Board of Education. Dormitories, fraternity houses,
sorority houses and other student housing which are constructed on campus shall
be considered accessory buildings.
      KENNEL. Any place, area, building, structure or enclosure where three or
more domesticated animals, commonly considered to be household pets, more than
three months old are boarded, cared for, housed, fed, trained or bred. This
definition includes both private and commercially operated facilities.
      LABORATORY, MEDICAL. An establishment which provides bacteriological,
biological, medical, X-ray, pathological and other similar analytical or
diagnostic services.
      LANDSCAPING. The improvement of a lot, parcel or tract of land with grass
and shrubs and/or trees. LANDSCAPING may include pedestrian walks, flower beds
and ornamental objects, such as fountains, statuary and other similar natural
and artificial objects, designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically
pleasing effect.
      LAUNDRY. An establishment where commercial laundry and dry cleaning work
is undertaken.
      LAUNDRY (SELF-SERVICE OR COIN). An establishment equipped with individual
coin-operated washing, drying or dry cleaning machines.
      LODGING HOUSE. A residential building or place where lodging is provided
(or which is equipped regularly to provide lodging) by pre-arrangement for
definite periods, for compensation, for three or more persons, in
contradistinction to hotels open to transients.
      LOT. A parcel of land shown as a unit on a recorded subdivision plat.
      LOT AREA. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
      LOT, CORNER OR EXTERNAL. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection, and shall be deemed to front on both streets.
      LOT COVERAGE. The total area of buildings expressed as a percentage of
the total lot, plot or tract. (Includes both principal and accessory
buildings.)
      LOT, DEPTH OF. A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot.
      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. An internal lot having a frontage on two streets.
      LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot which does not constitute a corner lot.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. A boundary line of a lot which coincides with a street
boundary line. The word STREET, as used in this definition, shall not include
an alley.
      LOT LINE, REAR (INTERNAL). A boundary line of a lot which does not
coincide with a street boundary line but may coincide with an alley line.
      LOT LINE, SIDE (INTERNAL). A boundary line of a lot which does not
coincide with a street boundary line. The word STREET, as used in this
definition, does not include an alley.
      LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is a part of a subdivision the map of which
has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds, or a lot described by
metes and bounds the description of which was recorded in the office of the
Register of Deeds prior to the adoption of these regulations.
      LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot the rear lot line of which either
abuts upon or is directly across an alley from the side lot line of another lot
or parcel.
      LOT WIDTH. The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured at right angles to the lot depth. Where side lot lines are not
parallel, minimum WIDTH OF A LOT shall be measured at the front yard setback
line, but in no case shall the front lot line be less than 35 feet in width.
      LOT ZONING. A parcel or tract of land used, developed or built upon as a
unit under single ownership or control. Said parcel or tract may consist of one
or more lots of record; one or more portions of a lot or lots of record; or any
combination thereof.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A factory-built structure or structures equipped with
the necessary utility service connections, and made so as to be transportable
as a unit or units on its or their own running gear, and designed to be used as
a dwelling unit irrespective of how affixed to the land. The transportation
system is designed so that the MANUFACTURED HOME may be moved from time to
time. The term shall include two or more separately towed units which, when
bolted or otherwise fastened together, form a complete living unit. Such homes
are built on a chassis consisting of drawbar and coupling mechanism, frame
(e.g., steel I-beams), running gear assembly and lights. The removal of any or
all of these component parts does not change the definition. All MANUFACTURED
HOMES shall be either skirted or placed on a permanent-type, enclosed perimeter
foundation and, according to standards of the state, shall be anchored to the
ground. All MANUFACTURED HOMES intended for new installation in the zoning
jurisdiction of the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter shall bear a certification plate pursuant to the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C.
§§ 5401 et seq., as amended.
      MANUFACTURED HOME, DEPENDENT. A manufactured home which does not have a
flush toilet and bath or shower.
      MANUFACTURED HOME, INDEPENDENT. A manufactured home which has a flush
toilet and a bath or shower.
      MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any area, parcel or tract of ground equipped as
required for the support of manufactured homes and used or intended to be used
by two or more occupied manufactured homes. Such MANUFACTURED HOME PARK shall
be under one ownership and control, but under no circumstances shall the
manufactured home spaces be sold or offered for sale individually. The term
does not include a sales area on which unoccupied manufactured homes, whether
new or used, are parked for the purposes of storage, inspection or sale. A
manufactured home may, however, remain on a space for purposes of sale by the
resident owner or the manufactured home park owner. No more than 15% of the
manufactured homes may be for rent at any one time.
      MANUFACTURED HOME, RESIDENTIAL DESIGN. A manufactured home on permanent
foundation which has:
         (A)   Minimum dimensions of 22 body feet in width;
         (B)   A pitched roof; and
         (C)   Siding and roofing materials which are customarily used on site-
built homes.
      MEDICAL, DENTAL OR HEALTH CLINIC. Any building designed for use by one or
more persons lawfully engaged in the diagnosis, care and treatment of physical
or mental diseases or ailments of human beings, including, but not limited to,
doctors of medicine, dentists, chiropractors, osteopaths, optometrists,
psychiatrists and podiatrists, and in which no patients are lodged overnight.
      MEAT PROCESSING. Food processing in which the transformation of raw
animal materials is turned into edible products.
      MODULAR HOME. A dwelling structure located on a permanent foundation with
permanently connected utilities, consisting of pre-selected, prefabricated
units or modules designed to meet the requirements of the building code, and
transported to and/or assembled on the site of its permanent foundation; as
opposed to a dwelling structure which is custom built on the site of its
permanent location; and also as opposed to a manufactured home, either single-
wide, double-wide or of multiple width.
      MOTEL. A group of buildings, including either separate cabins or a row of
connected cabins or rooms, which contain individual sleeping accommodations for
transient occupancy and which have individual entrances.
      MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP. A building or portion of a building arranged,
intended or designed to be used for making repairs to motor vehicles.
      NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD. A platted lot which does not comply with the
lot size requirements for any permitted use in the district in which it is
located.
      NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR USE. A lawfully existing structure or use at
the time these regulations or any amendments thereto became effective which
does not conform to the requirements of the zone in which it is located.
      NURSING HOMES or CONVALESCENT HOMES. An institution or agency licensed by
the state for the reception, board, care or treatment of three or more
unrelated individuals, but not including facilities for the care and treatment
of mental illness, alcoholism or narcotics.
      PARCEL. All contiguous lands (including lots and parts of lots) held in
one ownership.
      PARKING AREA, PUBLIC OR CUSTOMER. An area other than a private parking
area, street or alley used for the parking of automobiles and available for
public or semipublic use.
      PARKING SPACE. A surfaced area of not less than 200 square feet on
private or public property, either within or outside a building, suitable in
size and location to store one standard automobile.
      PAVED PARKING. A vehicular parking area which has been surfaced with an
applied material, such as concrete or asphalt, which shall be of sufficient
quality and consistency to provide a dust-free, all-weather condition.
      PERMANENT FOUNDATION. A foundation of formed and poured-in-place concrete
or masonry units laid up with such reinforcing materials as may be required for
quality construction.
      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation.
      PLACE or COURT. An open, unoccupied space, other than a street or alley,
permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property.
      PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A tract of land meeting specified minimum site size
whereon all elements of development may be designed as interrelated aspects of
an overall improvement concept in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations.
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The City Planning Commission of Oxford, Kansas,
unless otherwise specified.
      PLAT. A layout of a subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of
individual properties.
      PLATTING. Whenever the terms PLATTING, PLATTED or SUBDIVIDED are used in
the Zoning Ordinance, it shall refer to the process established by the duly
adopted Subdivision Regulations of the city.
      PREMISES. A parcel, together with all buildings and structures thereon.
      PRESCHOOL. A public or privately owned facility with defined curriculum
which offers preparatory education for minor children aged five years and
younger. The term does not include kindergarten.
      PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. The main use of land or structures, as distinguished
from a subordinate or accessory use.
      PRIVATE CLUB. An association, other than a fraternal or service club,
organized and operated either for- or not-for-profit for persons who are bona
fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases premises, the use
of which premises is restricted to such members and their guests. The affairs
and management of such association are conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual
meeting. Food, meals and beverages may be served on such premises provided
adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. Alcoholic
beverages may be sold or served to members and their guests provided that such
sale or service is in compliance with all applicable federal, state, county and
local laws.
      PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. Any building or part thereof used by one or more
persons engaged in the practice of law, medicine, accounting, architecture,
engineering or other occupation customarily considered as a profession.
      PUBLIC UTILITY. Any business which furnishes the general public telephone
service, electricity, cable television, natural gas or water, and any other
business so affecting the public interest as to be subject to supervision or
regulation by an agency of the state.
      RECYCLING FACILITY. Any location whose primary use is where waste or
scrap materials are stored, bought, sold, accumulated, exchanged, packaged,
disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap metals, paper,
rags, tires, bottles and other such materials.
      RESTAURANT. A public eating establishment, including, but not limited to,
the types of business establishments customarily referred to as cafeterias,
coffee shops, dairy bars, restaurants and soda fountains, but not a drive-in
establishment unless specified.
      RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN. An eating establishment where, for compensation,
food is prepared and dispensed having only incidental consumption within the
principal building on the premises.
      ROOMING HOUSE. A building or portion thereof, other than a hotel, motel
or bed and breakfast establishment, where lodging of three or more persons is
provided for compensation.
      SALVAGE YARD.
         (A)   Any land or building used for the collection, storage or sale of
wastepaper, trash, rags, fibrous material, scrap metal or other discarded
material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage or salvaging of machinery
or vehicles not in running condition, or for the sale of parts thereof; or
materials from the demolition of buildings or structures.
         (B)   In the agricultural and residential districts, no more than two
licensed or unlicensed motor vehicles which are in the process of restoration
to operating condition may be stored; provided, however, such vehicles are
stored inside a structure or screened from public view.
      SANITARY LANDFILL. A lot or parcel of land used primarily for the
disposal, abandonment, dumping, burial or burning of garbage, sewage, trash,
refuse, junk, discarded machinery or motor vehicles or parts thereof, or other
waste, and which is in conformance with the requirements of the State
Department of Health and Environment.
      SCHOOL. A public elementary or secondary educational facility which is
under the direction and control of the State Board of Education and the State
Superintendent of Public Instruction and/or a parochial elementary or secondary
educational facility which offers the same general curriculum as that provided
by a comparable public educational facility.
      SERVICE STATION. An establishment consisting of a building or group of
buildings and surfaced area where automotive vehicles may be refueled and
serviced; such service shall not include tire recapping, body repairs or major
overhaul. (Also see FILLING STATION.)
      SETBACK. The distance between the lot line and building line.
      SIGN. Any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs or trademarks by
which anything is made known, such as are used to designate an individual firm,
profession, business or a commodity, and which are visible from any public
street or air. For various types of SIGNS, see Article 19.
      SITE. See PARCEL.
      SIGHT TRIANGLE. An area at a street intersection in which nothing shall
be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of three feet and ten feet above the
grades of the bottom of the curb of the intersecting streets, measured from the
point of the intersection of the centerline of the streets, 90 feet in each
direction along the centerline of the streets. At the intersection of major or
arterial streets, the 90-foot distance shall be increased to 120 feet. (See
illustration below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b7c1333007b5e87c549b5aedf1ee9d56046b1295/
IMAGES/0-0-0-613.png]
 
      SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A written permit issued by the Zoning Administrator
with the written authorization of the Appeals Board. This SPECIAL USE PERMIT
provides permission under special conditions to make certain special exception
of uses in certain zoning districts as stipulated in the specific district
zoning regulations.
      STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
      STORY, HALF. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of the roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above
the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor
area is finished for use. A HALF-STORY containing independent apartment or
living quarters shall be counted as a full story.
      STREET. A right-of-way, other than an alley, dedicated to the public use
which provides principal access to adjacent properties.
      STREET LINE. A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and
the contiguous street.
      STREET NETWORK.
         (A)   ARTERIAL STREET. A street which provides for through traffic
movement between and around areas and across the city with direct access to
abutting property, subject to necessary control of entrances, exits and curb
uses.
         (B)   LOCAL STREET. A street which provides direct access to abutting
land and for local traffic movement, whether in business, industrial or
residential areas.
      STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or
any complete rebuilding of the roof or the exterior walls. For the purpose of
these regulations, the following shall not be considered STRUCTURAL
ALTERATIONS:
         (A)   Attachment of a new front where structural supports are not
changed;
         (B)   Addition of fire escapes where structural supports are not
changed;
         (C)   New windows where lintels and support walls are not materially
changed;
         (D)   Repair or replacement of non-structural members; and
         (E)   Alterations for the safety of the building and normal repairs
and maintenance.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent
location on the ground, but not including fences, driveways, hard-surfaced
walks and terraces or public items, such as utility poles, street light
fixtures and street signs.
      SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract of land into one or more lots or
parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or,
if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term
SUBDIVISION includes resubdivision, and the term RESUBDIVISION, as used herein,
shall include any further subdivision of a lot or parcel of land previously
subdivided for sale, use or other purpose which varies from the latest approved
subdivision of the same. See the city’s Land Subdivision Regulations.
      SUBDIVISION PLAT. A plan or map prepared in accordance with the
provisions of the duly adopted Subdivision Regulations and recorded with the
Register of Deeds.
      TAVERN. An establishment in which the primary function is the public sale
and serving of cereal malt beverages.
      THEATER, MOVING PICTURE. A building or part of a building devoted to the
showing of moving pictures on a paid admission basis.
      THEATER, OUTDOOR DRIVE-IN. An open lot or part thereof with its
appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing of moving pictures or
theatrical productions on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in
automobiles or on outdoor seats.
      THESE REGULATIONS. The document duly approved and adopted by the Planning
Commission and the City Council of Oxford, Kansas, which establishes zoning
requirements.
      TINY HOME. A compact dwelling with a maximum of 400 square feet.
      TOURIST CABINS. See MOTEL.
      TOURIST HOME. A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are provided
or offered for transient guests for compensation. (Also see BED AND BREAKFAST
INN.)
      TOWNHOUSE. A multiple-family dwelling unit which is individually owned
along with a lot or other tract of land, as opposed to a condominium.
      TRACT. A plot or parcel of land, other than a lot in a subdivision, which
is recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds.
      USE. Any purpose for which a structure or a tract of land may be
designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied; also, any activity,
occupation, business or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in
a structure or on a tract of land.
      USE REGULATIONS. The provisions of these regulations which identify
permitted, special and conditional uses; impose use limitations; and regulate
accessory and temporary uses and home occupations.
      VARIANCE. A modification or variation of the provisions of these
regulations, as applied to a specific parcel of property, as distinct from
rezoning.
      WAY. A street, an alley or other thoroughfare or easement permanently
established for the passage of persons or vehicles.
      YARD. An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided herein. In measuring a YARD, the depth of the front yard or
the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot
line and the main building shall be used.
      YARD, FRONT.
         (A)   A yard extending along a full length of a front lot line and
back to a line drawn parallel to the front lot line at a distance therefrom
equal to the depth of the required FRONT YARD. On a corner lot, each yard that
abuts a street shall be considered a FRONT YARD.
         (B)   For corner lots that have a DOUBLE FRONT YARD, the following
definitions apply.
            (i)   PRIMARY FRONT YARD. The addressed side.
            (ii)   SECONDARY FRONT YARD. The non-addressed side.
      YARD, REAR. A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line
and back to a line drawn parallel to the rear lot line at a distance therefrom
equal to the depth of the required REAR YARD.
      YARD, SIDE. A yard extending along a side lot line and back to a line
drawn parallel to the side lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the width
of a required minimum SIDE YARD, but excluding any area encompassed within a
front yard or rear yard.
      ZONE or DISTRICT. A portion, area or section of the city’s zoning
jurisdiction for which uniform regulations governing the use, height, area,
size and intensity of use of buildings, land and open spaces about buildings
are herein established.
      ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The person or persons authorized and empowered by
the governing body having jurisdiction to administer the requirements of these
zoning regulations.
      ZONING AREA. The area to be zoned as set out on the Official Zoning Map
filed of record.
      ZONING REGULATIONS or THIS OR THESE REGULATIONS. The requirements
stipulated in the regulations herewith attached.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004; Ord. 335, passed 10-6-2020; Ord. 337, passed 10-6-
2020)
APPENDIX A: BLOCK DIAGRAM SHOWING LOT TYPES, SETBACKS AND TERMS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b7c1333007b5e87c549b5aedf1ee9d56046b1295/
IMAGES/0-0-0-617.png]
 
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 2: INTERPRETATION AND CONSTRUCTION
Section
   
1-201   Rules of interpretation
   
1-202   Rules of construction
   
1-203   Zoning procedure
§ 1-201 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   When interpreting the provisions of these regulations, the following shall
govern.
   (a)   Minimum requirements. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the
citizens of the city.
   (b)   Overlapping or contradictory regulations. Where the conditions imposed
by the provisions of these regulations upon the use of land or structures are
either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed
by any other provision of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule
or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and
impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
   (c)   Private agreements. The provisions of these regulations are not
intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or other private agreement,
provided that where the requirements of these regulations are more restrictive
or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other
private agreement, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
   (d)   District boundary lines. The interpretation of zoning district
boundary line locations shall be governed by the following.
      (1)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately
following streets and alleys, highways or railroads, such boundaries shall be
construed as following the centerlines thereof.
      (2)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately
following lot lines or section lines, such lines shall be construed as the said
boundaries.
      (3)   Where a boundary of a district appears to follow a stream, lake or
other body of water, said boundary line shall be deemed to be at the limit of
the jurisdiction of the governing body, unless otherwise indicated.
      (4)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot or un-subdivided
property and the dimensions are not shown on the map, the location of such
boundary shall be indicated by using the scale appearing on the Zoning Map.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-202 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   Except where clearly required to be otherwise by the context, the rules of
construction shall include:
   (a)   Words or numbers used singularly or plurals shall include both
singular and plural interpretation;
   (b)   The word MAY is permissive; the word SHALL is mandatory;
   (c)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future
the present;
   (d)   The phrase USED FOR shall include the phrases ARRANGED FOR, DESIGNED
FOR, INTENDED FOR, MAINTAINED FOR and OCCUPIED FOR;
   (e)   The word PERSON includes individuals, firms, corporations,
associations, governmental bodies and other legal entities;
   (f)   The words USE, USED, OCCUPY or OCCUPIED, as applied to any land or
building, shall be construed to include the words INTENDED, ARRANGED OR
DESIGNED TO BE USED OR OCCUPIED; and
   (g)   Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured
horizontally.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-203 ZONING PROCEDURE.
   The requirements of this Zoning Ordinance permit only those uses listed in
each district under “use regulations.” Any owner of property desiring to use
his or her property for some use other than the listed uses may proceed as
follows.
   (a)   When the proposed use intensity varies slightly from regulation, the
property owner may file an application with the Building Official for a hearing
with the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals for one of the following:
      (1)   Variance (height, area and yard);
      (2)   Exception (special use permit as outlined in the district
regulations); and
      (3)   Appeals from Building Official’s decisions.
   (b)   When the proposed use requires a change of Zoning Ordinance and/or
change in the District Zoning Map, the property owner may file an application
for zoning changes and proceed as set out in Article 28.
   (c)   Any person intending to perform construction of any sort other than
for agricultural structures shall provide certification of proof of compliance
with Zoning Requirements to the Building Official.
   (d)   Any person intending to construct a residence on an unplatted tract
for other than agricultural use shall prepare a plat in accordance with the
Subdivision Regulations and shall obtain approval of the plat by the Planning
Commission and the governing body before requesting a zoning permit.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 3: DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
Section
   
1-301   District classifications
   
1-302   Zoning District Map
   
1-303   Extraterritorial Zoning District Map
   
1-304   Annexation rule
§ 1-301 DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS.
   In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of trades,
industries, residential uses and other uses, and the location of buildings
designed for specified uses; to regulate and limit the height and bulk of
buildings; to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lots; to regulate
and determine the area of yards and other open spaces surrounding buildings;
and to regulate and restrict the density of population, the city’s zoning
jurisdiction is divided into districts, designated as follows:
“A�Agricultural District
“C�Central Business District
“C�General Commercial District
“C�Adult Entertainment District
“C�Highway Service District
“F�Floodplain District
“I�Light Industrial District
“I�Heavy Industrial District
“M�Manufactured Home District
“M�Manufactured Home Park District
“PUDPlanned Unit Development District
“R�Single-Family Dwelling District
“R�Two-Family Dwelling District
“R�Multiple-Family Dwelling District
“R�Residential Suburban District
 
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-302 ZONING DISTRICT MAP.
   The boundaries of the zoning districts are shown on the map and/or sections
thereof attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and made a part
hereof by reference, which map is designated as the “Zoning Map, City of
Oxford, Kansas.” The Zoning Map and all the notations, references and other
information shown thereon are a part of this chapter and have the same force
and effect as if said map and all the notations, references and other
information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein. Copies
of the Zoning Map are properly attested and are on file with the City Clerk.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004; Ord. 253, passed 11-2-2004; Ord. 270, passed 4-3-
2007; Ord. 301, passed 11-5-2013; Ord. 306, passed 5-5-2015; Ord. 321, passed
5-8-2018; Ord. 323, passed 9-4-2018; Ord. 327, passed 10-8-2019; Ord. 330,
passed 4-7-2020; Ord. 334, passed 10-6-2020; Ord. 338, passed 1-5-2021; Ord.
343, passed 4-5-2022; Ord. 345, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 1-303 EXTRATERRITORIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP.
   (a)   The Revised Zoning District Map for the extraterritorial zoning
jurisdiction surrounding the city, as recommended by the Planning Commission,
meeting the conditions for adoption prescribed in K.S.A. 12-757, is hereby
adopted and declared to be the Official Zoning Map for the extraterritorial
zoning jurisdiction of the city.
   (b)   The Zoning District Map shall constitute the basis for determination
of the location of zoning district boundary lines within the zoning
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 254, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-304 ANNEXATION RULE.
    All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city shall be annexed
as “R–1” Single-Family Dwelling District until or unless otherwise established
by ordinance.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 4: “F–P” FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
Section
   
1-401   Intent and purpose of district
   
1-402   District regulations
   
1-403   Special use regulations
   
1-404   Intensity of use regulations
   
1-405   Height regulations
   
1-406   Yard regulations
   
1-407   Sign regulations
   
1-408   Parking and loading regulations
§ 1-401 INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT.
   The “F–P” Floodplain District is intended for application in those areas of
the community which are subject to inundation from surplus stormwater as
defined by the “Sumner County Flood Insurance Study” and accompanying Insurance
Rate Map, Panel Number 20191C0295B, effective April 16, 1990, and any
subsequent additions or amendments thereto, prepared for the county by the
Federal Insurance Administration. This zone is intended for application
throughout the zoning jurisdiction in locations where an official floodplain
delineation has been established. The regulations are intended to minimize the
extent of floods and reduce the height and violence thereof; to minimize the
hazard of loss of lives and property caused by floods; and to secure safety
from floods through the confinement of floods, within reasonable limits, by
regulating and restricting areas of development along or in natural water
courses and drainways.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-402 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   In the “F–P” District, no building or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged or designed
for other than one of the permitted uses in the parent district to which this
district is made a part, provided that such uses and structures meet the
minimum requirements of § 1-403.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-403 SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Notwithstanding the requirements of the parent district, the other
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and the detailed requirements of the
County Floodplain Regulations, and any amendments thereto, the following
regulations shall supplement the regulations of the parent district of which
this district is made a part. These regulations shall supersede those of the
parent district where there is a conflict among regulations.
      (1)   Whereby reason of flooding potential, and where the special flood
studies and map indicate the possibility of detrimental or limiting conditions
for development, no person, firm or corporation shall initiate any development
or substantial improvement, or cause the same to be done, without first
obtaining a separate permit for development for each such building or structure
in accordance with the detailed requirements of the County Floodplain
Regulations. The application for a development permit shall be prepared in
writing and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
      (2)   The application shall be accompanied by explanatory background
information as required by the Floodplain Regulations, and any amendments
thereto, which shall include as a minimum:
         (A)   Identification and description of the work to be covered by the
permit;
         (B)   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
by lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar description that
will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work;
         (C)   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work
is intended;
         (D)   Provisions of plans and specifications for proposed
construction;
         (E)   Evidence of compliance with the requirements of the County
Floodplain Regulations;
         (F)   Signature of the applicant or his or her authorized agent, who
may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority; and
         (G)   Provision of other information as may be required by the
Building Inspector.
   (b)   In areas within the city’s zoning jurisdiction which are designated as
“F–P” Floodplain, all developed uses of land and buildings shall meet the
minimum standards and requirements for development within flood hazard areas as
outlined and defined by the County Floodplain Regulations, and any amendments
thereto.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-404 INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS.
   The lot coverage and intensity of use of the parent district of which this
district is made a part shall be the maximum allowable.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-405 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The height requirements of the parent district of which this district is
made a part shall be the maximum height requirements, subject to additional
requirements as prescribed by this chapter.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-406 YARD REGULATIONS.
   The yard requirements of the parent district of which this district is made
a part shall be the minimum yard requirements, subject to additional
requirements as prescribed by this chapter.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-407 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   The sign regulations of the parent district of which this district is made a
part shall be the minimum requirements for sign regulations.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-408 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
   The parking and loading regulations of the parent district of which this
district is made a part shall be the minimum requirements, subject to
additional requirements as prescribed by this chapter.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 5: “A–L” AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
Section
   
1-501   Intent and purpose of district
   
1-502   District regulations
   
1-503   Use regulations
   
1-504   Intensity of use regulations
   
1-505   Height regulations
   
1-506   Yard regulations
   
1-507   Sign regulations
   
1-508   Parking and loading regulations
§ 1-501 INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT.
   This district is intended to provide a location for land situated on the
fringe of the urban area to be used for agricultural purposes, but which will
be undergoing urbanization in the foreseeable future. Therefore, the
agricultural uses and activities should not be detrimental to urban land uses.
It is not intended that this district provide a location for a lower standard
of residential, commercial or industrial development than is authorized in
other districts. The types of uses, and intensity of use of land, authorized in
this district is designed to encourage and protect agricultural uses until
urbanization is warranted and the appropriate changes in district
classification are made.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-502 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   In the “A–L” District, no building or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged or designed
for other than one of the uses listed in §
1-503.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-503 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Allowed uses.
      (1)   General farm operations, not including:
         (A)   The spreading, accumulation, feeding or use of garbage in any
manner on the open surface of the land;
         (B)   A use or activity engaged in within 300 feet of a residential or
retail business structure, if such use or activity results in continuous odor,
dust or noise; and
         (C)   The construction of agricultural buildings or structures closer
than 90 feet to the centerline of a principal public way.
      (2)   Single-family dwelling units on a minimum of two acres for
exclusive use by the farm family or employees (site size subject to utility
service requirements);
      (3)   Residential design manufactured homes;
      (4)   Manufactured homes incidental to general farm operations on the
same tract or parcel with the principal dwelling, provided the manufactured
home is used exclusively by the farm family or employees, and provided that, in
the case where individual wells and/or septic systems are used, spacing is in
accordance with all applicable sanitary regulations;
      (5)   Group homes, foster homes and boarding homes for children;
      (6)   Churches and similar places of worship and parish houses;
      (7)   Farms and ranches;
      (8)   Golf courses and other open land recreational uses, except
miniature golf courses, driving tees or other intensive commercial uses, such
as automobile race tracks or amusement parks;
      (9)   Greenhouses, nurseries and garden centers;
      (10)   Institutions of higher learning, including dormitory
accommodations when located on the same tract as the educational buildings;
      (11)   Privately-owned parks, playgrounds, golf courses or other outdoor
recreational areas, such as campgrounds, youth camps, gun clubs and archery,
trap and skeet ranges;
      (12)   Public and semi-public parks, playgrounds, campgrounds, fishing
preserves or other recreational areas and community buildings owned and
operated by a public agency or nonprofit organization;
      (13)   Public or parochial elementary, junior high and high schools and
private schools with equivalent curriculums;
      (14)   Licensed child care centers;
      (15)   Stands for the sale of agricultural products or commodities raised
or prepared on the premises;
      (16)   Customary accessory uses and structures located on the same tract
with the principal use, including barns, sheds, tennis courts, swimming pools,
private garages, garden houses, barbecue ovens, fireplaces and similar uses;
      (17)   Temporary structures incidental to construction work, but only for
the period of such work. Basements and cellars may not be occupied for
residential purposes until the building is completed; and
      (18)   Utility lines and facilities necessary for public service, and
including refuse disposal areas conducted under a landfill or sanitary fill
method, public and semi-public storage and repair facilities, sewage disposal,
water supply and treatment facilities, dams and power plants, subject to
applicable State Department of Health and Environment regulations.
   (b)   Uses allowed by special use permit. The following uses may be allowed
by special use permit when submitted, reviewed and approved by the Planning and
Zoning Board and subject to conditions as the Board may impose:
      (1)   Any public building erected or land used by any department of the
city, county, state or federal government;
      (2)   Airports or heliports;
      (3)   Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums;
      (4)   Electronic communications towers, provided that towers within 150
feet of a dwelling district zone may have a height of no more than 80 feet; and
customary accessory uses incidental to electronic communications towers, such
as parking areas, electronics and generator buildings (not to include broadcast
studios). Also see § 1-2413, wireless communications towers;
      (5)   Home occupations;
      (6)   Hospitals, isolation homes, penal institutions, sanitariums or
asylums for the treatment of mental illness, alcoholism or narcotics addiction
on a tract of land three acres or larger;
      (7)   Preschools;
      (8)   Oil and gas exploration and extraction;
      (9)   Dog kennels;
      (10)   Water retention areas;
      (11)   Racetracks, animal or vehicular;
      (12)   Development of natural resources and extraction of raw materials,
such as rock, gravel, sand and the like;
      (13)   Nursing and care homes subject to inspection and license
requirements;
      (14)   Seasonal or temporary uses, such as recreation camps or similar
enterprises;
      (15)   Telephone exchanges, electric substations or similar public
utilities;
      (16)   Agricultural product storage (elevators) when no other business is
in combination with said storage;
      (17)   Animal feed lots subject to the license requirements of the state
and subject to the following minimum sanitation and odor practices (the intent
is to establish a healthful environment around the feed lot):
         (A)   Operation.
            (i)   Manure shall be removed or disposed of in one of the
following manners:
               1.   Spraying or spreading on land followed by disking or
plowing;
               2.   Grinding or dehydrating in properly designed dehydrators;
or
               3.   Stockpiling in a compost plant in an isolated area at least
three miles from a residential area.
            (ii)   Insect and rodent control:
               1.   Removal of manure and disposal as outlined above; and
               2.   Use of chemical sprays and poisons in accordance with
procedures and recommendations of a biologist experienced in insect and rodent
control.
         (B)   Drainage.
            (i)   All ground surfaces within pens shall be so graded and
compacted to ensure proper drainage.
            (ii)   Surface runoff shall be so controlled that no appreciable
amount of soil or manure is carried into any roadway ditch or drainage area
where it will deposit and form sludge banks where flies and mosquitoes can
breed.
      (18)   Radio or television transmitters;
      (19)   Private clubs (as defined in these regulations);
      (20)   Kennels, breeding and boarding, provided that:
         (A)   The minimum lot size shall be not less than two acres;
         (B)   No kennel buildings or runs shall be located nearer than 75 feet
to any property lines; and
         (C)   All kennel runs or open areas shall be screened around such
areas or at the property lines to prevent the distraction or excitement of the
dogs. Such screening may be mature, dense deciduous foliage (double row), solid
masonry, brick or stone wall, louvered wood, stockade or chain- link fence with
aluminum strip intertwined or other equivalent fencing providing a sight
barrier to the dogs.
      (21)   Privately owned parks, playgrounds, golf courses or other outdoor
recreational areas, such as campgrounds, youth camps, gun clubs and archery,
trap and skeet ranges;
      (22)   Riding stables and academies, providing no structure housing
horses shall be located nearer than 600 feet to the boundary of any residential
district;
      (23)   Light manufacturing operations, provided that such use is not
noxious or offensive by reason of vibration or noise beyond the confines of the
building or emission of dust, fumes, gas, odor or smoke; and
      (24)   Raising of fur-bearing animals.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-504 INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS.
   Tracts in this district shall be subject to the following minimum size
requirements:
   (a)   Tracts served by private water wells and septic systems: five acres;
   (b)   Tracts served by a public water system and a private septic system:
three acres; and
   (c)   Tracts served by a public water system and public sewer system: two
acres.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-505 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided in the height, area, bulk and dimensional
requirements of this chapter, no building or structure shall exceed the
following height restrictions.
   (a)   When a building or structure is within 150 feet of a dwelling district
zone, said building or structure shall not exceed 35 feet in height.
   (b)   When a building or structure is more than 150 feet from a dwelling
district zone, said building or structure shall not exceed 80 feet in height.
Buildings and structures used for nonagricultural purposes shall not exceed 35
feet in height.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-506 YARD REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Front yard.
      (1)   There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 40 feet
except as required for arterial streets or roads. (See
Article 24.)
      (2)   Where a lot or tract has double frontage, the required front yard
shall be provided on both streets or roads.
      (3)   Where a lot or tract is located at the intersection of two or more
streets or roads, there shall be a front yard on each street or road side of
said lot or tract. No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard
line on either street or road.
   (b)   Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of every building,
structure or zoning lot, which said yard shall not be less than 15 feet.
   (c)   Rear yard. Except as hereinafter provided in the additional height,
area and use regulations of this chapter, there shall be a rear yard having a
depth of not less than 40 feet.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-507 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   For applicable sign regulations, see
Article 19.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-508 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
   For applicable parking and loading regulations, see
Article 20.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 6: “R–S” RESIDENTIAL SUBURBAN DISTRICT
Section
   
1-601   Intent and purpose of district
   
1-602   District regulations
   
1-603   Use regulations
   
1-604   Intensity of use regulations
   
1-605   Lot coverage
   
1-606   Height regulations
   
1-607   Yard regulations
   
1-608   Sign regulations
   
1-609   Parking and loading regulations
§ 1-601 INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT.
   The “R–S” Residential Suburban District is established to provide for
single-family rural residential development at a low density and to allow
certain public facilities. It is the intent of the district regulations to
protect the health, safety and general welfare of persons residing in the
district; to prevent uses which would devalue property; to regulate population
density; and to provide adequate open space around buildings and structures.
This zone is intended for application in developing areas at the fringe of the
city and is intended to minimize conflicts of incompatible uses of land and
protect the public health and welfare until the area is more fully developed.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-602 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   In the “R–S” District, no building or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged or designed
for other than one of the following uses listed in §
1-603.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-603 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Allowed uses.
      (1)   General farm operations. This shall not include or permit:
         (A)   Any activity within 300 feet of another residential district
which activity is noxious or offensive by reason of dust, odor or noise; or
         (B)   Feedlots.
      (2)   Single-family non-farm dwellings;
      (3)   Residential design manufactured homes;
      (4)   Group homes, foster homes and boarding homes for children;
      (5)   Temporary structures incidental to construction work, but only for
the period of work. Basements and cellars may not be occupied for residential
purposes until the building is completed;
      (6)   Golf courses, except commercial miniature golf courses or driving
tees;
      (7)   Public parks, playgrounds and recreational areas owned and operated
by a public agency;
      (8)   Customary accessory uses and structures located on the same lot
with the principal use, including tennis courts, swimming pools, private
garages, garden houses, barbecue ovens and fireplaces; and
      (9)   Raising of trees, shrubs and grasses not sold on the premises.
   (b)   Uses allowed by special use permit. The following uses may be allowed
by special use permit when submitted, reviewed and approved by the Planning and
Zoning Board, and under such conditions as the Board may impose:
      (1)   Raising and care of livestock for show and pleasure, provided:
         (A)   When an “R–S” District or a portion thereof is reclassified to
another more restrictive residential zone, those uses granted by special use
permit for animal shelters or similar related uses in division (A) above shall
be completely discontinued within a period of six months from the date of
reclassification;
         (B)   Uses permitted in division (A) above shall not be kept for
commercial purposes;
         (C)   Livestock permitted in division (A) above shall be properly
sheltered and proper sanitation shall be maintained at all times; and
         (D)   Livestock cages or pens permitted in division (A) above shall
not be closer than 50 feet to any residence.
      (2)   Churches and similar places of worship;
      (3)   Home occupations;
      (4)   Hospitals and/or clinics for people on a lot, plot or tract of land
five acres or larger;
      (5)   Licensed child care centers;
      (6)   Nursing homes, sanitariums, rest homes, homes for the aged or
convalescent homes on a lot, plot or tract of land five acres or larger;
      (7)   Preschools;
      (8)   Schools, public or parochial, elementary, junior high and high
schools and private schools with equivalent curriculums;
      (9)   Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums when used in conjunction with
a cemetery;
      (10)   Any public building erected or land used by any department of the
city, county, state or federal government;
      (11)   Telephone exchanges, electric substations, regulator stations and
other public utilities;
      (12)   Bed and breakfast establishments;
      (13)   Oil and gas exploration, extraction and/or production;
      (14)   Extraction and/or mining of minerals; and
      (15)   Wireless communications towers. (See §
1-2413.)
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-604 INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS.
   Lots in this district shall be subject to the following minimum size
requirements:
   (a)   Lots served by private water wells and septic systems: five acres,
with a minimum lot width of 140 feet;
   (b)   Lots served by a public water system and a private septic system:
three acres, with a minimum lot width of 140 feet; and
   (c)   Lots served by a public water system and a public sewer system: 9,000
square feet. Lots shall have an average lot width of not less than 70 feet.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-605 LOT COVERAGE.
   The principal building and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 30%
of the lot area.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-606 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-607 YARD REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Front yard.
      (1)   There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 25
feet, except as required for arterial streets in
Article 24.
      (2)   Where a lot or group of lots have a double frontage, the required
front yard shall be provided on both streets.
      (3)   Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets,
there shall be a front yard on each street side of a corner lot; provided,
however, that the buildable width of a single lot of record as of the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be reduced to less
than 35 feet, except as may be required to preserve a minimum setback of six
feet from the lot line.
   (b)   Side yard. Except as hereinafter required in the additional height,
area and use regulations of this chapter, there shall be a side yard having a
width of not less than 10% of the width of the lot, with a minimum of eight
feet on each side of the principal building.
   (c)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
25 feet.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-608 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   For applicable sign regulations, see
Article 19.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-609 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
   For applicable parking and loading regulations, see
Article 20.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 7: “R–1” SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
Section
   
1-701   Intent and purpose of district
   
1-702   District regulations
   
1-703   Use regulations
   
1-704   Intensity of use regulations
   
1-705   Lot coverage
   
1-706   Height regulations
   
1-707   Yard regulations
   
1-708   Sign regulations
   
1-709   Parking and loading regulations
§ 1-701 INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT.
   The “R–1” Single-Family Dwelling District is established for the purpose of
low density, single-family dwelling use and to allow certain public facilities.
It is intended that no uses be permitted in this district that will tend to
devalue property for residential purposes or interfere with the health, safety,
order or general welfare of persons residing in the district. Regulations are
intended to control density of population and to provide adequate open space
around buildings and structures in the district to accomplish these purposes.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-702 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   In the “R–1” District, no building or structure shall be used and no
building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged,
intended or designed for other than one of the uses listed in §
1-703.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-703 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings;
      (2)   Residential design manufactured housing;
      (3)   Group homes, foster homes and boarding homes for children;
      (4)   Churches and similar places of worship and parish houses;
      (5)   Golf courses, except miniature golf courses and driving tees
operated for commercial purposes;
      (6)   Hospitals for people only on a lot, plot or tract of land five
acres or larger;
      (7)   Nursing or convalescent homes on a lot, plot or tract of land five
acres or larger;
      (8)   Public parks, playgrounds and recreational areas;
      (9)   Schools, public or parochial, elementary, junior high and high
schools and private schools with equivalent curriculums;
      (10)   Customary accessory uses and structures located on the same lot
with the principal use, including tennis courts, swimming pools, private
garages, garden houses, barbecue ovens and fireplaces, but which do not include
uses unrelated to the principal use or any activity commonly conducted for
gain; and
      (11)   Temporary structures incidental to construction work, but only for
the period of such work. Basements and cellars may not be occupied for
residential purposes until the building is completed.
   (b)   Uses allowed by special use permit. The following uses may be allowed
by special use permit when submitted, reviewed and approved by the Planning and
Zoning Board, and under such conditions as the Board may impose:
      (1)   Any public building erected or land used by any department of the
city, county, state or federal government;
      (2)   Bed and breakfast establishments;
      (3)   Home occupations;
      (4)   Telephone exchanges, electric substations and regulatory stations,
or other public utilities;
      (5)   Raising of crops, trees and shrubs not sold on the premises;
      (6)   Licensed child care centers;
      (7)   Water retention areas; and
      (8)   Preschools.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-704 INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS.
   Every lot shall have an area of not less than 7,000 square feet and an
average width of not less than 50 feet.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-705 LOT COVERAGE.
   The principal building and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 30%
of the lot area.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-706 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-707 YARD REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Front yard.
      (1)   There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 30
feet, except as required for arterial streets in
Article 24.
      (2)   Where a lot or group of lots have a double frontage, the required
front yard shall be provided on both streets.
      (3)   Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets,
there shall be a front yard on each street side of a corner lot; provided,
however, that the buildable width of a single lot of record, as of the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall not be reduced
to less than 35 feet, except as may be required to preserve a minimum setback
of six feet from the lot line.
   (b)   Side yard.
      (1)   Except as hereinafter required in the additional height, area and
use regulations of this chapter, there shall be a side yard having a width of
not less than 10% of the width of the lot with a minimum of eight feet on each
side of the principal building, except as provided for zero-lot-line
development.
      (2)   Where more than one principal building is constructed on a tract
for hospital use, nursing home use, church use, school use and other public
uses, the spacing between principal buildings shall not be less than the
average height of the adjacent buildings.
   (c)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
30 feet.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-708 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   For applicable sign regulations, see
Article 19.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-709 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
   For applicable parking and loading regulations, see
Article 20.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 8: “R–2” TWO-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
Section
   
1-801   Intent and purpose of district
   
1-802   District regulations
   
1-803   Use regulations
   
1-804   Intensity of use regulations
   
1-805   Lot coverage
   
1-806   Height regulations
   
1-807   Yard regulations
   
1-808   Sign regulations
   
1-809   Parking and loading regulations
§ 1-801 INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT.
   The “R–2” Two-Family Dwelling District is intended for the purpose of
allowing a slightly higher density than in district “R–1” yet retaining the
residential qualities. This district allows duplex uses, single-family homes,
certain community facilities and certain special uses.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-802 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   In the “R–2” District, no building or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged, intended or
designed for other than one of the uses listed in §
1-803.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-803 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings;
      (2)   Residential design manufactured homes;
      (3)   Group homes, foster homes and boarding homes for children;
      (4)   Two-family dwellings;
      (5)   Community recreation buildings owned and operated by a public
agency;
      (6)   Churches and similar places of worship and parish houses;
      (7)   Golf courses, except miniature golf courses and driving tees
operated for commercial purposes;
      (8)   Hospitals and clinics on a parcel of land not less than two acres
in size (but not animal hospitals or mental hospitals);
      (9)   Institutions of higher learning, including dormitory
accommodations;
      (10)   Public parks, playgrounds and recreation areas;
      (11)   Schools, public or parochial, elementary, junior high and high
schools and private schools with equivalent curriculum;
      (12)   Nonprofit institutions of an educational, philanthropic or
eleemosynary nature, but not penal institutions;
      (13)   Nursing and convalescent homes on a tract of land not less than
two acres in size;
      (14)   Customary accessory uses and structures located on the same lot or
group of lots with the principal use, including tennis courts, swimming pools,
private garages, garden houses, barbecue ovens and fireplaces, but does not
include uses unrelated to the principal use of any activity commonly conducted
for gain; and
      (15)   Temporary structures incidental to construction work, but only for
the period of such work. Basements and cellars may not be occupied for
residential purposes until the building is complete.
   (b)   Uses allowed by special use permit. The following uses may be allowed
by special use permit when submitted, reviewed and approved by the Planning and
Zoning Board and under such conditions as the Board may impose: any special use
permitted in the “R–1” District.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-804 INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS.
   Lots in this district shall be subject to the following minimum size
requirements.
   (a)   Single-family dwellings. A lot on which there is erected a single-
family dwelling shall contain an area of not less than 6,000 square feet with a
minimum lot width of 50 feet.
   (b)   Two-family dwellings. A lot on which there is erected a two-family
dwelling shall contain an area of not less than 3,000 square feet per family.
This regulation shall also be applicable to two-family structures being
converted to individually owned units. Also see
Article 24, additional height, area and use regulations.
   (c)   Other. Dormitories, lodging houses, nursing homes and boarding houses
shall, in addition to meeting the above requirements for single-family
buildings, provide at least 500 square feet of lot area for each occupant.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-805 LOT COVERAGE.
   The principal building and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 40%
of the lot area.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-806 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building shall exceed 45 feet in height.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-807 YARD REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Front yard.
      (1)   There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 25
feet, except as required for arterial streets in
Article 24.
      (2)   Where a lot or group of lots have a double frontage, the required
front yard shall be provided on both streets.
      (3)   Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets,
there shall be a front yard on each street side of a corner lot; provided,
however, that the buildable width of a single lot of record as of the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be reduced to less
than 35 feet, except as may be required to preserve a minimum setback of six
feet from the property line.
   (b)   Side yard.
      (1)   There shall be a side yard on each side of a principal building
which shall be one-third the height of the building or 10% of the width of the
lot, whichever is the greater, with a minimum of six feet except as provided
for zero-lot-line development.
      (2)   Where more than one principal building is constructed on a tract
for hospital use, nursing home use, church use, school use and other public or
quasi-public uses, the spacing of said buildings shall not be less than the
average height of the adjacent buildings.
   (c)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard for each principal building in
this district, which shall have a depth of not less than 25 feet.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-808 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   For applicable sign regulations, see
Article 19.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-809 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
   For applicable parking and loading regulations, see
Article 20.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 9: “R–3” MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
Section
   
1-901   Intent and purpose of district
   
1-902   District regulations
   
1-903   Use regulations
   
1-904   Intensity of use regulations
   
1-905   Lot coverage
   
1-906   Height regulations
   
1-907   Yard regulations
   
1-908   Sign regulations
   
1-909   Parking and loading regulations
§ 1-901 INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT.
   The “R–3” Multiple-Family Dwelling District is intended for the purpose of
allowing moderate to high residential density land use with the co-mingling of
compatible single-family and two-family dwellings, apartments, home
occupations, certain community facilities and certain special uses, yet
retaining the basic residential qualities.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-902 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   In the “R–3” District, no building shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged, intended or
designed for other than one of the uses listed in §
1-903.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-903 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the “R–2” Two-Family Dwelling District;
      (2)   Multiple-family dwellings;
      (3)   Bed and breakfast establishments;
      (4)   Rooming and lodging houses; and
      (5)   Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges, except those
where the chief activity is a service customarily carried on as a business.
   (b)   Uses allowed by special use permit. The following uses may be allowed
by special use permit when submitted, reviewed and approved by the Planning and
Zoning Board, and under such conditions as the Board may impose: any special
use permitted in the “R–2” Two-Family Dwelling District.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-904 INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS.
   Lots in this district shall be subject to the following minimum size
requirements:
   (a)   Single-family dwellings. A lot on which there is erected a single-
family dwelling shall contain an area of not less than 6,000 square feet;
   (b)   Two-family dwellings. A lot on which there is erected a two-family
dwelling shall contain an area of not less than 3,000 square feet per family;
   (c)   Multi-family dwellings. A lot on which there is erected a multiple-
family dwelling shall contain an area of not less than 6,000 square feet or
2,000 square feet per family, whichever area is the larger;
   (d)   Bed and breakfast establishments. A lot on which there is a bed and
breakfast establishment shall contain an area of not less than 6,000 square
feet;
   (e)   Dormitories, lodging houses, nursing homes, rooming houses and
boarding houses. Same as “R–2” District requirements;
   (f)   Lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 50 feet; and
   (g)   Area smaller than required. Where a single lot of record as of the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, as defined in §
1-105, has less area than that specified for multiple-family dwellings, and its
boundary lines, along their entire length, touch lands under other ownership on
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and have not since
been changed, such lot may be used only for single-family dwelling purposes, or
for any other non-dwelling use permitted in this district, provided the
structure conforms with other yard and height requirements of this district.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-905 LOT COVERAGE.
   The principal building and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 40%
of the lot area.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-906 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building shall exceed 45 feet in height.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-907 YARD REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Front yard.
      (1)   There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 25
feet, except as required for arterial streets in
Article 24.
      (2)   Where a lot or lots have a double frontage, the required front yard
shall be provided on both streets.
      (3)   Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets,
there shall be a front yard on each street side of the corner lot; provided,
however, that the buildable width of a single lot of record, as of the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall not be reduced
to less than 35 feet, except as may be required in order to preserve a minimum
setback of six feet from the property line.
   (b)   Side yard.
      (1)   There shall be a side yard on each side of a principal building
which shall be one-third the height of the building or 10% of the width of the
lot, whichever is the greater, with a minimum of six feet.
      (2)   Where more than one principal building is constructed on a tract
for hospitals, nursing homes, churches, schools, institutions of higher
learning, public buildings or other public or quasi-public uses, the spacing of
said buildings shall not be less than the average height of the adjacent
buildings.
   (c)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard for each principal building in
this district, which shall have a depth of not less than 25 feet.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-908 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   For applicable sign regulations, see
Article 19.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-909 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
   For applicable parking and loading regulations, see
Article 20.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 10: “PUD” PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
Section
   
1-1001   Intent
   
1-1002   Permitted uses
   
1-1003   General provisions
   
1-1004   Standards and conditions for Planned Unit Development
   
1-1005   Application for approval of preliminary plan
   
1-1006   Final plan approval
   
1-1007   Recording
   
1-1008   Enforcement and modification of provisions of the plan
   
1-1009   Amendments
   
1-1010   Platting
§ 1-1001 INTENT.
   (a)   The intent of the Planned Unit Development District is to encourage
innovation in residential, commercial and industrial development by greater
variety in type, design and layout of buildings; to encourage a more efficient
use of land reflecting changes in the technology of land development; to
encourage the expansion of urban areas incorporating the best features of modem
design while conserving the value of land; and to provide a procedure which
relates the type, design and layout of development to the particular site and
the particular demand at the time of development in a manner consistent with
the preservation of property values within established neighborhoods.
   (b)   The “PUD” District in this chapter is an overlay zone which may be
used in conjunction with any of the standard residential, commercial or
industrial zones. Although the specific conditions within this district are
predetermined, the location of a proposed district must be carefully reviewed
to assure that these conditions can be met.
   (c)   A development plan shall be submitted by each applicant for PUD zoning
in accordance with the provisions and conditions that follow.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1002 PERMITTED USES.
   All uses; however, such uses must be approved as shown on the development
plan as specified in the regulations.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1003 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   The Planning Commission shall make a report to the governing body
setting forth its reasons for recommendation of approval or denial of the
application, along with specific evidence and facts showing that the proposed
Planned Unit Development meets or does not meet the following conditions.
      (1)   Said Planned Unit Development shall be in general conformity with
the provisions of the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   Said Planned Unit Development shall not have a substantially
adverse effect on the development of the neighboring area.
   (b)   The Planned Unit Development District may be established exclusively
for residential, commercial or industrial development or any combination of
those types of development.
   (c)   (1)   The minimum size allowed for a Planned Unit Development shall be
as follows.
 
Type        Size
Commercial  3 acres
Industrial  5 acres
Residential 2 acres
 
      (2)   Any PUD which has combined two or more types of use into a single
plan shall have a minimum allowable size for the PUD equal to the sum of the
minimum land areas required for each of the two or more types contained
therein.
   (d)   Height, bulk and setback requirements may be varied so as to promote
an efficient and creative PUD.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1004 STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   (a)   Upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, the governing body may
from time to time adopt general policies or specific rules and regulations for
Planned Unit Developments and place said policies or rules and regulations of
public record in the office of the Zoning Administrator; provided said policies
and/or rules and regulations are not inconsistent with the adopted standards
and conditions; and provided that no policies, rules or regulations shall be
revised or added to so as to be applicable to a specific proposal for a Planned
Unit Development after an application for preliminary approval of a specific
development plan has been filed.
   (b)   A Planned Unit Development shall not be inconsistent with the
following general standards for use of land, and the use, type, bulk, design
and location of buildings, the density or intensity of use, open space, public
facilities and the development by geographic division of the site.
      (1)   The applicant shall satisfy the Planning Commission and the
governing body that he or she has the ability to carry out the proposed plan
and shall prepare and submit a schedule of construction. The proposed
construction shall begin within a period of 18 months following approval of a
final plan by the governing body, and a minimum of 50% of the total planned
construction shall be completed within a period of three years following such
approval or the approval of the plan. The period of time established for the
completion of the development may be modified from time to time by the
governing body upon the showing of good cause by the developer.
      (2)   The applicant may designate divisible geographic sections of the
entire parcel to be developed as a unit, and shall, in such case, specify
reasonable periods within which developments of each such unit must be
commenced. In the case of residential Planned Unit Developments, the governing
body may permit in each unit deviations from the number of dwelling units per
acre established for the entire planned development, provided such deviation
shall be adjusted for in other sections of the development so that the number
of dwelling units per acre authorized for the entire planned development is not
affected.
      (3)   The developer shall provide and record easements and covenants,
shall make such other arrangements and shall furnish such performance bonds,
escrow deposits or other financial guarantees as may be determined by the
Planning Commission, and approved by the governing body, to be reasonably
required to assure performance in accordance with the development plan and to
protect the public interest in the event of abandonment of said plan before
completion.
      (4)   The site shall be accessible from public roads that are adequate to
carry the traffic that will be imposed upon them by the proposed development.
The streets and driveways on the site of the proposed development shall be
adequate to serve the residents or occupants of the proposed development. If it
is determined that traffic control signals are required to prevent traffic
hazards or congestion in adjacent streets, the control signals shall be
provided at the developer’s expense.
      (5)   The development shall not impose an undue burden on public services
and facilities, such as water and sewer systems and fire and police protection.
      (6)   The entire tract or parcel of land to be submitted for Planned Unit
Development shall be held in single ownership or control, or if there are two
or more owners, the application for such Planned Unit Development shall be
filed jointly.
      (7)   The location and arrangement of structures, parking areas, walks,
lighting and appurtenant facilities shall be compatible with the surrounding
land uses, and any part of a Planned Unit Development not used for structures,
parking and loading areas or access-ways shall be landscaped or otherwise
improved.
      (8)   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with
Article 20.
      (9)   When a commercial or industrial use within a Planned Unit
Development District abuts a residential district, a solid or semi-solid fence
or wall at least six feet, but not more than eight feet, high and having a
visual density of not less than 90% per square foot shall be provided adjacent
to any adjoining residential district, except where the commercial or
industrial development is separated from the residential zone by a street
right-of-way. A ten-foot-wide landscape buffer, which shall consist of trees,
shrubs and evergreens located along the property line and which shall be
maintained by the owner or owners of the property in the Planned Unit
Development District, may be substituted for the solid or semi-solid fence when
approved by the city.
      (10)   All commercial and industrial buildings shall be set back not less
than 45 feet from the right-of-way of any street and 20 feet from any district
boundary line that does not abut a street right-of-way. Additional setback from
a heavily traveled thoroughfare may be required by the governing body when
recommended by the Planning Commission for the protection of health, safety and
general welfare.
      (11)   Building coverage shall not exceed the following percentages of
the net developable area of each individual parcel and of the total development
for each type of Planned Unit Development.
 
Type        Building Coverage
Commercial  35% maximum
Industrial  35% maximum
Residential 40% maximum
 
      (12)   A minimum of 30% of the net area of the part of Planned Unit
Development reserved for residential development shall be provided for open
space as defined by these regulations. At least one-half of this open space
shall be provided for the leisure and recreational use of all PUD residents and
maintained by owners of property in the development as through a homeowner’s
association in the case of a townhouse or a residential subdivision. The common
open space shall be developed for appropriate recreational facilities and a
minimum of 50% of the proposed recreational facilities shall be constructed
prior to the development of one-half of the project, and all recreational
facilities shall be constructed by the time the project is 75% developed.
      (13)   The PUD shall include such provisions for the ownership and
maintenance of the common open spaces as are reasonably necessary to ensure its
continuity, care, conservation and maintenance, and to ensure that remedial
measures will be available to the governing body if the common open space is
permitted to deteriorate, or is not maintained in a condition consistent with
the best interests of the Planned Unit Development or of the entire community.
      (14)   Modifications of the zoning or other regulations that would
otherwise be applicable to the site may be permitted, providing the design of
the Planned Unit Development and the amenities incorporated in it are not
inconsistent with the interest of the public generally.
      (15)   No residential use shall have direct access onto an arterial
street.
      (16)   All commercial or industrial areas must have access to an arterial
street; however, no individual commercial or industrial use may have direct
access onto arterial streets unless deemed necessary by the Planning Commission
and approved by the governing body.
      (17)   Sidewalks shall be built to city specifications along all public
and private streets; however, an alternative pedestrian and sidewalk plan may
be developed which provides pedestrians access between each use in the Planned
Unit Development.
      (18)   Consideration shall be given for the provision of bicycle traffic
along arterial streets or along the approved pedestrian sidewalk system.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1005 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN.
   (a)   Handling of applications. An application for a Planned Unit
Development shall be handled in the same manner prescribed for amending the
Zoning Ordinance. The same requirements for notice, advertisement of public
hearing, protests and adoption shall be required as in conventional zoning.
   (b)   Application contents. The applicant shall prepare and submit 20 copies
of the preliminary development plan for review and recommendation by the
Planning Commission, which said plan shall include:
      (1)   A site plan showing:
         (A)   Contours at intervals of two feet;
         (B)   General location, size and use of all proposed structures in
conformance with the yard requirements; or designation of individual lots if
such lots are proposed to be sold to individual owners;
         (C)   All points of ingress and egress, driveways, circulation aisles,
parking lots, parking spaces and service areas;
         (D)   All streets adjoining subject property and the width of the
existing right-of-way;
         (E)   Areas set aside for public and private open space with the type
of recreational facilities planned for each area indicated;
         (F)   Designation of individual parcels if the proposed development is
to be set up in separate construction phases;
         (G)   Location of required screening;
         (H)   Location of natural features such as ponds, tree clusters and
rock outcroppings; and
         (I)   Existing development on adjacent properties within 200 feet.
      (2)   The above-described site plan shall also include a section
designated as “General Provisions,” and said section shall include the
following items when said items are applicable:
         (A)   Net area _____ square feet or _____ acres. (Note: “Net area”
does not include land dedicated or necessary to be dedicated for public street
rights-of-way. If more than one parcel is proposed, designate net area by
parcel as well as total net area);
         (B)   Density shall not exceed _____ dwelling units per acre or a
total of _____ dwelling units for the entire plan. No parcel or unit of the
plan shall exceed a density of _____ units per acre for the individual parcel
by more than 20%;
         (C)   Building coverage shall not exceed _____ of the net area of the
Planned Unit Development by individual or total development;
         (D)   A minimum of _____ percent of the development plan shall be
provided for common open space as defined by this regulation. (Note: Normally,
this figure should be approximately 50%);
         (E)   A minimum of 50% of the recreational facilities shall be
constructed prior to the development of one-half of the project, and all
recreational facilities shall be constructed by the time the project is 75%
developed;
         (F)   If more than one parcel is proposed, a statement relating to the
sequence of development shall be included;
         (G)   Required number of off-street parking spaces: _____;
         (H)   Gross floor area proposed: _____ square feet (commercial PUD
only); and
         (I)   All proposed land uses shall be listed by parcel.
      (3)   A statement or adequate drawings shall be included describing the
manner for the disposition of sanitary waste and stormwater;
      (4)   The full legal description of the boundaries of the property or
properties to be included in the Planned Unit Development;
      (5)   A vicinity map showing the general arrangement of streets within an
area of 1,000 feet from the boundaries of the proposed Planned Unit
Development;
      (6)   Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the tract
to effectuate the proposed plan, including a statement of all the ownership and
beneficial interest in the tract of land and the proposed development;
      (7)   When a Planned Unit Development includes provisions for a common
open space, or recreational facilities, a statement describing the provision
that is to be made for the care and maintenance for such open space or
recreational facilities. If it is proposed that such open space be owned and/or
maintained by any entity other than a governmental authority, copies of the
proposed articles of incorporation and bylaws of such entity shall be
submitted;
      (8)   Copies of any restrictive covenants that are to be recorded with
respect to property included in the planned development district;
      (9)   In the case where a Planned Unit Development calls for construction
in units over a period of years, a schedule showing the proposed item and
sequence within which the applications for final approval of all sections of
the Planned Unit Development are intended to be filed shall be submitted; and
      (10)   A written statement by the applicant shall be submitted setting
forth the reasons why, in his or her opinion, the Planned Unit Development
would be in the public interest and would be consistent with the intent of the
governing body on Planned Unit Development.
   (c)   Action by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall, within
60 days after a preliminary Planned Unit Development is filed, hold a public
hearing on said development after giving notice as required by statute for
hearings on amendments. Said public hearing may be adjourned from time to time
and within a reasonable period of time. After the conclusion of said public
hearing, the Planning Commission shall prepare and transmit to the governing
body and the applicant specific findings of fact with respect to the
preliminary Planned Unit Development. The Planning Commission may recommend
disapproval, approval or approval with amendments, conditions or restrictions.
   (d)   Action by governing body. The governing body shall or shall not
approve the preliminary development plan and authorize the submitting of the
final development plan. If the governing body approves the preliminary plan, it
shall pass an ordinance designating the tract with an overlay of Planned Unit
Development and so order the Official Zoning Map to be amended.
   (e)   Changes. Substantial or significant changes in the preliminary Planned
Unit Development shall only be made after re-hearing and re-approval as
required for the initial approval of the preliminary plan.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1006 FINAL PLAN APPROVAL.
   (a)   After approval of a preliminary plan, the applicant shall submit an
application for final approval. Said final application may include the entire
Planned Unit Development or may be for a unit or section thereof as set forth
in the approval of the preliminary plan, and shall include changes required in
the approval of the preliminary plan. The application shall include 20 copies
of such drawings, specifications, covenants, easements, conditions and form of
performance bond as set forth in the approval of the preliminary plan and in
accordance with the conditions established in the zoning regulations for
Planned Unit Developments.
   (b)   A plan submitted for final approval shall be deemed to be in
substantial compliance with the plan previously given tentative approval,
provided any modification by the landowner of the plan as tentatively approved
does not:
      (1)   Vary the proposed gross residential density or intensity of use by
more than 5% or involve a reduction in the area set aside for common open
space, nor the substantial relocation of such area;
      (2)   Increase by more than 10% the floor area proposed for
nonresidential use;
      (3)   Increase by more than 5% the total ground area covered by buildings
nor involve a substantial change in the height of buildings; or
      (4)   Substantially change the design of the plan so as to significantly
alter, as determined by the Planning Commission:
         (A)   Pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow;
         (B)   The juxtaposition of different land uses;
         (C)   The relation of open space to residential development; or
         (D)   The proposed phasing of construction.
   (c)   (1)   A public hearing need not be held for the approval of a final
plan if it is in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plan, and
a public hearing need not be held to consider modifications on location and
design of streets or facilities for water, stormwater, sanitary sewers or other
public facilities.
      (2)   In the event a public hearing is not required for final approval
and the application for final approval has been filed, together with all
drawings, specifications and other documents in support thereof, the Planning
Commission shall, within a reasonable period of time of such filing, recommend
that such plan be given final approval and forward its recommendation to the
governing body for its final approval.
   (d)   In the event that the final plan submitted contains substantial
changes from the approved preliminary development plan, the applicant shall
resubmit the original plan. This preliminary development plan shall be modified
in the same manner prescribed in this article for original approval.
   (e)   In the event that a plan or section thereof is given final approval
and thereafter the landowner shall abandon said plan or section, he or she
shall so notify the city thereof in writing. In the event the landowner shall
fail to commence the Planned Unit Development within 18 months after final
approval has been granted, such final approval shall terminate and shall be
deemed null and void unless such time period is extended by the Planning
Commission upon written application by the landowner.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1007 RECORDING.
   Any approved final plan shall be filed of record with the Register of Deeds.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1008 ENFORCEMENT AND MODIFICATION OF PROVISIONS OF THE PLAN.
   To further the mutual interest of the residents and owners of the Planned
Unit Development and of the public in the preservation of the integrity of the
plan, as finally approved, and to ensure that modifications, if any, in the
plan shall not impair the reasonable reliance of the said residents and owners
upon the provisions of the plan, nor result in changes that would adversely
affect the public interest, the enforcement and modification of the provisions
of the plan as finally approved, whether recorded by plan, covenant, easement
or otherwise, shall be subject to the following provisions.
   (a)   Enforcement by the municipality. The provisions of the plan relating
to:
      (1)   The use of land and the use bulk, and location of buildings and
structures;
      (2)   The quality and location of common open space; and
      (3)   The intensity of use or the density of residential units shall run
in favor of the municipality and shall be enforceable in law or in equity by
the municipality, without limitation on any owners or regulation otherwise
granted to the municipality by law.
   (b)   Enforcement by the residents and owners. All provisions of the plan
shall run in favor of the residents and owners of the planned development, but
only to the extent expressly provided in the plan and in accordance with the
terms of the plan, and to the extent said provisions, whether recorded by plat,
covenant, easement or otherwise, may be enforced at law or equity by said
residents and owners acting individually, jointly or through an organization
designated in the plan to act on their behalf; provided, however, that no
provisions of the plan shall be implied to exist in favor of residents and
owners of the Planned Unit Development except as to those portions of the plan
which have been finally approved and have been recorded.
   (c)   Modifications of the plan by the municipality. All those provisions of
the plan authorized to be enforced by the municipality under division (a) above
may be modified, removed or released by the municipality (except grants or
easements relating to the service or equipment of a public utility, unless
expressly consented to by the public utility), subject to the following
conditions.
      (1)   No such modification, removal or release of the provisions of the
plan by the municipality shall affect the rights of the residents and owners of
the Planned Unit Development to maintain and enforce those provisions, at law
or equity, as provided in division (b) above.
      (2)   No modification, removal or release of the provisions of the plan
by the municipality shall be permitted except upon a finding by the municipal
authority, following a public hearing called and held in accordance with the
provisions of this section, that the same is consistent with the efficient
development and preservation of the entire Planned Unit Development; does not
adversely affect either the enjoyment of land abutting upon or across a street
from the Planned Unit Development or the public interest; and is not granted
solely to confer a special benefit upon any person.
   (d)   Modification by the residents. Residents and owners of the Planned
Unit Development may, to the extent and in the manner expressly authorized by
the provisions of the plan, modify, remove or release their rights to enforce
the provisions of the plan, but no such action shall affect the right of the
municipality to enforce the provisions of the plan in accordance with the
provisions of division (a) above.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1009 AMENDMENTS.
   A Planned Unit Development District ordinance or an approved preliminary or
final development plan may be amended in the same manner prescribed in this
article for approval of a preliminary or final plan. Application for amendment
may be by the homeowner’s association or 51% of the owners of the property
within the PUD.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1010 PLATTING.
   For un-platted tracts or tracts being re-platted, the approval of the
preliminary Planned Unit Development shall be considered as the approval of a
preliminary plat. To complete the platting process, the applicant need only
submit a final plat. Said final plat shall be in accordance with the
Subdivision Regulations.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 11: “M–H” MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT
Section
   
1-1101   Intent and purpose of district
   
1-1102   District regulations
   
1-1103   Use regulations
   
1-1104   Intensity of use regulations
   
1-1105   Lot coverage
   
1-1106   Height regulations
   
1-1107   Yard regulations
   
1-1108   Sign regulations
   
1-1109   Parking and loading regulations
   
1-1110   Special manufactured home requirements
§ 1-1101 INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT.
   (a)   It is intended that this district be established to permit
manufactured homes on permanent foundations where a lot or a group of lots is
owned by the manufactured home owner.
   (b)   This district is intended to be appended as an overlay to any of the
residential districts to provide an opportunity for individual siting and use
of manufactured homes for single-family dwellings consistent with the use and
density characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1102 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   In the “M–H” District, no building shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged, intended or
designed for other than one of the uses in §
1-1103.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1103 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Manufactured homes on permanent foundations; and
   (b)   Uses and structures permitted under the provisions of the regulations
of the parent district of which this district is made a part.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1104 INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS.
   A manufactured home in an “M–H” District shall be located on a lot which
conforms with the minimum lot size requirements of the parent district of which
this district is made a part.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1105 LOT COVERAGE.
   A manufactured home and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 40% of
the lot area.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1106 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The height requirements of the parent district of which this district is
made a part shall be the maximum height requirements.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1107 YARD REGULATIONS.
   The yard requirements of the parent district of which this district is made
a part shall be the minimum yard requirements.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1108 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   The sign regulations of the parent district of which this district is made a
part shall be the minimum requirements for signs unless otherwise approved by
the Planning Commission and the governing body.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1109 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
   The parking and loading requirements of the parent district of which this
district is made a part shall be the minimum requirements unless otherwise
prescribed and/or approved by the Planning Commission and the governing body.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1110 SPECIAL MANUFACTURED HOME REQUIREMENTS.
   Manufactured homes sited on individually owned lots shall be subject to the
following special requirements.
   (a)   Manufactured homes shall be mounted on a foundation of permanent
design.
   (b)   All open space below such manufactured homes not completely enclosed
by the permanent foundation shall be skirted, blocked or otherwise screened
using solid materials which will assure positive closure.
   (c)   Each manufactured home shall be an independent dwelling unit,
connected to all available utilities.
   (d)   Each manufactured home shall be provided with anchors and tie-downs of
adequate capacity to provide stability against high winds and adverse weather
conditions in accordance with manufacturers’ recommendations and applicable
state regulations.
   (e)   Each independent manufactured home shall be sited in such a manner as
to preserve the visual character of the neighborhood, which shall include
provisions for landscaping and other site improvements as well as off-street
parking.
   (f)   Each manufactured home shall bear a certification plate pursuant to
the National Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C.
§§ 5401 et seq., as amended.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 12: “M–P” MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT
Section
   
1-1201   Intent and purpose of district
   
1-1202   District regulations
   
1-1203   Use regulations
   
1-1204   Park requirements
   
1-1205   Application procedure
§ 1-1201 INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT.
   It is the intent of the “M–P” Manufactured Home Park District to permit low-
density manufactured home uses in a park-like atmosphere. The Manufactured Home
Park District is intended for those areas where the owner proposes to develop
and rent or lease individual sites.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1202 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   In the “M–P” District, no building shall be used and no building shall be
erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged, intended or designed for other
than uses listed in §
1-1203.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1203 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Independent manufactured homes located on a well-drained concrete
slab;
   (b)   Parks and playgrounds;
   (c)   Manufactured housing service buildings, such as coin-operated washers
and dryers, for exclusive use of residents of the manufactured home park;
   (d)   Office for manager of the manufactured home park;
   (e)   Storage building for vehicles used to tow manufactured housing units;
   (f)   Storage building for blocks, skirts, pipes and other material and
equipment required to set up a manufactured house;
   (g)   Accessory uses and buildings, including swimming pools, bath houses,
RV and boat storage sheds, patios and the like, for exclusive use of
manufactured housing residents;
   (h)   Licensed child care centers;
   (i)   Home occupations; and
   (j)   Churches and other similar places of worship.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1204 PARK REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   A tract to be used for a manufactured housing park shall be large
enough to accommodate ten or more manufactured units.
   (b)   Each manufactured housing park space shall be not less than 35 feet
wide.
   (c)   Manufactured housing parks shall have a maximum density of eight
manufactured units per gross acre, and each space shall have not less than
3,000 square feet.
   (d)   The manufactured housing park shall be located on a well-drained site
properly graded to ensure rapid drainage.
   (e)   Manufactured housing parks shall provide screening when they abut
residential property.
   (f)   Each manufactured housing park having ten lots for rent shall reserve
an area for child recreation according to the following schedule.
 
Number of Manufactured Homes Minimum Area of Playground
10—20                      1,500 square feet
21—25                      2,500 square feet
25 and over                  100 square feet per lot
 
   (g)   The recreation area shall be located so as to be free from hazards and
provided with play equipment.
   (h)   All new manufactured housing parks shall provide a storm shelter for
the occupants. All existing manufactured housing parks (at the date of the
adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter) are encouraged to provide
storm shelters.
   (i)   The manufactured housing shelter shall be approved, after the
submission of plans by the applicant, by the Zoning Administrator. The shelter
shall be constructed below ground level as a concrete structure or other
material approved by the city and provided with heavy metal doors. It shall be
located so as to be accessible to the park residents in a central place, with
access to the shelter clearly marked.
   (j)   Manufactured housing units shall be located so that there is at least
a 20-foot clearance between manufactured houses; provided, however, with
respect to manufactured houses parked end-to-end, the clearance shall not be
less than ten feet. No manufactured housing unit shall be located less than ten
feet from the front driveway.
   (k)   No manufactured housing unit shall be located less than 25 feet from
any property line of the manufactured housing park or from any community
building within the park, including any washroom, toilet, laundry facilities or
office.
   (l)   All manufactured housing spaces shall abut on an internal driveway
that is not less than 24 feet in width; provided, however, that no on-street
parking is permitted. If parallel parking is permitted on one side of the
street, the width shall be increased to 28 feet, and if parallel parking is
permitted on both sides of the street, the width shall be increased to 36 feet.
Such driveways shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway and
shall have, as a minimum, a gravel surface or be paved and well- maintained and
lighted.
   (m)   Manufactured housing parks containing more than 20 units shall provide
each lot with a concrete pad for parking two vehicles separate from the road.
The minimum pad size shall be 14 feet wide and 16 feet in depth. In parks
containing less than 20 units, the parking space may be constructed of crushed
rock finished to a depth of eight inches.
   (n)   All roadways and walks within the manufactured housing park shall be
hard surfaced and provided with night lighting using lamps spaced at intervals
of not more than 100 feet.
   (o)   All electrical distribution systems and telephone service systems to
each manufactured housing space, except outlets and risers, shall be
underground. Each manufactured housing space shall be provided with a 110-volt
and 220-volt service with a minimum 100-ampere individual service outlet.
   (p)   Whenever master television antenna systems, including cable systems,
are to be installed, the complete plans and specifications for the system must
be submitted for approval. Distribution to individual manufactured housing
spaces shall be underground and shall terminate adjacent to the electrical
outlet.
   (q)   Laundry facilities for the exclusive use of the manufactured housing
occupants may be provided in a service building.
   (r)   An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes
shall be supplied by pipes to all buildings and manufactured housing spaces
within the park. Each manufactured housing space shall be provided with a cold
water tap at least four inches above the ground. An adequate supply of hot
water shall be provided at all times in the service buildings for all washing
and laundry facilities.
   (s)   All manufactured housing units within the “M–P” District shall be
connected to an approved public water supply and an approved sanitary sewer
system with at least a four-inch sewer connection to each manufactured housing
unit. The sewer connection shall be provided with suitable fittings so that a
water-tight connection can be made between the manufactured housing drain and
the sewer connection. Such individual unit connections shall be so constructed
that they can be closed when not linked to a manufactured housing unit and
shall be trapped in such a manner as to maintain them in an odor-free
condition.
   (t)   Each manufactured housing unit shall be secured by anchoring the
superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning.
   (u)   Outdoor laundry drying space of adequate area and suitable location
shall be provided and indicated upon the required plan.
   (v)   The owner or operator shall include with the required plan the method
of refuse collection and the location of refuse containers. Refuse and garbage
handling methods shall meet the following minimum requirements.
      (1)   Storage collection and disposal of refuse in a park shall be so
conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding
areas, accidents, fire hazards or air pollution.
      (2)   All refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, water-tight, rodent-proof
containers. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to
properly store all refuse.
      (3)   Refuse racks shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such
racks shall be designed so as to prevent the containers from being tipped, to
minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around
them.
      (4)   Refuse and garbage shall be removed from the park at least once
each week. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or
covered containers.
      (5)   The park owner shall ensure that containers at all stands are
emptied regularly and maintained in a useable sanitary condition.
   (w)   If only independent manufactured housing spaces are to be provided, no
service building will be required; however, when such service building is
required, it shall comply with the following regulations:
      (1)   Be located 20 feet or more from any manufactured housing unit;
      (2)   Be adequately lighted;
      (3)   Have the interior finished with moisture-resistant material to
permit frequent washing and cleaning;
      (4)   Provide at least one lavatory, water closet and shower for each
sex; one laundry tray, one floor drain and hot and cold water;
      (5)   Have adequate heating facilities for the building and equipment
which will furnish an ample supply of heated water during times of peak demand;
and
      (6)   Have all rooms well ventilated with all openings effectively
screened.
   (x)   When liquefied petroleum gas is used in a manufactured home park,
containers for such gas shall not hold more than 25 gallons of water capacity,
shall be the liquefied petroleum gas containers approved by the United States
Commerce Commission for its intended purposes and shall be attached to the
mobile home in a manner approved by the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Association.
   (y)   A solid or semi-solid fence or wall, minimum six feet high, maximum
eight feet high, shall be provided between the manufactured home park district
and any adjoining property or property immediately across the alley which is
zoned for residential purposes other than for manufactured homes. Said fence
shall be so located as defined by this regulation. In lieu of said fence or
wall, a landscape buffer may be provided not less than 15 feet in width, and
said landscape buffer shall be planted with coniferous and deciduous plant
material so as to provide proper screening for the park. When the landscape
buffer is used in lieu of the fence or wall, the landscape buffer shall not be
included as any part of a required rear yard for a mobile home space. The
fence, wall or landscape buffer shall be properly policed and maintained by the
owner.
   (z)   The owner or operator shall include with the required plan a budget
for financing the proposed improvements.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1205 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (a)   The applicant for a manufactured housing park shall prepare or cause
to be prepared an application for rezoning and a development plan and shall
present ten copies of the plan for review by the Planning Commission. The
development plan shall show topography and the location and size of:
      (1)   Manufactured housing sites;
      (2)   Service buildings;
      (3)   Off-street parking areas;
      (4)   Electrical outlets;
      (5)   Sewer outlets;
      (6)   Water outlets;
      (7)   Water lines;
      (8)   Sewer lines;
      (9)   Recreational areas;
      (10)   Landscaped areas and walls or fences;
      (11)   Roadways; and
      (12)   Sidewalks.
   (b)   Following a rezoning hearing, as required by law and preliminary
approval of the development plan, the Planning Commission shall submit the
plan, together with a record of the hearing plus its formal recommendations, to
the governing body for final approval.
   (c)   When final approvals have been obtained, the Zoning Administrator
shall issue a permit to operate the manufactured housing park.
   (d)   Upon the issuance of the permit for a mobile home park or court, the
city shall have the authority to have said manufactured home inspected by the
proper inspecting officer of the city, and if it shall be found that the holder
of said permit has made any false or misleading statements in his or her
application or has placed or caused to be placed more manufactured homes in
said manufactured home park or court than provided for and set forth in said
application for permit, or that said holder of said permit has violated or
caused to be violated any provision of this article, the city’s governing body
shall have the power to revoke said permit.
   (e)   If the city shall determine, upon proper inspection by the inspecting
officer of the city, that the sanitary condition of the manufactured home park
shall have become so unsanitary as to endanger the health or welfare of
occupants of said manufactured home park or the surrounding community, or that
said sanitary facilities have become inadequate to properly protect the
occupants of said manufactured park, the city’s governing body shall have the
power to require the holder of said manufactured home park permit, within ten
days, to set said manufactured home park in proper sanitary condition. If, upon
notice from the city to the holder of the permit as aforesaid, the owner or
manager of said manufactured home park shall fail or refuse to place said park
or court in sanitary condition, the city’s governing body shall have the right
to revoke said permit.
   (f)   Whenever a property zoned “M–P” ceases to be used for such purposes
for a period of one year, the Planning Commission shall initiate action and
hold a public hearing to rezone said property back to its former zoning
district classification.
   (g)   After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no
new manufactured housing park may be operated, and no existing park expanded,
except in accordance with these regulations and under permit from the Zoning
Administrator.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 13: “C–S” HIGHWAY SERVICE DISTRICT
Section
   
1-1301   Intent and purpose of district
   
1-1302   District regulations
   
1-1303   Use regulations
   
1-1304   Intensity of use regulations
   
1-1305   Lot coverage
   
1-1306   Height regulations
   
1-1307   Yard regulations
   
1-1308   Sign regulations
   
1-1309   Parking and loading regulations
   
1-1310   Landscaping regulations
   
1-1311   Traffic regulations
§ 1-1301 INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT.
   The “C–S” Highway Service District is intended for the purpose of grouping
limited highway services in appropriate areas. Floor area is restricted and
off-street parking and landscaping is required in order to reduce possible
adverse effects on adjacent properties.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1302 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   In the “C–S” District, no building shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged, intended or
designed for other than one of the uses in §
1-1303.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1303 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Ambulance services;
      (2)   Animal hospitals or clinics;
      (3)   Apartments on floors other than the ground floor;
      (4)   Automobile, truck and other motor vehicle sales, services, repairs
and rentals;
      (5)   Bakery and pastry shops, retail;
      (6)   Bed and breakfast establishments;
      (7)   Boat sales and rental;
      (8)   Building materials, retail sales;
      (9)   Commercial recreation facilities;
      (10)   Car washes;
      (11)   Electrical and telephone substations;
      (12)   Farm and construction equipment sales; outdoor display shall be
permitted provided that no machinery shall be displayed, parked or stored in
any required yard;
      (13)   Feed and seed stores, including garden and lawn supplies;
      (14)   Florist shops;
      (15)   Funeral homes;
      (16)   Garden supplies and landscape nurseries;
      (17)   Grocery stores;
      (18)   Hospitals and medical clinics;
      (19)   Liquor stores;
      (20)   Lumber yards;
      (21)   Mini-warehouses;
      (22)   Motels or motor hotels;
      (23)   Newsstands;
      (24)   Parking lots, customer and private;
      (25)   Parks, playgrounds and community buildings;
      (26)   Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges;
      (27)   Restaurants and drive-ins;
      (28)   Self-service laundries and dry-cleaning stores;
      (29)   Service stations;
      (30)   Taverns;
      (31)   Truck sales, service and repair, provided there is no outside
repair or repair storage;
      (32)   Truck terminals; and
      (33)   Theaters, indoor.
   (b)   Uses allowed by special use permit. The following uses of land may be
allowed in this district by special use permit when submitted, reviewed and
approved by the Planning and Zoning Board:
      (1)   Amusement parks;
      (2)   Child care centers;
      (3)   Collection and distribution of recyclable items;
      (4)   Drive-in theaters;
      (5)   Manufactured home sales, subject to the following regulations.
         (A)   In the “C–S” Highway Service District, manufactured home sales
activities shall be limited to the display, storage and sale of completed,
undamaged manufactured home units, including all activities necessary to
prepare said units for display on the property and transport off the property.
Said activities shall include the placement or removal of towing equipment,
tires and axles, blocks, skids, jacks, skirting and steps, and the connection
and disconnection of utilities. Said activities shall not include construction
on or in the manufactured home.
         (B)   No more than eight manufactured homes may exist on each acre of
property used for manufactured home sales at any given time.
      (6)   Miniature golf courses;
      (7)   Race tracks, animal or vehicular;
      (8)   Wireless communications towers subject to the provisions of §
1-2413; and
      (9)   Recreational vehicle (RV) parks, subject to the following
conditions.
         (A)   Recreational vehicle (RV) parks shall be utilized for the
accommodation of travel trailers and other recreational vehicles only, and
under no circumstances shall the park be utilized for occupancy by manufactured
homes.
         (B)   The tract to be used for an RV park shall not be less than two
acres in area.
         (C)   The applicant for an RV park shall prepare or cause to be
prepared a preliminary plan, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals
one hundred feet (1” = 100’), and ten copies of said plan shall be submitted to
the Planning Commission for its review and recommendation. Such plans shall
comply with the following minimum requirements.
            (i)   Contours at intervals of one foot shall be indicated on the
plan. Commercial recreation facilities to include recreation vehicle (RV)
parks.
            (ii)   The RV park shall be located on a well-drained site,
properly graded to ensure rain drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of
water.
            (iii)   RV parks shall have a maximum density of 20 RV units per
gross acre, and a minimum area of 1,250 square feet shall be provided for each
RV space.
            (iv)   Each RV space shall be at least 25 feet wide and a minimum
of 50 feet in depth.
            (v)   Recreational vehicles shall be located on each space so as to
maintain a setback of no less than 20 feet from any public street or highway
right-of-way, and as to maintain a setback of no less than five feet from any
boundary line of an adjoining RV space when such boundary line is not common to
any public street or highway right-of-way.
            (vi)   All RV spaces shall front on a private roadway of not less
than 24 feet in width, and all roadways shall have unobstructed access to a
public street.
            (vii)   A solid or semi-solid fence or wall at least six feet
heigh, but not more than eight feet high, shall be provided between the RV park
and any adjoining property which is zoned for residential purposes. Said fence
shall be so located as to not be in violation of the intersection site triangle
as defined by §
1-105. In lieu of said fence or wall, a landscape buffer may be provided not
less than 15 feet in width, and said landscape buffer shall be planted with
coniferous and deciduous plant material so as to provide proper screening for
the park. When the landscape buffer is used in lieu of the fence or wall, the
landscape buffer shall not be included as any part of a required rear yard for
an RV space. The fence, wall or landscape buffer shall be properly policed and
maintained by the owner.
         (D)   Upon approval of the preliminary RV park plan by the Planning
Commission, the applicant shall prepare and submit a final plan, which shall
incorporate any changes or alterations requested. The final plan and the
Planning Commission recommendation shall be forwarded to the governing body for
its review and final action.
         (E)   Any substantial deviation, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, from the approved plan shall constitute a violation of the
building or zoning permit authorizing construction of the project. Changes in
plans shall be re-submitted for reconsideration and approval by the Planning
Commission and governing body prior to the issuance of a building or zoning
permit.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1304 INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Where the lot will be served by public water and sewer, the minimum
lot size shall be 10,000 square feet with 100 feet for minimum width.
   (b)   Where a private water and sewer service will be provided on the lot,
the minimum lot size shall be two acres.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1305 LOT COVERAGE.
   The principal and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 50% of the
lot area.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1306 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building or structure shall exceed 45 feet in height.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1307 YARD REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Front yard.
      (1)   There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 25
feet, except as required for arterial streets in
Article 24.
      (2)   Where a lot has double frontage or is a corner lot, a front yard
shall be provided on both streets. No accessory buildings or structures shall
project beyond the setback line of either street.
   (b)   Side yard. Where a “C–S” Zone abuts any residential district zone, a
side yard of not less than 15 feet shall be provided. Such side yard shall be
completely enclosed with a board fence or other acceptable enclosure, which
shall be not less than six feet in height.
   (c)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
25 feet.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1308 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   For applicable sign regulations, see
Article 19.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1309 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
   For applicable parking and loading regulations, see
Article 20.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1310 LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS.
   For applicable landscaping regulations, see
Article 21.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1311 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   For applicable traffic regulations, see
Article 22.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 14: “C–1” CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Section
   
1-1401   Intent and purpose of district
   
1-1402   District regulations
   
1-1403   Use regulations
   
1-1404   Intensity of use regulations
   
1-1405   Height regulations
   
1-1406   Yard regulations
   
1-1407   Sign regulations
   
1-1408   Parking and loading regulations
   
1-1409   Landscaping regulations
   
1-1410   Traffic regulations
§ 1-1401 INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT.
   The “C–1” Central Business District is intended for the purpose of grouping
retail merchandising activities into a concentrated area serving the general
shopping needs of the trade area. Principal permitted uses include department
stores, apparel stores, general retail sales and services and similar uses
appropriate for comparison shopping. The grouping is intended to strengthen the
economic level of the primary shopping district.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1402 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   In the “C–1” District, no building shall be used and no building or
structure altered, enlarged or erected which is arranged, intended or designed
for other than one of the uses listed in §
1-1403.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1403 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Allowed uses. Note: list is not inclusive.
      (1)   Adding machine and other small business machine repair, sales and
services;
      (2)   Ambulance services;
      (3)   Amusement places;
      (4)   Antique shops and stores, providing all merchandise is displayed
and sold inside a building;
      (5)   Apartments or individual dwelling units on floors other than the
ground floor, or on the alley side of the lot;
      (6)   Apparel and accessory stores;
      (7)   Appliance stores;
      (8)   Art and art supply stores;
      (9)   Artist studios;
      (10)   Auditoriums and similar places of public assembly;
      (11)   Automobile accessory and supply stores;
      (12)   Automobile, truck and other motor vehicle sales and rentals;
      (13)   Automobile parking lots and garages;
      (14)   Bakery and pastry shops (retail only);
      (15)   Banks and other savings and lending institutions;
      (16)   Barber shops, beauty shops and chiropody, massage or similar
personal services;
      (17)   Bicycle shops;
      (18)   Boat sales and rentals;
      (19)   Books and stationery stores;
      (20)   Bowling centers and recreational buildings;
      (21)   Building materials, retail sales;
      (22)   Business and technical schools, including schools for photography,
dancing and music;
      (23)   Business machine sales, repairs and services;
      (24)   Catalog stores;
      (25)   Churches;
      (26)   Cigar and tobacco stores;
      (27)   Clothing and costume rental shops;
      (28)   Clothing stores;
      (29)   Commercial recreational uses;
      (30)   Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring and similar trades;
      (31)   Day care centers;
      (32)   Delicatessens and catering establishments;
      (33)   Department stores;
      (34)   Drug stores and prescription shops;
      (35)   Dry cleaning and laundry establishments;
      (36)   Dry goods and notion stores, including coin shops and fabric
shops;
      (37)   Electronic appliances and equipment, including computer and
software services;
      (38)   Farm and construction equipment, retail sales;
      (39)   Fire stations, police stations, jails;
      (40)   Fix-it shops (radio, television and small household appliances);
      (41)   Florist and gift shops;
      (42)   Frozen food lockers of not more than 10,000 square feet in floor
area;
      (43)   Funeral homes;
      (44)   Furniture and home furnishing stores;
      (45)   Garage and auto repair shops, but not including auto body and
fender work and auto painting;
      (46)   Garden supplies and landscape nurseries;
      (47)   Government buildings;
      (48)   Grocery, fruit and vegetable stores (retail only);
      (49)   Hardware stores;
      (50)   Heating and air conditioning shops, provided all merchandise is
located in a building;
      (51)   Hobby, stamp and coin shops;
      (52)   Hotels and motels;
      (53)   Household appliance stores;
      (54)   Interior decorator shops;
      (55)   Jewelry and metal craft stores and shops;
      (56)   Leather goods and luggage stores;
      (57)   Libraries and museums (public);
      (58)   Liquor stores;
      (59)   Lock and key shops;
      (60)   Mail order catalog stores;
      (61)   Medical, dental and health clinics;
      (62)   Medical and orthopedic appliance stores;
      (63)   Meeting halls and auditoriums;
      (64)   Messenger and telegraph service stations;
      (65)   Milk and milk products distribution stations;
      (66)   Manufactured housing and recreational vehicle sales;
      (67)   Musical instrument sales and repair shops;
      (68)   Music stores and studios;
      (69)   Newspaper offices, printing and printing supply sales and
services;
      (70)   Newsstands;
      (71)   Offices and office buildings;
      (72)   Office supply and office equipment sales and service stores;
      (73)   Optician and optometrist shops;
      (74)   Paint, wallpaper and glass stores;
      (75)   Parking lots and garages;
      (76)   Parks and open spaces;
      (77)   Pawn shops;
      (78)   Pet shops;
      (79)   Photographic equipment sales and supply stores;
      (80)   Photographic studios;
      (81)   Picture framing shops;
      (82)   Prescription shops;
      (83)   Printing and publishing houses (including newspapers);
      (84)   Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges;
      (85)   Public buildings, including post offices, city offices, county
offices, state offices;
      (86)   Radio and television studios;
      (87)   Railway, taxi and bus passenger stations;
      (88)   Restaurants and snack shops, excluding drive-ins;
      (89)   Service stations;
      (90)   Sewing machine sales and repair;
      (91)   Shoe repair and shoeshine shops;
      (92)   Shoe stores;
      (93)   Sporting and athletic goods stores;
      (94)   Stores and shops for the conduct of retail business similar to the
uses listed in this section;
      (95)   Tailor shops;
      (96)   Taverns;
      (97)   Television and radio sales and services;
      (98)   Theaters;
      (99)   Toy stores;
      (100)   Travel bureaus;
      (101)   Used car lots;
      (102)   Upholstery shops of not more than 10,000 square feet of floor
area;
      (103)   Utility company offices;
      (104)   Variety stores;
      (105)   Wallpaper and paint stores;
      (106)   Watch and watch repair shops;
      (107)   Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above uses; and
      (108)   Auction houses, excluding the sale of livestock and domestic and
exotic animals.
   (b)   Uses allowed by special use permit. The following uses may be allowed
by special use permit when submitted, reviewed and approved by the Planning and
Zoning Board, and under such conditions as the Board may impose:
      (1)   Motor vehicle repair services, provided that all work shall be
performed and all materials shall be stored within an enclosed building; and
provided further that all operable or inoperable motor vehicles determined by
the Building Official to be a safety hazard or visual blight shall be screened
from public view and access by a solid or semi-solid fence having a minimum
height of six feet and a visual density of no less than 90%;
      (2)   Motor vehicle body shops, provided that all work shall be performed
and all materials shall be stored within an enclosed building; and provided
further that all operable or inoperable motor vehicles determined by the
Building Official to be a safety hazard or visual blight shall be screened from
public view and access by a solid or semi-solid fence having a minimum height
of six feet and a visual density of no less than 90%;
      (3)   Carpenter, cabinet, plumbing or sheet metal shops, provided that
any outside storage is completely enclosed by a six-foot sight-obscuring fence;
      (4)   Contractors’ offices and equipment storage yards, provided that
outside storage of equipment or materials is completely enclosed by a six-foot
sight-obscuring fence;
      (5)   Storage and warehousing, except for products of a highly explosive,
combustible or volatile nature;
      (6)   Wholesale establishments, except those which handle products of a
highly explosive, combustible or volatile nature;
      (7)   Retail lumber yards, providing all materials and equipment are
stored in a completely enclosed building or are screened by a minimum six-foot
high solid fence;
      (8)   Collection and distribution of recyclable items; and
      (9)   Wireless communications towers subject to the requirements of §
1-2413.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004; Ord. 294, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 1-1404 INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS.
   No requirements, except those to meet fire regulations.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1405 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building shall exceed 60 feet in height except as otherwise provided in
the additional height, area and use regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1406 YARD REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Front yard. No front yard is required for any building in the “C–1”
Central Business District.
   (b)   Side yard. No side yard is required for any building in the “C–1”
Central Business District, except where a lot sides on any residential
district, in which case, there shall be a 15-foot side yard.
   (c)   Rear yard. No rear yard is required for any building in the “C–1”
Central Business District, except where a lot abuts on a residential district,
in which case, there shall be a 15-foot rear yard.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1407 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   For applicable sign regulations, see
Article 19.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1408 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
   None required.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1409 LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS.
   None required.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1410 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   For applicable traffic regulations, see
Article 22.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 15: “C–2” GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Section
   
1-1501   Intent and purpose of district
   
1-1502   District regulations
   
1-1503   Use regulations
   
1-1504   Intensity of use regulations
   
1-1505   Height regulations
   
1-1506   Yard regulations
   
1-1507   Sign regulations
   
1-1508   Parking and loading regulations
   
1-1509   Landscaping regulations
   
1-1510   Traffic regulations
§ 1-1501 INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT.
   (a)   The “C–2” General Commercial District is intended for the purpose of
allowing basic retail, service and office uses in locations outside the Central
Business District.
   (b)   This district is intended to provide locations for commercial
activities that do not need a central location but do require a location easily
accessible to downtown shoppers.
   (c)   Business uses needing large floor areas, particularly those not
compatible with central business district densities, are included in this
district.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1502 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   In the “C–2” District, no building shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged, intended or
designed for other than one of the uses listed in §
1-1503.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1503 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Accessory uses;
      (2)   Amusement places (indoors);
      (3)   Animal hospitals, clinics and kennels, providing the establishment
and runs are completely enclosed in a building;
      (4)   Antique shops and stores, providing all merchandise is displayed
and sold inside a building;
      (5)   Apparel and accessory stores;
      (6)   Apartments on floors other than the ground floor;
      (7)   Armories;
      (8)   Art and art supply stores;
      (9)   Artist studios;
      (10)   Auditoriums and similar places of public assembly;
      (11)   Automobile accessory and supply stores;
      (12)   Automobile and mobile home sales and services;
      (13)   Automobile parking lots and garages;
      (14)   Bakery and pastry shops (retail only);
      (15)   Banks and other savings and lending institutions;
      (16)   Barber shops, beauty shops, chiropody, massage or similar personal
services;
      (17)   Bicycle shops;
      (18)   Book and stationary stores;
      (19)   Bowling alleys;
      (20)   Business and technical schools, including schools for photography,
dancing and music;
      (21)   Business machine repairs, sales and services, including computers
and related equipment;
      (22)   Carpenter and cabinet shops employing five persons or less;
      (23)   Car washes;
      (24)   Cigar and tobacco stores;
      (25)   Churches and other similar places of worship;
      (26)   Clothing and costume rentals;
      (27)   Commercial recreation centers;
      (28)   Computer and electronic stores;
      (29)   Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring and similar trades;
      (30)   Delicatessens and catering establishments;
      (31)   Department stores;
      (32)   Drug stores and prescription shops;
      (33)   Dry goods and notion stores;
      (34)   Dry cleaning and laundry establishments;
      (35)   Fire stations, police stations and jails;
      (36)   Fix-it shops (radio, television and small electronic appliances);
      (37)   Florist and gift shops;
      (38)   Funeral homes and mortuaries;
      (39)   Furniture and home furnishing stores;
      (40)   Golf courses, including miniature golf and driving tees;
      (41)   Government administrative buildings;
      (42)   Greenhouses, garden centers and nurseries;
      (43)   Grocery stores;
      (44)   Hardware stores;
      (45)   Hobby, stamp and coin shops;
      (46)   Hotels and motels;
      (47)   Household appliance stores;
      (48)   Interior decorator’s shops;
      (49)   Jewelry and metal craft stores and shops;
      (50)   Leather goods and luggage stores;
      (51)   Libraries and museums (public);
      (52)   Liquor stores;
      (53)   Lock and key shops;
      (54)   Lumber and building supply stores;
      (55)   Mail order catalog stores;
      (56)   Medical, dental and health clinics;
      (57)   Medical and orthopedic appliance stores;
      (58)   Meeting halls and auditoriums;
      (59)   Messenger and telegraph service stations;
      (60)   Musical instrument sales and repair shops;
      (61)   Music studios;
      (62)   Newspaper offices;
      (63)   Newsprint job printing and printing supply stores;
      (64)   Offices and office buildings;
      (65)   Office supply and office equipment stores;
      (66)   Opticians and optometrists;
      (67)   Package liquor stores;
      (68)   Paint and wallpaper stores;
      (69)   Parking lots and garages;
      (70)   Parks and open spaces;
      (71)   Pawn shops;
      (72)   Pet shops;
      (73)   Photographic equipment sales and supply stores;
      (74)   Photographic studios;
      (75)   Picture framing shops;
      (76)   Plumbing shops;
      (77)   Post offices;
      (78)   Printers;
      (79)   Private clubs and lodges;
      (80)   Radio and television studios;
      (81)   Restaurants, including drive-ins;
      (82)   Service stations;
      (83)   Self-service laundries and dry cleaning establishments;
      (84)   Sewing machine shops and stores;
      (85)   Shoe stores;
      (86)   Shoe repair shops;
      (87)   Sporting and athletic goods stores;
      (88)   Stores and shops for the conduct of retail businesses similar to
the uses which are listed in this section;
      (89)   Tailor shops;
      (90)   Taverns;
      (91)   Theaters;
      (92)   Tire repair shops;
      (93)   Toy stores;
      (94)   Travel bureaus;
      (95)   Used car lots;
      (96)   Utility company offices;
      (97)   Variety stores; and
      (98)   Watch repair shops.
   (b)   Uses allowed by special use permit. The following uses may be allowed
by special use permit when submitted, reviewed and approved by the Planning and
Zoning Board, and under such conditions as the Board may impose:
      (1)   All special uses allowed in the “C–1” District;
      (2)   Any public building erected on land used by any department of the
city, county, state or federal government;
      (3)   Public utilities: telephone exchanges, electric substations, radio
and television towers, water, sewer or storm sewer facilities, a natural, piped
gas operating under government franchise and contract;
      (4)   Carpenter, cabinet, plumbing or sheet metal shops, provided that
any outside storage is completely enclosed by a six-foot sight-obscuring fence;
and
      (5)   Contractors’ offices and equipment storage yards, provided that
outside storage of equipment or materials is completely enclosed by a six-foot
sight-obscuring fence.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1504 INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS.
   A tract used for other than residential purposes shall be not less than
2,500 square feet in area, with an average width of not less than 25 feet. A
minimum of 1,500 square feet of lot area shall be required for each apartment
built above ground floor.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1505 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building in a “C–2” District shall exceed 45 feet except as provided in
the additional height, area and use regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1506 YARD REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than 25 feet, except as required for arterial streets in
Article 24.
      (1)   Where a lot or group of lots have a double frontage, the required
front yard shall be provided on both streets.
      (2)   Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets
or roads, there shall be a front yard on each street side of a corner lot.
   (b)   Side yard. Where the “C–2” District abuts a residential district,
there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet.
   (c)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet, or 20%
of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1507 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   For applicable sign regulations, see
Article 19.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1508 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
   For applicable parking and loading regulations, see
Article 20.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1509 LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS.
   For applicable landscaping regulations, see
Article 21.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1510 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   For applicable traffic regulations, see
Article 22.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 16: “C–3” ADULT ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT
Section
   
1-1601   Intent and purpose of district
   
1-1602   District regulations
   
1-1603   Use regulations
   
1-1604   Intensity of use regulations
   
1-1605   Height regulations
   
1-1606   Yard regulations
   
1-1607   Sign regulations
   
1-1608   Parking and loading regulations
   
1-1609   Landscaping requirements
   
1-1610   Traffic regulations
   
1-1611   Use and location restrictions
§ 1-1601 INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT.
   It is the intent and purpose of the “C–3” Adult Entertainment District to
regulate adult entertainment establishments, which by their nature are known to
produce deleterious effects to adjacent development and serious secondary
negative impacts to juveniles, especially where such uses are clustered.
Special regulation of such uses is therefore necessary to ensure that these and
other adverse secondary effects will not impact residential neighborhoods,
public and quasi-public institutions or facilities serving the youth of the
community.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1602 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   In the “C–3” District, no building shall be used and no building shall be
erected, altered or enlarged, which is arranged, intended or designed for other
than adult entertainment uses listed in §
1-1603.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1603 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Escort agencies;
   (b)   Adult book and/or video stores;
   (c)   Adult entertainment establishments, including bars, cabarets, massage
parlors, live theaters, motion picture theaters and other sexually-oriented
entertainment businesses; and
   (d)   Adult novelty stores.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1604 INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS.
   All lots and tracts shall have not less than 7,000 square feet in area, with
an average width of not less than 50 feet.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1605 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building in a “C–3” District shall exceed 35 feet in height, except as
may be otherwise provided by the regulations. Please see §
1-1603.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1606 YARD REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than 25 feet, except as may be required for arterial streets and collector
streets.
      (1)   Where a lot or group of lots have a double frontage, the required
front yard shall be provided on both streets.
      (2)   Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets
or roads, there shall be a front yard on each street side of a corner lot.
   (b)   Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building, and
no side yard shall be less than ten feet.
   (c)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1607 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   For applicable sign regulations, see
Article 19.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1608 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
   For applicable parking and loading regulations, see
Article 20.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1609 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   For applicable landscaping requirements, see
Article 21.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1610 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   For applicable traffic regulations, see
Article 22.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1611 USE AND LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   No adult entertainment use, escort agency, adult book or video store
or adult novelty store shall be conducted in any manner:
      (1)   To allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be
visible from any point outside of the building or structure containing such
use; or
      (2)   That permits the observation of any material depicting, describing
or relating to sexual activities from any point outside of the building or
structure containing such use.
   (b)   The provisions of divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) above shall apply to any
display, decoration, sign, window or other opening.
   (c)   No adult use as set out in §
1-1603 shall be allowed within 1,000 feet of another existing adult use.
   (d)   No adult use as set out in §
1-1603 shall be located within 1,000 feet of any zoning district which allows
residential uses or within 1,000 feet of any residence.
   (e)   No adult use as set out in §
1-1603 shall be located within 1,000 feet of a pre-existing church or place of
worship, day care facility, park, educational institution, library, museum,
community center, playground or swimming pool.
   (f)   For the purposes of divisions (c), (d) and (e) above, measurements
shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings,
structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the
applicant’s adult entertainment use to the nearest point on the property line
of the church, and the like.
   (g)   No more than one such use shall be conducted within any building or
structure containing an adult use.
   (h)   No permitted adult-oriented business, as defined herein, shall be
operated between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
CHAPTER 17: “I–1” LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Section
   
1-1701   Intent and purpose of district
   
1-1702   District regulations
   
1-1703   Use regulations
   
1-1704   Intensity of use regulations
   
1-1705   Height regulations
   
1-1706   Yard regulations
   
1-1707   Sign regulations
   
1-1708   Parking and loading regulations
   
1-1709   Landscaping regulations
   
1-1710   Traffic regulations
§ 1-1701 INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT.
   (a)   The “I–1” Light Industrial District is intended for the purpose of
allowing certain industrial uses which do not:
      (1)   Require intensive land coverage;
      (2)   Generate large volumes of vehicular traffic; or
      (3)   Create obnoxious sounds, glare, dust or odor.
   (b)   Height and land coverage are controlled to ensure compatibility with
adjoining uses.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1702 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   In the “I–1” District, no building or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged, intended or
designed for other than one of the uses listed in §
1-1703.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1703 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Animal hospitals or clinics;
      (2)   Auto sales and repairs;
      (3)   Bakeries whose primary purpose is not retail sales;
      (4)   Billboards subject to requirements outlined in
Article 19;
      (5)   Bottling works;
      (6)   Building material sales (except for ready-mix concrete and similar
uses which emit dust, odor or smoke);
      (7)   Carpenter, cabinet, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and sheet
metal shops;
      (8)   Car wash establishments;
      (9)   Reserved;
      (10)   Contractors’ offices and equipment storage yards, providing the
storage yard is completely enclosed with a six-foot solid fence or wall;
      (11)   Dog kennels;
      (12)   Dry cleaning and/or laundry plants;
      (13)   Farm and construction equipment sales and services;
      (14)   Feed and seed storage and wholesale distribution;
      (15)   Frozen food lockers;
      (16)   Greenhouses and nurseries, retail and wholesale;
      (17)   Light manufacturing operations, providing that such use is not
noxious or offensive by reason of vibration or noise beyond the confines of the
building or the emission of dust, fumes, gas, odor or smoke;
      (18)   Machinery sales and storage lots;
      (19)   Monument sales;
      (20)   Motor vehicle body shops, provided that all work shall be
performed and all materials shall be stored within an enclosed building; and
provided further that all operable or inoperable motor vehicles determined by
the Building Official to be a safety hazard or visual blight shall be screened
from public view and access by a solid or semi-solid fence having a minimum
height of six feet and a visual density of no less than 90%;
      (21)   Motor vehicle repair services, provided that all work shall be
performed and all materials shall be stored within an enclosed building; and
provided further that all operable or inoperable motor vehicles determined by
the Building Official to be a safety hazard or visual blight shall be screened
from public view and access by a solid or semi-solid fence having a minimum
height of six feet and a visual density of no less than 90%;
      (22)   Motor vehicle and farm implement sales and storage;
      (23)   Public utilities and public service uses:
         (A)   Municipal power plants;
         (B)   Substations;
         (C)   Railroads;
         (D)   Telephone exchanges, microwave towers, radio towers, television
towers, telephone transmission buildings, electric power plants; and
         (E)   Public utility storage yards when the entire storage area is
enclosed by at least a six-foot wall or fence.
      (24)   Collection and distribution of recyclable items;
      (25)   Sign printing and manufacturing;
      (26)   Truck and rail terminals;
      (27)   Upholstering shops;
      (28)   Warehouses; and
      (29)   Wholesale merchandise sales and storage.
   (b)   Uses allowed by special use permit. The following uses of land may be
allowed in this district by special use permit when submitted, reviewed and
approved by the Planning and Zoning Board, subject to such conditions as the
Board may require:
      (1)   Livestock auction sales and/or sales of farm-related products,
including seed and feed;
      (2)   Grain elevators;
      (3)   Wireless communications towers subject to the provisions of §
1-2413; and
      (4)   Wholesale and storage of products of a volatile nature, such as
anhydrous and similar products.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1704 INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Lots in this district shall be subject to the following minimum size
requirements:
      (1)   Minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet; and
      (2)   Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet.
   (b)   A building, structure or use allowed in this district may occupy all
of the lot except for that area required for off-street parking and off-street
loading and unloading and their access roads and as required for arterial
streets in
Article 24.
   (c)   In the case where the required off-street parking and/or loading and
unloading will be provided within the building or structure, then the structure
may cover the entire lot except as required for arterial streets in
Article 24.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1705 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (a)   When a building or structure is within 150 feet of a residential
district zone, said building or structure shall not exceed 45 feet in height.
   (b)   When a building or structure is more than 150 feet from a residential
district zone, said building structure shall not exceed 75 feet in height.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1706 YARD REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Front yard.
      (1)   No front yard setback is required for existing uses. New structures
shall provide a front yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet measured
from the front property line, except as required for arterial streets in
Article 24.
      (2)   Where a lot or lots have double frontage, the required front yard
shall be provided on both streets.
      (3)   Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets,
there shall be a front yard on each street side of the corner lot, except the
buildable width of such lot shall not be reduced to less than 28 feet except
where necessary to provide a yard on the side street not less than five feet in
width.
      (4)   No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on
either street.
   (b)   Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of each building
and said side yard shall not be less than the average height of adjacent
buildings. The required side yards for the lot or tract shall be 30 feet.
   (c)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
25 feet or 20% of the depth of the lot, whichever is the smaller.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1707 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   For applicable sign regulations, see
Article 19.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1708 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
   For applicable parking and loading regulations, see
Article 20.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1709 LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS.
   For applicable landscaping regulations, see
Article 21.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1710 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   For applicable traffic regulations, see
Article 22.
(Ord 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 18: “I–2” HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Section
   
1-1801   Purpose and intent of district
   
1-1802   District regulations
   
1-1803   Use regulations
   
1-1804   Use limitations
   
1-1805   Intensity of use regulations
   
1-1806   Height regulations
   
1-1807   Yard regulations
   
1-1808   Sign regulations
   
1-1809   Parking and loading regulations
   
1-1810   Landscaping regulations
   
1-1811   Traffic regulations
§ 1-1801 PURPOSE AND INTENT OF DISTRICT.
   The “I–2” Heavy Industrial District is intended for the purpose of allowing
basic or primary industries which are generally not compatible with residential
and/or commercial activity. Certain extremely obnoxious or hazardous uses will
require special permission to locate in this district.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1802 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   In the “I–2” District, no building or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged, intended or
designed for other than one of the uses listed in §
1-1803.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1803 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Animal hospitals or clinics;
      (2)   Auto sales and repairs, services and painting;
      (3)   Bottling works;
      (4)   Blacksmith shops;
      (5)   Building materials, storage and sales;
      (6)   Carpenter, cabinet, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and sheet
metal shops;
      (7)   Collection and distribution of recyclable items;
      (8)   Contractors’ offices and equipment storage yards;
      (9)   Dog kennels;
      (10)   Dry cleaning and/or laundry plants;
      (11)   Feed and seed stores;
      (12)   Frozen food lockers;
      (13)   Grain elevators;
      (14)   Greenhouses and nurseries, retail and wholesale;
      (15)   Lumber yards;
      (16)   Machinery sales and storage lots;
      (17)   Manufactured home fabrication, sales and storage;
      (18)   Manufacturing or fabrication establishments which are not noxious
or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, dust, fumes, gas, odor or smoke;
      (19)   Motor vehicle and farm implement sales and storage;
      (20)   Poultry storage or slaughtering;
      (21)   Public utility and public services uses;
      (22)   Radiator repair shops;
      (23)   Service stations;
      (24)   Storage yards, providing the storage yard is completely enclosed
with a six-foot fence or wall;
      (25)   Truck and rail terminals;
      (26)   Upholstering shops;
      (27)   Vehicle body repairs, provided all repair operations are conducted
in a closed building and that all outside storage shall be enclosed by a six-
foot solid fence;
      (28)   Warehouses or storage houses; and
      (29)   Wholesale houses.
   (b)   Uses allowed by special use permit. The following uses of land may be
allowed in this district by special use permit when submitted, reviewed and
approved by the Planning and Zoning Board:
      (1)   Automobile wrecking yards, junk yards and scrap processing yards,
subject to the following:
         (A)   Located on a tract of land at least 300 feet from a residential
district zone;
         (B)   The operation shall be conducted wholly within a noncombustible
building or within an area completely surrounded on all sides by a fence, wall
or hedge. The fence, wall or hedge shall be of uniform height (at least six
feet high) and uniform texture and color and shall be so maintained by the
proprietor as to ensure maximum safety to the public and preserve the general
welfare of the neighborhood. The fence, wall or hedge shall be installed in
such a manner as to retain all scrap, junk or other material within the yard;
         (C)   No junk shall be loaded or unloaded or otherwise placed, either
temporarily or permanently, outside of the enclosing building, hedge, fence or
wall, or within the public right-of-way;
         (D)   The burning of paper, trash, junk or other waste materials shall
be permitted only after approval of the Fire Department. Said burning, when
permitted, shall be done during daylight hours only;
         (E)   No junk, salvage, scrap or other materials shall be piled or
stacked higher than the top of the required fence or wall; and
         (F)   Said use shall not be located on nor visible from an arterial
street or major street or highway.
      (2)   Manufacturing or storage of bulk oil, gas and explosives;
      (3)   Oil and gas exploration, extraction and/or production;
      (4)   Storage and warehousing of products of a highly explosive,
combustible or volatile nature;
      (5)   Mining and/or extraction of minerals;
      (6)   Wholesale and retail establishments which handle products of a
highly explosive, combustible or volatile nature;
      (7)   Petroleum refining;
      (8)   Stockyards and slaughter houses;
      (9)   Ready-mix concrete and asphalt mix plants;
      (10)   Sanitary landfills;
      (11)   Storage, warehousing and sales of bulk fertilizers; and
      (12)   Other uses which may be noxious or offensive by reason of the
emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or vibration.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1804 USE LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   No new building shall be used for residential purposes, except that a
watchperson or custodian may reside on the premises.
   (b)   No use shall be permitted that produces a noise level greater than
that noise level produced by the traffic in the area during periods of peak
flow.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1805 INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Lots in this district shall be subject to the following minimum size
requirements unless served by a public water and sewer system:
      (1)   Minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet; and
      (2)   Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet.
   (b)   A building, structure or use allowed in this district may occupy all
of the lot except for that area required for off-street parking and off-street
loading and unloading and their access roads, and as required for arterial
streets in
Article 24.
   (c)   In the case where the required off-street parking and/or loading and
unloading will be provided within the building or structure, then the structure
may cover the entire lot except as required for arterial streets in
Article 24.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1806 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (a)   When a building or structure is within 150 feet of a residential
district zone, said building or structure shall not exceed 45 feet in height.
   (b)   When a building or structure is more than 150 feet from a residential
district zone, said building or structure shall not exceed 150 feet in height
if not in conflict with airport approach zones.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1807 YARD REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Front yard.
      (1)   No front yard setback is required for existing uses. New structures
shall provide a front yard having a depth of not less than 30 feet measured
from the front property line except as required for arterial streets in
Article 24.
      (2)   Where a lot or lots have double frontage, the required front yard
shall be provided on both streets.
      (3)   Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets,
there shall be a front yard on each street side of the corner lot, except the
buildable width of such lot shall not be reduced to less than 28 feet except
where necessary to provide a yard on the side street not less than five feet in
width.
      (4)   No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on
either street.
   (b)   Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building, and
said side yard shall not be less than the average height of adjacent buildings.
For the lot or tract, side yard requirements shall be 15 feet.
   (c)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard for buildings in this district,
which rear yard shall have a depth of not less than 25 feet or 20% of the depth
of the lot, whichever is the smaller.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1808 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   For applicable sign regulations, see
Article 19.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1809 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
   For applicable parking and loading regulations, see
Article 20.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1810 LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS.
   For applicable landscaping regulations, see
Article 21.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1811 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   For applicable traffic regulations, see
Article 22.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 19: SIGN REGULATIONS
Section
   
1-1901   General requirements
   
1-1902   Specific requirements
   
1-1903   Permits and fees required
   
1-1904   Nonconforming signs
   
1-1905   Removal of signs from vacant buildings
§ 1-1901 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, move, alter, change,
repair, place or suspend, or to cause or permit to be erected, moved, altered,
changed, repaired, placed, suspended or attached, any sign in violation of this
Zoning Ordinance and this article.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to fasten, paste,
place, post, paint or attach in any way any sign, handbill, poster,
advertisement or notice of any kind or sort, whether political or otherwise, or
to cause the same to be done, in or upon any curbstone, lamp post, telephone,
telegraph or electric light pole, tree or bridge. It shall be unlawful to
paste, place, paint or attach any sign on any building, street or property of
the city; provided, however, that any property owner or the occupant of any
property abutting on any public street in the city or county may paint or stamp
the address of such property upon the curbing directly in front of the
building, or to have the same painted thereon, subject to approval by the
Building Official.
   (c)   BILLBOARDS are defined as signs advertising products or services other
than those available on the premises and which have an area of 300 square feet
or more per face. Billboards shall not be permitted under these sign
regulations in any city zones.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1902 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.
   Requirements for signs erected in the city’s zoning jurisdiction are as
follows:
   (a)   (1)   Advertising signs, other than billboards, which call attention
to an activity or product located on a different tract from the sign are
permitted in the “A–L,” “C–1,” “C–2,” “C–3,” “I–1” and “I–2” Districts only.
      (2)   In the “A–L” District, an advertising sign shall be allowed by
special use permit only when submitted, reviewed and approved by the Planning
and Zoning Board and under such conditions as the Board may impose.
         (A)   The advertising sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area for
a single- or double-faced sign; the bottom edge of the sign shall be at least
three feet above the average ground level; and the top edge not higher than ten
feet above the average ground level.
         (B)   The advertising sign shall not be located closer than 500 feet
from two or more intersecting roads. Not more than one such sign shall be
permitted on one roadside within any one mile.
         (C)   An applicant for a special use permit to erect an advertising
sign shall submit to the Board a plot plan showing the location, size and
construction details of the proposed sign installation and a letter from the
property owner indicating intent to lease said property, together with a copy
of terms of said lease. Such permit shall be issued for a period of five years,
and its renewal shall be subject to a review of the site and changed conditions
within the surrounding area.
   (b)   Business signs which call attention to an activity or product located
on the tract upon which the sign is located are permitted in the “A–L,” “C–S,”
“C–1,” “C–2,” “C–3,” “I–1” and “I–2” Districts only, except as may be expressly
permitted below;
   (c)   (1)   The gross surface area on one side of an advertising or business
sign shall not exceed the following limitations.
 
District Formula (Square Feet)                            Maximum Area Possible
         No greater than three times the lineal feet of
         frontage of the lot occupied by the building.
“A–L�Each side of the lot which abuts upon a street
“C-1”shall be considered a separate frontage, and the 300 square feet
“C–2�gross surface area of all signs located on each
         side of a building shall not exceed three times
         the lineal feet of the separate frontage
“I–1�Same as above                                    Not applicable
“I–2”
 
      (2)   In all districts, individual letters with no background shall be
measured by the minimum rectangular area necessary to encompass such letter or
by a combination of rectangles as are necessary to encompass letters of
irregular dimensions.
   (d)   Advertising or business signs in the “C–3” district shall conform to
the following.
      (1)   Advertising signs shall have no more than two display surfaces.
Each such display surface shall:
         (A)   Not contain any flashing lights;
         (B)   Be a flat plane, rectangular shape;
         (C)   Not exceed 49 square feet in sign area if a wall sign, nor 25
square feet if other than a wall sign; and
         (D)   Not exceed seven feet in height or seven feet in length.
      (2)   Advertising signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes,
drawings or pictorial representations of any kind.
      (3)   Each letter forming a word on an advertising sign shall be of a
solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color.
The background behind such lettering on the display surface of an advertising
sign shall be of a uniform and solid color.
   (e)   Building signs are permitted in the “A–L,” “C–S,” “C–1,” “C–2,” “C–3,”
“I–1” and “I–2” Districts only, subject to the following.
      (1)   The building sign shall be affixed flat against the face of the
building as opposed to perpendicular and/or double faced.
      (2)   Building signs in the “C–3” District shall conform to the following
special requirements: Building signs shall have only one display surface. Such
display surface shall:
         (A)   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
         (B)   Not exceed nine square feet in sign area;
         (C)   Not exceed three feet in height or three feet in length;
         (D)   Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the establishment;
and
         (E)   The provisions of divisions (d)(2) and (d)(3) above shall also
apply to building signs in the “C–3” District.
   (f)   Marquee and canopy signs are permitted in the “C–1” and “C–2”
Districts only. The sign must be mounted either on the front edge of the
marquee or canopy or suspended beneath (see division (j) below). Signs
suspended beneath a marquee or canopy shall not exceed eight square feet in
surface area and shall contain an announcement of the business name only. The
lowest elevation shall always be no less than eight feet above the sidewalk
surface. The canopy or marquee shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the Building Code of the city;
   (g)   A maximum of two business signs (only one on a facade) shall be
allowed for a business or profession conducted on the premises in the “I–1” and
“I–2” Districts. In the “C–1” District, a maximum of four business signs shall
be allowed, except that an additional number of signs may be allowed in the
“C–1” District by special use permit when submitted, reviewed and approved by
the Planning and Zoning Board and under such conditions as the Board may
impose;
   (h)   All signs in the “C–S,” “I–1” and “I–2” Districts shall be affixed to
or be a part of the building if within 50 feet of a residential district;
   (i)   Except as provided in division (f) above, no sign shall be permitted
to overhang a road, street or alley right-of-way, and no sign shall be located
in a manner as to constitute a traffic hazard;
   (j)   Any sign, other than one affixed flat against the face of a building,
which is located within three feet of a driveway or parking area or within 50
feet of the intersection of the centerlines of two or more streets, measured
along the adjacent curb lines, shall have its lowest elevation at least ten
feet above curb level to avoid the creation of line-of-sight or other traffic-
related obstructions;
   (k)   All lighted signs in direct vision of a traffic signal shall not be in
red, green or amber illumination;
   (l)   Non-flashing, illuminated signs shall be permitted providing said sign
shall not beam upon any street or any residential district, except as provided
in divisions (t) and (u) below. Clocks and/or thermometers installed for public
convenience and information are exempt from this requirement;
   (m)   Where a sign is illuminated by light directed upon it, the direct ray
of light shall not beam upon any existing residential district, except as
provided in divisions (t) and (u) below, or into any street;
   (n)   Flashing, moving or animated signs in the “C–S” District are not
permitted within 500 feet of a residential district or where the rays of light
from the sign beam upon any part of any residential district. In the “C–S”
District, no high intensity strobe or flashing lights shall be permitted to be
used with any sign or separately;
   (o)   In the “C–1,” “C–2,” “I–1” and “I–2” Districts, flashing, moving or
animated signs shall be permitted only upon approval of the City Building
Inspector, providing it is first determined that the location and colors will
in no way create a traffic hazard or confusion with traffic lights and with
lights on emergency vehicles and that direct rays of the sign will not be
directed into any residential district;
   (p)   Sandwich board signs are permitted in the “C–S,” “I–1” and “I–2”
Districts only, providing said sign is permanently affixed to the surface on
which it rests;
   (q)   Non-illuminated nameplates in the “A–L,” “R–S,” “R–1,” “R–2” and “R–3”
Districts shall conform to the following restrictions:
      (1)   The nameplate shall not exceed three square feet in area; and
      (2)   The nameplate shall show only the name and/or address of the
occupant.
   (r)    Non-illuminated single- or double-faced “For Sale” and “For Rent”
signs in the “R–S,” “R–1,” “R–2” and “R–3” Districts are subject to the
following regulations (except as provided in divisions (t) and (u) below).
      (1)   Only one sign shall be permitted per lot.
      (2)   No sign shall exceed four square feet in area.
      (3)   Signs shall be located no closer than five feet from any property
line and shall not obstruct the view of traffic approaching a street
intersection.
      (4)   When said sign is affixed to a building, it shall not project
higher than ten feet above the ground level.
      (5)   Ground signs shall not project higher than four feet above ground
grade.
   (s)   In the “A–L” District, only one non-illuminated “For Sale,” “For Rent”
or single- or double-faced business sign shall be permitted per residential
building lot. Accessory business signs shall not exceed 50 square feet;
   (t)   Bulletin boards and signs for churches and other public institutions
are subject to the following regulations.
      (1)   One sign or bulletin board shall be permitted on each street side
if located on the same site as the principal building.
      (2)   If a sign or bulletin board is illuminated, the lights shall be
directed away from adjoining residential uses.
      (3)   No sign or bulletin board shall exceed 24 square feet in area.
      (4)   No sign shall be located closer than eight feet from any side or
rear property line.
      (5)   A sign or bulletin board located in the front yard shall be no
closer to the street line than one-half the required front yard.
      (6)   A sign or bulletin board affixed to a building shall not project
higher than ten feet above the ground level.
      (7)   Ground signs shall be permanently anchored to the ground and shall
not exceed a height of six feet above normal grade.
      (8)   Buildings constructed on the property line prior to the adoption of
the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be allowed one identification
sign, providing said sign is a flat wall sign and permanently attached to the
building.
   (u)   Signage for manufactured home parks and multi-family developments must
meet the following requirements.
      (1)   Only one business sign per street frontage shall be permitted.
      (2)   No business sign shall exceed 40 square feet in area for each face.
      (3)   Any number of informational and directional signs shall be
permitted and shall contain no advertising or solicitation.
      (4)   All signs may be illuminated, either directly, indirectly or
internally, providing direct beams of light do not shine off the site or into
any building on the site.
      (5)   Ground signs shall not exceed ten feet in height.
   (v)   Temporary signs, whether illuminated or non-illuminated, are permitted
in the “A– L,” “C–S,” “C–1,” “C–2,” “I–1” and “I–2” Districts only (except as
provided in division (r) above).
      (1)   Only one such sign shall be permitted per location.
      (2)   Temporary signs shall not exceed 45 square feet of surface area.
      (3)   No temporary sign, except upon approval by the governing body,
shall extend over or into any street, alley, sidewalk or other public
thoroughfare. It shall not obstruct any wall opening.
      (4)   Every temporary sign shall be secured to prevent movement or
overturning in a manner approved by the Building Official.
      (5)   All electrical cords to such signs shall be located so as not to
expose them to physical damage. No such electrical cord shall be laid upon any
sidewalk, driveway or parking lot. All such wiring shall be subject to the
Electrical Code of the city.
      (6)   Temporary signs shall not exceed six feet in height and shall be so
located so as to avoid the creation of line-of-sight or other traffic-related
obstructions.
   (w)   Private informational and directional signs shall contain no
advertising or solicitation and are subject to the following provisions (except
as provided in division (u) above).
      (1)   Where a sign is illuminated by light directed upon it, the direct
rays of light shall not beam upon any part of any residential district or into
any street.
      (2)   Lighted signs in direct vision of traffic shall not be in red,
green or amber illumination.
      (3)   Flashing signs shall not be allowed.
      (4)   Only one sign shall be permitted per location.
      (5)   Signs shall not exceed 32 square feet of surface area for each
face.
      (6)   No private informational or directional sign, except upon approval
by the governing body, shall extend over or into any street, alley or sidewalk
or other public thoroughfare. It shall not obstruct any wall opening.
      (7)   Any sign, other than one affixed flat against the face of the
building and located within three feet of a driveway or parking area or within
50 feet of the intersection of two or more streets, measured along the adjacent
curb line, shall have the lowest elevation at least ten feet above the curb
level to avoid line-of-sight or other traffic-related obstructions.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1903 PERMITS AND FEES REQUIRED.
   (a)   A permit shall be required for the erection, construction or
alteration of any sign in the city’s zoning jurisdiction.
   (b)   Application for permits by other than the property owner shall be
accompanied, in each instance, by either a letter authorizing the placement of
a sign on the land or building, signed by the owner or his or her duly
authorized agent, or accompanied by a lease showing the right of the applicant.
Such application shall conform to the regulations herein provided, and no
signboard shall be erected or painted on any area until the application is
acted upon and granted.
   (c)   A charge in accordance with a schedule of fees determined by the
governing body shall be made for each permit granted.
   (d)   If a sign for which a permit is granted is not erected within 60 days
from date of the permit, the permit shall, unless renewed, become void.
   (e)   Advertising painted or placed on a structure shall be deemed subject
to these regulations if permanent and over eight square feet in area.
   (f)   All signs shall be constructed, located and placed in accordance with
local ordinances and the laws of the state.
   (g)   Permits, except for permits for temporary signs, are issued for the
life of the sign so long as it is kept in good condition and changing
conditions do not make it a hazard or undesirable to adjoining property owners.
In such case, the city may direct its removal.
   (h)   Permits for temporary signs shall be issued for up to 30 days plus one
renewal, for a total of 60 days maximum per year.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1904 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   All advertising signs, business signs or bulletin boards not in accordance
or in compliance with this article which were in existence as of the date of
adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be exempt from this
article, except that upon the change of ownership of any building or property
having a nonconforming sign which was in existence prior to the adoption date
of the ordinance codified in this article, or upon remodeling or renovating of
the exterior of any building to the extent of greater than 50%, the
nonconforming sign shall be brought into conformity with this article and any
other city, state or federal regulations.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-1905 REMOVAL OF SIGNS FROM VACANT BUILDINGS.
   Signs located on vacant buildings shall be removed by the property owner or
his or her authorized agent within 30 days after said premises are vacated.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 20: PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
Section
   
1-2001   Requirements
   
1-2002   Plans and approval required
   
1-2003   Construction requirements
   
1-2004   Layout and design requirements
   
1-2005   Maintenance
   
1-2006   Performance
   
1-2007   Application
§ 1-2001 REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Schedule of requirements. Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, when any building or structure is hereafter erected or structurally
altered to the extent of increasing the floor area by 50% or more, accessory
off-street parking and/or loading spaces shall be provided as required by the
following schedule, except that these requirements shall not apply in the “C–1”
Commercial District.
SCHEDULE OF MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Structures and Uses Minimum Off-Street Parking Minimum Off-Street Loading
                    Regulations                Requirements
SCHEDULE OF MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Structures and Uses       Minimum Off-Street Parking Minimum Off-Street Loading
                          Regulations                Requirements
                          2 spaces per 2 seats or
                          seating spaces, or 1 space
Adult uses                per 100 square feet of     1 space per establishment
                          floor space, whichever is
                          greater
                          5 spaces per lane, plus
Bowling centers           required spaces for other  1 space per establishment
                          uses in association
Churches, synagogues,     1 space per 4 seats in     None required
temples                   main unit of worship
Convalescent and rest     1 space per 3 beds, plus 1 1 space per establishment
home services             space per employee
Drive-up facilities: bank 60 feet of waiting space
teller windows, fast food ahead of facility (1 space None required
pickup, similar           is 20 feet)
facilities
Eating and drinking       Parking spaces equal to    2 spaces per establishment
places                    30% of capacity in persons
Educational uses, adult   Parking spaces equal to
day care and day care,    20% of capacity in         2 spaces per structure
primary schools           students or persons served
Educational uses, all     Parking spaces equal to
other                     40% of capacity in         2 spaces per structure
                          students
                          8 spaces per reposing room
Funeral homes and chapels plus 1 space per 4 seats   2 spaces per establishment
                          in chapel
                          2 spaces in addition to
Home occupations          those required for the     None required
                          dwelling
Hospitals                 1 space per 2 beds plus 1  3 spaces per structure
                          per each employee
Hotels                    1 space per rental unit    1 space per establishment
Indoor recreation
centers: fitness clubs,   1 space per 125 square
arcades, skating rinks,   feet of gross floor area   1 space per establishment
bingo parlors, similar
facilities
Industrial uses           1 space per 2 employees on 2 spaces per establishment
                          largest shift
Libraries                 1 space per 500 square     1 space per structure
                          feet of floor area
Lodging and boarding      1 space per 2 rental units None required
houses
Manufactured home parks   2 spaces per dwelling unit None required
Medical clinics           5 spaces per staff doctor  None required
                          or dentist
Motels                    1 space per rental unit    None required
Offices                   1 space per 250 square     None required
                          feet of gross floor area
Private clubs and lodges  1 space per 200 square     1 space per establishment
                          feet of floor area
Residential structures    2 spaces per dwelling unit None required
(multi-family)
Residential structures    2 spaces per dwelling unit None required
(single-family)
Retail sales              1 space per 200 square     1 space per establishment
establishments            feet gross floor area
Roadside stands           4 spaces per establishment None required
Service establishments    1 space per 200 square     1 space per establishment
                          feet gross floor area
Theaters, auditoriums,    1 space per 4 people in    1 space per establishment
places of assembly        designed capacity
Veterinary establishments 3 spaces per staff doctor  None required
Wholesaling and           1 space per 2 employees    2 spaces per establishment
distribution operations
 
   (b)   Off-street parking lots. Off-street parking lots for single- or
multiple-family dwellings, home occupations, schools, churches and similar
places of public assembly, hospitals, nursing homes, boarding and lodging
houses, dormitories or fraternity or sorority houses shall not be located in
any required front yard area.
   (c)   Off-street parking spaces. Off-street parking spaces for uses required
in the “C–3,” “I–1” and “I–2” Districts shall be located in back of the
required front yard line and shall be on the same lot as the building they
serve.
   (d)   Exterior storage.
      (1)   All-weather, dust-free surfacing of areas for exterior storage of
business vehicles, equipment and materials is not required.
      (2)   Exterior storage of business vehicles, equipment and materials
shall not occur upon required off-street parking.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2002 PLANS AND APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   (a)   For all uses other than single-family residential structures, plans
showing layout and design of all off-street parking areas shall be submitted to
and approved by the Building Official prior to issuing a building permit.
Additionally, provisions for stormwater drainage into an established drainage
ditch or covered storm sewer system on public right-of-way shall be required
for all parking lots more than 2,000 square feet in area. Such provisions shall
be consistent with and in consideration of the city’s overall storm drainage
system and future plans. Before approving any parking layout, the Building
Official shall satisfy himself or herself that parking spaces provided and
storm drainage design is usable and meets the standard design criteria of the
city.
   (b)   In the case of multiple uses associated with a site, the Building
Official may calculate the parking requirement as the accumulative requirement
of the separate uses unless it is determined that the uses generate overlapping
parking demand.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2003 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Parking lots for other than single-family dwellings that are 2,000
square feet in area or smaller may be constructed of gravel to a depth of four
inches as a minimum standard.
   (b)   Parking lots for other than single-family dwellings that are larger
than 2,000 square feet in area shall be all-weather, dust-free and constructed
of the following materials or combinations thereof:
      (1)   Concrete;
      (2)   Asphalt; and
      (3)   Prime and seal over aggregate base.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2004 LAYOUT AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Area. A required off-street parking space shall be at least nine feet
in width and at least 20 feet in length, exclusive of access drives or aisles,
ramps and columns.
   (b)   Access. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly
upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide a safe and
efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space.
   (c)   Design. Off-street parking spaces shall comply with the design
standards relating to curb length, stall depth, driveway width, island width,
barriers and ingress and egress as contained in the off-street parking
standards of this article.
   (d)   Surfacing. All open off-street parking and loading areas shall be
graded and paved or otherwise improved with an approved concrete, asphalt or
other dust-free surface.
   (e)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking and
loading areas shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way
as not to interfere with the residential use.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2005 MAINTENANCE.
   No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in
association with any off-street parking facilities. All parking lot surfaces
shall be maintained with a smooth, dust-free surface.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2006 PERFORMANCE.
   In lieu of construction of the required parking lot, the governing body may
accept a corporate surety bond, cashier’s check, escrow account or other
security of a type and in an amount approved by the governing body. Such
security shall be conditioned upon the actual completion of such work or
improvement within the specified time and shall be enforceable by the governing
body by all equitable means.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2007 APPLICATION.
   This article shall not apply to uses existing as of the date of adoption of
the ordinance codified in this chapter.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 21: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
1-2101   Minimum landscape requirements
§ 1-2101 MINIMUM LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS.
   All property within the zoning jurisdiction of the city shall hereinafter be
subject to the following minimum requirements.
   (a)   The open, unpaved areas of each property shall be graded to provide
for the adequate drainage of all stormwater and shall be free of hazards,
nuisances or unsanitary conditions.
   (b)   Open, unpaved areas shall be appropriately landscaped to provide an
attractive appearance to enhance the character of the neighborhood.
   (c)   No vegetation shall overhang a public street or sidewalk below a
height of ten feet or obstruct views of pedestrian and vehicular movements.
   (d)   Where districts “PUD,” “M–P,” “C–S,” “C–2,” “I–1” and “I–2” adjoin
“R–S,” “R–1,” “R–2” and “R–3” Districts, they shall be appropriately separated
by a landscaped area of at least 15 feet wide or a decorative architectural
screen of at least six feet high. Additionally, these requirements shall apply
where districts “C–S,” “C–2,” “I–1” and “I–2” Districts adjoin the “M–P” and
“PUD” Districts. A landscaped area and decorative architectural screen shall
not be required where these uses are separated by a public street or alley.
   (e)   Parking areas abutting public walkways or streets shall be
appropriately separated by a landscaped area or a decorative architectural
screen. The landscaped area or architectural screen shall not exceed three feet
in height.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 22: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
1-2201   Minimum requirements for traffic regulations
§ 1-2201 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   All business properties hereinafter improved shall include provision for
vehicular access in accordance with the following: plans for the erection or
structural alteration of any business use dependent on vehicles entering onto
the business site or parking lot shall be approved by the Building Official,
who may require such changes therein in relation to yards, location of curb
cuts, width of drives, location of signs, accessory uses and buildings and the
construction of buildings as he or she may deem best suited to ensure safety,
to minimize traffic difficulties and to safeguard adjacent properties.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 23: BUILDINGS AND USES AFFECTED
Section
   
1-2301   Minimum building requirements
   
1-2302   Buildings and structures moved into districts
   
1-2303   Elevation
§ 1-2301 MINIMUM BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   No building or structure shall be erected, enlarged, reconstructed or moved
into the zoning jurisdiction with less than the following.
   (a)   Dwelling units.
      (1)   All dwelling units shall provide a minimum floor area, exclusive of
porches, breezeways and garages, as follows.
 
Type of Dwelling Unit Minimum Area
Multiple-family       480 square feet per unit
Single-family         600 square feet
Two-family            600 square feet per unit
 
      (2)   Every dwelling unit shall be provided with at least one water
closet, which water closet shall be located within the dwelling and in a room
which affords privacy.
      (3)   Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink which is connected
to running water and an approved sewer system.
      (4)   Every dwelling unit shall be enclosed with an exterior wall surface
other than tar paper or galvanized metal.
      (5)   No basement or cellar shall be occupied for residential purposes
until the main portion, aboveground, is completed.
   (b)   Bed and breakfast inns. All units shall be served with an approved
public water supply and an approved public sanitary sewer system.
   (c)   Motels.
      (1)   The number of motel units permitted on a tract of land shall not
exceed the number obtained by dividing the total square feet of area of the
site by 1,500.
      (2)   Motels shall be served with an approved public water supply and
approved public sanitary sewer system.
      (3)   Each motel unit shall contain not less than 200 square feet of
floor area.
   (d)   Tents. No tent, except play tents for children, shall be used for any
purpose except those authorized by the governing body.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004; Ord. 337, passed 10-6-2020)
§ 1-2302 BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES MOVED INTO DISTRICTS.
   Buildings and structures may be moved into various districts, providing:
   (a)   The proposed use conforms with the district zoning regulations of the
district into which it is to be moved;
   (b)   The building or structure meets building, fire, safety and health
regulations; and
   (c)   The Planning and Zoning Board finds that the building or structure
will not devaluate properties in the area where the structure is proposed to be
moved.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2303 ELEVATION.
   Unless otherwise directed by the City Building Inspector, the first floor
elevation of a building or group of buildings shall be at least 18 inches above
the grade of the center of the street or roadway.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 24: ADDITIONAL HEIGHT, AREA AND USE REGULATIONS
Section
   
1-2401   Qualifications and supplementations to district regulations
   
1-2402   Fences
   
1-2403   Building setback lines
   
1-2404   Lots of record
   
1-2405   Canopies and marquees
   
1-2406   Temporary uses permitted
   
1-2407   Wind energy conversion systems (WECS)
   
1-2408   Joint driveways and garages
   
1-2409   Protection of sewer and other utility lines
   
1-2410   Mining and extraction of minerals
   
1-2411   Vacated streets and alleys
   
1-2412   Sanitary sewerage requirements
   
1-2413   Wireless communications towers
§ 1-2401 QUALIFICATIONS AND SUPPLEMENTATIONS TO DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   The regulations hereinafter set forth in this section qualify or supplement,
as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this
chapter.
   (a)   In districts where public buildings, semi-public buildings, public
service buildings, hospitals, institutional buildings, schools and churches,
and similar places of worship, are permitted, one foot of additional height
will be permitted for each one foot of additional building setback provided.
   (b)   Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator headhouses, fire towers, grain
elevators, monuments, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water
towers, ornamental towers and spires, church steeples, radio and television
towers or necessary mechanical appurtenances which do not conflict with airport
approach zones may be erected to a height not to exceed 150 feet.
   (c)   (1)   Accessory buildings may be built in a side or rear yard, but
such accessory buildings shall not be nearer than the main building to any
front lot line. When any accessory building is constructed in a rear yard, it
shall not encroach on any required utility easements and shall not be located
any closer to the rear or side lot lines of the property than three feet,
except that where vehicular access to a garage is perpendicular to the alley
line, a setback of at least 15 feet from the alley line shall be required. No
accessory building shall cover more than 30% of the required rear yard.
      (2)   Accessory buildings shall be no larger than a total of 1,500 square
feet per primary residence and shall not be used for dwelling purposes. No
galvanized metal, in any form, shall be permitted on accessory buildings, and
no Quonset or arch-type building of any kind shall be allowed. No accessory
building shall exceed ten feet to top plate or 20 feet in overall height.
   (d)   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no accessory
building shall be used for dwelling purposes.
   (e)   The setback line for yard requirements shall be determined by
measuring the horizontal distance from the property line to the nearest
architectural projection of the building.
   (f)   Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes; fire-proof outside stairways
and balconies opening upon fire towers; and the ordinary projections of
chimneys and flues into the rear yard may be permitted by the City Building
Inspector for a distance of not more than three-and-one-half feet, provided the
same are so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation.
   (g)   For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a two-family dwelling or
a multiple-family dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one
lot.
   (h)   Temporary buildings and temporary construction signs that are used in
conjunction with construction work may be permitted in any district during the
period that the building is being constructed, but such temporary building and/
or sign shall be removed upon completion of the construction work.
   (i)   No side yards are required where dwelling units are erected above
commercial structures, and front, side and rear yard requirements shall not
apply to the interior walls of dwelling units established under the State
Apartment Ownership Act, being K.S.A. 58-3101 et seq., or under the State
Townhouse Ownership Act, being K.S.A. 58-3701 et seq.
   (j)   Whenever the number of employees is restricted in connection with any
use in the commercial districts, such maximum number applies only to employees
principally engaged in processing, selling or treating materials or products on
the premises and not to employees engaged in delivery or off-site similar
activities.
   (k)   Electronic communications towers shall be permitted in any commercial,
industrial or agricultural district, providing the height of said towers do not
conflict with any airport approach or landing zone or with any other ordinance,
and providing that towers within 150 feet of a residential district shall not
exceed 80 feet in height. (Also see §
1-2413, wireless communications towers.)
   (l)   On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be erected,
placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede
vision between a height of three and ten feet above the centerline grades of
the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner
lots and a line joining points along said street lines 90 feet from the point
of the centerline intersection.
   (m)   In any district, more than one structure housing a permitted or
permissible principal use may be erected on a zoning lot, provided that yard
and other requirements of this chapter shall be met for each structure as
though it were on an individual lot.
   (n)   Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent
to a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all
structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access
for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking.
   (o)   Privately owned swimming pools shall be enclosed as appropriate to
assure privacy and safety.
   (p)   Major recreational equipment such as boats, boat trailers, travel
trailers, pick-up campers or coaches, camping buses or converted trucks and
tent trailers shall not be stored in a residential district except within an
enclosed building, or behind the front yard setback line.
      (1)   On a corner lot, such equipment shall be kept back of the front
yard setback lines on both street sides.
      (2)   No such recreational equipment shall be utilized for living,
sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked on a residential lot or in any
location not approved for such use.
   (q)   Conversion of a two-family or multiple-family structure to
individually owned single-family dwelling units may be permitted, subject to
the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations and to the following.
      (1)   An application for such unit conversion shall be filed for review
and comment by city staff and the Planning Commission and approval by the
governing body. Such application shall be accompanied by the following
information as a minimum:
         (A)   A plot plan showing site and structure arrangements and proposed
replatting;
         (B)   A full legal description of the subject property, including
legal descriptions of proposed individual properties after replatting;
         (C)   A description of proposed structural and utility alterations to
provide for individual services and maintenance;
         (D)   A description of proposed public access patterns, both vehicular
and pedestrian;
         (E)   A copy of protective covenants which shall be written to run
with the land, in which shall be specified methods for providing for the
maintenance of shared property and/or easements, responsibilities for shared
expenses and continued use of the property for specified purposes. Such
covenants shall be written to provide for the long-term maintenance and use of
the premises for residential purposes only, within the overall context of
neighborhood development; and
         (F)   Any other supplementary information as may be required to assess
short- and long-term neighborhood impacts associated with the proposed
conversion.
      (2)   The applicant for unit conversion shall submit with his or her
application a consent agreement signed by 75% of all owners of property within
200 feet of the premises whereon the unit conversion is proposed.
      (3)   Where a two-family or multiple-family structure is converted to
individually owned, single-family dwelling units, a separation of utility
service lines is required from each individually owned, single-family dwelling
unit to a public utility line or to a utility line, private well, septic system
or lagoon which is located in an area of a lot or building that is owned by or
accessible to a party legally responsible for the maintenance of utility lines
or systems on behalf of the owners of each converted single-family dwelling
unit.
      (4)   The Planning Commission and the governing body shall not approve an
application for conversion from a two-family or multiple-family structure to
individually-owned, single-family dwelling units where it is determined that an
existing or proposed utility service line, private well, septic system or
lagoon exists or is proposed to exist in an area where the maintenance of said
utilities would require entry into an individually-owned dwelling unit.
      (5)   All conversions of two-family or multiple-family structures to
individually-owned, single-family dwelling units are subject to all applicable
city codes, including building permit application and inspection procedures.
      (6)   The above procedures and regulations are applicable even where the
conversion does not require new construction.
      (7)   After reviewing a conversion application for compliance with all
applicable city codes, the Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer shall
report to the Planning Commission and the governing body all details of
noncompliance with city codes.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004; Ord. 264, passed 3-13-2006; Ord. 335, passed 10-6-
2020)
§ 1-2402 FENCES.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided in other codes, ordinances or
resolutions, the following regulations shall apply to the construction of
fences.
   (a)   No fence shall be constructed closer to the street than the front
property line established for the district in which such fence is to be
erected, except that fences installed upon public or parochial school grounds
or in public parks and public playgrounds may be permitted by special use
permit approved by the Planning and Zoning Board without any front yard setback
limitation, providing the fence does not encroach on any required utility
easements or cause any vision impairment for vehicles.
   (b)   No fence shall be constructed which will constitute a traffic hazard
and no permit shall be granted for the construction of a fence unless the City
Building Inspector has certified that the proposed fence will not constitute a
traffic hazard.
   (c)   No fence shall be constructed in such a manner or be of such design as
to be hazardous or dangerous to persons or animals.
   (d)   No person shall erect or maintain any fence which will materially
damage the adjacent property by obstructing the view, shutting out the sunlight
or hindering ventilation, or any fence which shall adversely affect the public
health, safety and welfare.
   (e)   (1)   No fence, except fences erected upon public or parochial school
grounds or in public parks and in public playgrounds, shall be constructed of a
height greater than six feet; provided, however, that the Planning and Zoning
Board may, by exception, authorize the construction of a fence higher than six
feet if the Board finds the public welfare is preserved.
      (2)   All fences constructed in a front yard of a residential district
shall not exceed a height of more than three feet unless otherwise stated in §
1-2401(l).
      (3)   A fence of no greater height than six feet will be allowed from the
furthest edge from the back lot line of the existing structure on the secondary
front yard on the property line. This fence cannot violate the line of the site
triangle at the intersection of the streets as shown in the reference image in
the definition of site triangle in §
1-105.
   (f)   All fences shall conform to the construction standards of the building
code and other applicable ordinances and resolutions.
   (g)   Fences shall be exempt from the provisions of §
1-2403; however, the city retains the right to remove any fence for right-of-
way purposes.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004; Ord. 264, passed 3-13-2006; Ord. 335, passed 10-6-
2020)
§ 1-2403 BUILDING SETBACK LINES.
   Building setback lines are hereby established for all arterial streets, as
shown on the adopted Major Street Plan in the City Comprehensive Plan. The
setback lines, as established in this section, shall be held to the minimum for
the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience
and economy in the process of development and shall conform with the following
requirements.
   (a)   Arterial streets. No building or structure which fronts or sides on an
arterial street shall be located nearer to the centerline of the arterial
street than the sum of the required front yard (in feet) plus 50 feet, except
as provided in §
1-2402.
   (b)   Common line of sight provision. Except on a corner lot where 40% or
more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets
is developed with buildings that have observed a front yard lesser in depth
than that herein required, then:
      (1)   Interior lot. Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land
that is other than a corner lot, and within 150 feet of existing buildings on
both sides, the minimum front yard shall be a line drawn between the two
closest front corners of the adjacent buildings on the two sides; or
      (2)   Corner lot. Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land
which is a corner lot or is within 150 feet of an existing building on one side
only, such building shall be erected according to regulations set forth in the
appropriate district.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004; Ord. 275, passed 11-10-2007)
§ 1-2404 LOTS OF RECORD.
   A lot, or group of lots, which was platted and recorded in the office of the
Register of Deeds prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter may be used for any purpose permitted in the district in which it is
located; provided, however, that no residential building permit shall be issued
for the construction of a residential structure that does not conform with the
minimum yard and height requirements unless specifically authorized by the
Planning and Zoning Board.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2405 CANOPIES AND MARQUEES.
   A canopy, marquee or balcony may be permitted to “overhang a public way” in
Districts “C–1” and “C–2,” providing:
   (a)   The canopy, marquee or balcony is constructed and maintained in
accordance with the City Building Code and other applicable codes, ordinances
and resolutions;
   (b)   No portion of the canopy, marquee or balcony, including supports,
shall be less than eight feet above the level of the sidewalk or other public
way except as required by §
1-2401(l); and
   (c)   The canopy, marquee or balcony shall not extend beyond a point two
feet inside the curb line of a public street.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2406 TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED.
   (a)   Christmas tree sales. Christmas tree sales in any business or
industrial district for a period not to exceed 60 days. Display of Christmas
trees need not comply with the yard and setback requirements of these
regulations provided that no trees shall be displayed which would obstruct
intersection sight distance requirements;
   (b)   Contractors’ offices. Contractors’ offices and equipment sheds
(containing no sleeping or cooking accommodations) accessory to a construction
project, and to continue only during the duration of such project;
   (c)   Real estate offices. Real estate offices (containing no sleeping or
cooking accommodations unless located in a model dwelling unit) incidental to a
new housing development, to continue only until the sale or lease of all
dwelling units in the development;
   (d)   Carnivals and circuses. A carnival or circus, but only in a “C–1,”
“C–2,” “I–1” or “I–2” District, and then only for a period that does not exceed
one week. Such use need not comply with the front yard requirements, provided
that structures or equipment which might block the view of operators of motor
vehicles on the public streets shall conform to the requirements for the street
intersection sight distance as defined by these regulations;
   (e)   Seasonal sales events and festivals. Seasonal sales events and
festivals in any district subject to any special requirements of the governing
body; and
   (f)   Additionally. Other special temporary uses as may be permitted by the
governing body and under such conditions as they may require.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2407 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS).
   Wind energy conversion systems (WECS) may be permitted, subject to the
following requirements.
   (a)   (1)   The minimum distance from any lot line to any tower, pole or
other support structure of the wind energy conversion system shall be
established by the following minimum standards.
Rotor Diameter (Feet) Setback Distance (Feet)
Rotor Diameter (Feet) Setback Distance (Feet)
5                     100
10                    165
15                    220
20                    270
25                    310
30                    340
35                    365
40                    385
 
      (2)   Intermediate rotor size distances shall be interpolated from the
above values.
   (b)   The WECS shall not be located in any required yard.
   (c)   The WECS shall not cause interference to microwave communications or
radio and television reception in the area. Noise levels measured at the lot
line shall not exceed 60 dBA in a residential zone.
   (d)   To limit climbing access to a WECS tower, or other support structure,
a six-foot-high fence with locking portal shall be place around the WECS
support, or if a tower is utilized, the tower climbing apparatus shall be
limited to no lower than 12 feet from the ground, or the WECS support may be
mounted on a rooftop.
   (e)   All blades of a WECS shall be constructed of non-metallic substances.
If the applicant can prove, in written form, that no electromagnetic
interference will result, a metal content of up to 25% will be acceptable.
   (f)   The WECS shall be located in compliance with the guidelines of the
Federal Aviation Regulations with regard to airport approach and clearance
around VOR and DVOR stations.
   (g)   Height of the WECS shall not exceed the maximum height restriction in
the zone where it is located by more than 20 feet. The height of the WECS shall
be measured at the center of the blade diameter.
   (h)   Data pertaining to the WECS’ safety and structural integrity shall be
certified by a licensed engineer and filed with the building permit
application. The tower or support and top adapter shall meet the restrictions
specified in the City Building Code.
   (i)   The WECS, if interconnected to a utility system, shall meet the
requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth in the electric
utility’s current service regulations applicable to WECS.
   (j)   A plot plan shall be submitted with the application for building
permit showing the proposed location and height of the WECS, fencing and all
existing buildings within 200 feet of the exterior lot lines.
   (k)   The owner/operator shall provide covenants, easements or similar
documentation to assure sufficient wind to operate the WECS unless adequate
accessibility to the wind is provided by the site.
   (l)   The owner/operator shall certify that the WECS does not violate any
covenants of record.
   (m)   The applicant shall provide a certificate of liability insurance.
Annually, the owner/operator shall present evidence to the Zoning Administrator
that the liability insurance is still in effect.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2408 JOINT DRIVEWAYS AND GARAGES.
   Where joint driveways and joint garages were in existence prior to the
passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it shall be permissible to
repair, reconstruct or enlarge joint garages, and it is not necessary to
conform to the provisions governing internal lot lines.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2409 PROTECTION OF SEWER AND OTHER UTILITY LINES.
   No building or addition thereto shall be erected over or across any public
sewer or utility line, nor upon any platted or recorded easement, unless
permission is granted in writing by the respective party whose lines are
involved.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2410 MINING AND EXTRACTION OF MINERALS.
   In districts where mineral extraction is a permitted use, the following
shall apply.
   (a)   In the case of open excavation, there will be required a substantial
fence with suitable gates completely enclosing the portion of the property in
which the excavation is located, and such fence shall be located 40 feet or
more from the edge of such excavation.
   (b)   The slope of the material in such sand, gravel or other pit shall not
exceed the normal angle of repose of such materials, and the plane of such
angle of repose shall not come nearer than 40 feet to any property lines.
   (c)   In the case of a quarry or other excavation in rock, there will be
required a substantial fence, with suitable gates at all points a distance of
40 feet or more from the face of any quarry walls.
   (d)   Rock crushers, cement plants or other crushing, grinding, polishing or
cutting machinery or other physical or chemical processes for treating the
product of such quarry may be prohibited.
   (e)   No such quarry shall be nearer than 40 feet to any property boundary
line, street or highway right-of-way line.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2411 VACATED STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   Whenever any street, alley or other public right-of-way is vacated by
official action of the governing body, any zoning districts adjoining each side
of any such vacated street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended
to the center of such vacated street or alley, and all area included in such
adjusted boundary shall then and thenceforth be subject to all regulations of
the extended districts.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2412 SANITARY SEWERAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   All new construction of residential units or relocation of residential
units, manufactured housing and all other buildings which would generate sewage
shall be connected to a public sewer system, where available, or provided with
a private system meeting the following requirements.
   (a)   All percolation rates shall be based on the standard test procedures
and shall be the responsibility of the person applying for a permit.
   (b)   Septic tanks constructed of concrete, metal, concrete blocks or other
material of a similar nature, the size of which shall be:
      (1)   Two-bedroom home: 1,000 gallons minimum;
      (2)   Three-bedroom home: 1,250 gallons minimum; and
      (3)   Four-bedroom home: 1,500 gallons minimum.
   (c)   All waste water must run through septic tanks, including laundry,
kitchen, lavatory and the like.
   (d)   Individual laterals shall not be less than 90 feet or more than 100
feet in length. There shall be a separation of six feet between laterals.
   (e)   Trench bottom and tile lines shall have a fall of two to four inches
per 100 feet and shall be ten inches in depth.
   (f)   Lateral lines shall be constructed for continual flow, or if desired,
use of absorption fields will be accepted.
   (g)   An absorption field not less than six feet long and four feet wide,
and not more than six feet deep, shall be available at the end of each lateral
line. The last tile must lie in the absorption field with high rock below and
above the tile with building or tar paper over the grade, and backfill of earth
over paper, with an overfill of four to six inches for settlement.
   (h)   The owner is required to provide a sketch with percolation times to
the County Health Department for evaluation and recommendations prior to
receiving a permit for construction of an individual sewage system.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2413 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS.
   Wireless communications and other telecommunications towers may be
permitted, subject to the following requirements.
   (a)   The minimum distance from any lot or property line to any tower, pole
or other support structure shall be the total maximum height of the tower, pole
or other support structure plus attached antennas.
   (b)   Anchors, guy wires and other accessory structures may not be located
in any required yard.
   (c)   The tower, pole or other support structure shall not exceed the
maximum height restriction in the zone where it is located by more than 30
feet, unless technical data indicating a greater requirement for adequate
reception is provided.
   (d)   Unauthorized access to the tower, pole or other support structure,
including anchors and guy wires, shall be limited by provision of an
immediately surrounding six-foot-high fence with locking portal. Tower climbing
apparatus shall be limited to no lower than 12 feet from the ground.
   (e)   Telecommunications towers shall be located in compliance with the
guidelines of the Federal Aviation Regulations with regard to airport approach
and clearance around VOR and DVOR stations.
   (f)   The tower or other support structure shall be designed to permit the
addition of antenna array for at least two additional service providers so as
to limit the number of permitted structures in the zoning jurisdiction.
   (g)   Information certifying safety and structural integrity of the tower
and other support structures shall be certified by a licensed engineer and
filed with the permit application.
   (h)   When located within 1,000 feet of a residential district, the tract
shall be appropriately landscaped to produce a visually pleasing appearance.
   (i)   An application for a permit to site a wireless telecommunications
facility shall be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   A site development plan, including landscape provisions and
topographic information;
      (2)   A technical description of the tower and the reasons for its design
and location;
      (3)   An explanation of need for a separate tower as opposed to an
existing facility;
      (4)   Information establishing structural integrity and capacity for
additional antenna array;
      (5)   Proof of ownership or authorization to use the proposed site;
      (6)   Copies of any necessary easements;
      (7)   A certificate of liability insurance; and
      (8)   An affidavit certifying that space on the proposed tower will be
made available to future users when technically feasible.
   (j)   The applicant shall also provide such other additional support
information as may be determined by the city.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 25: NONCONFORMING USES
Section
   
1-2501   Nonconforming uses which may be continued
   
1-2502   Nonconforming uses which may not be continued
§ 1-2501 NONCONFORMING USES WHICH MAY BE CONTINUED.
   (a)   The following lawful nonconforming uses of land may be continued:
      (1)   A use of land which existed prior to the effective date of this
Zoning Ordinance;
      (2)   A use of land existing at the time of the annexation; and
      (3)   A use of land existing at the time an amendment is made to the
Zoning Ordinance which changes such land to a more restricted district or
extends the jurisdiction of the Zoning Ordinance to the land use.
   (b)   The lawful use of a building located upon any land, except as provided
in §
1-2502, may be continued although such use does not conform with the provisions
of this Zoning Ordinance, and such use may be continued throughout the building
if no structural alterations are made therein, except those required by law or
ordinance. If no structural alterations are made in such building, a
nonconforming use of the building may be changed to another nonconforming use
of the same or more restricted use classification. The foregoing provisions
shall also apply to any uses of buildings which may be made nonconforming by
any subsequent amendment or change of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (c)   Normal maintenance and incidental repair, or replacement, installation
or relocation of nonbearing walls, nonbearing partitions, fixtures, wiring or
plumbing, may be performed on any structure that is devoted in whole or in part
to a nonconforming use.
   (d)   Nothing in these regulations shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of a structure in accordance
with an order of a public official who is charged with protecting the public
safety who declares such structure to be unsafe and orders its restoration to a
safe condition.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2502 NONCONFORMING USES WHICH MAY NOT BE CONTINUED.
   (a)   When a nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned for a period of
six consecutive months, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished or
resumed, and any subsequent use or occupancy of such land shall comply with the
regulations.
   (b)   No use which is accessory to a principal nonconforming use shall
continue after such principal use shall cease or terminate.
   (c)   No nonconforming structure shall be moved, in whole or in part, for
any distance whatsoever to any other location on the same or any other lot
unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located after being moved.
   (d)   Whenever a nonconforming use of a building has been changed to a more
conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming
use.
   (e)   (1)   A nonconforming building which has been damaged to the extent of
more than 50% of its fair market value by fire, explosion, act of God or the
public enemy shall not be restored except in accordance with all zoning
regulations of the zoning district.
      (2)   In the event a question may arise on the fair market value of such
a building, the same shall be determined by three appraisers: one shall be
selected by the governing body, one shall be selected by the owner of the
building and the third appraiser shall be selected by the two selected
appraisers. If the first two appraisers selected cannot agree on the selection
of the third such appraiser, the judge of the appropriate court shall be
requested to appoint the third appraiser. The decision of the appraisers, or a
majority of them, shall be final and conclusive and shall be binding upon all
concerned to the purpose of determining whether the damaged property may be
restored. The cost of such appraisal shall be paid by the property owner.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 26: ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND PENALTY
Section
   
1-2601   Enforcement
   
1-2602   Certificate of zoning compliance
   
1-2603   Plans
   
1-2604   Violation and penalty
§ 1-2601 ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Zoning Official shall administer and enforce this Zoning Ordinance.
Appeals from the decision of the City Zoning Official may be made to the
Planning and Zoning Board.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2602 CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.
   (a)   Subsequent to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, no change
in the use or occupancy of land nor any change in the use or occupancy of an
existing building shall be made, nor shall any new building be occupied, until
a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the City Zoning Official.
The certificate of zoning compliance shall state that the land and/or building
complies with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (b)   No excavation, erection or alteration of any building shall be
permitted before an application has been made and approved for a building
permit, and no building or premises shall be occupied until a certificate of
zoning compliance is issued.
   (c)   A record of all certificates of zoning compliance shall be kept on
file in the office of the City Zoning Official, and copies shall be furnished
for $2 on request by any person having an interest in the land or building
affected.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2603 PLANS.
   Each application for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by a plan in
duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built
upon; the size, shape and location of the building to be erected; and such
other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this
Zoning Ordinance. A record of applications and plans shall be kept in the
office of the City Zoning Official.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2604 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (a)   The owner or agent of a building or premises in or upon which a
violation of any provision of this Zoning Ordinance has been committed or shall
exist; or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises in or
upon which a violation has been committed or shall exist; or the agent,
architect, building contractor or any other person who commits, takes part or
assists in any violation, or who maintains any building or premises in or upon
which a violation has been committed or shall exist, shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment for not more than six months for
each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every day that
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this Zoning Ordinance, the
appropriate authorities of said area, in addition to other remedies, may
institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
conversion, maintenance or use, or to correct or abate such violation, or to
prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 27: PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD
Section
   
1-2701   Planning and Zoning Board established
   
1-2702   Election of officers
   
1-2703   Rules of procedure
   
1-2704   Meetings
   
1-2705   Records
   
1-2706   Filing fee
   
1-2707   Public hearing and notice
   
1-2708   Powers and jurisdictions
   
1-2709   Procedure
   
1-2710   Variances to this Zoning Ordinance
   
1-2711   Exceptions to this Zoning Ordinance
   
1-2712   Performance
§ 1-2701 PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   A Planning and Zoning Board is hereby established. As provided by K.S.A. 12-
759, the Planning Commission is hereby designated as the Planning and Zoning
Board. All references herein to the Planning and Zoning Board, or “Board,”
shall be understood to mean the Planning Commission acting in its capacity as
the Planning and Zoning Board.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004; Ord. 259, passed 3-8-2005)
§ 1-2702 ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
   (a)   The Chairperson of the Planning Commission shall also preside over the
proceedings wherein the Planning Commission is functioning as the Planning and
Zoning Board.
   (b)   The Planning Commission may appoint a secretary for the purpose of
maintaining records of appeal proceedings. Said Secretary may be a member or a
city officer or employee of the city.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004; Ord. 259, passed 3-8-2005)
§ 1-2703 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The Board shall adopt bylaws and rules of procedure for the conduct of
business.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2704 MEETINGS.
   Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at
such other times as the Board may determine.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2705 RECORDS.
   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing evidence presented,
findings of fact by the Board, decisions of the Board and voting upon each
question. Records of all official actions of the Board shall be filed in its
office and shall be a public record.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2706 FILING FEE.
   For the purpose of wholly or partially defraying the cost of the proceedings
prescribed herein, including publication costs, the applicant, upon filing an
appeal, shall pay to the City Clerk a fee in the amount required by a schedule
of fees determined by the governing body. Promptly upon filing the appeal and
required filing fee, the City Clerk shall refer said appeal to the Secretary of
the Planning and Zoning Board.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2707 PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE.
   The Planning and Zoning Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of an
appeal or other matter referred to it. Notice of the time, place and subject of
such hearing shall be published once in the official newspaper at least 20 days
prior to the date fixed for hearing. A copy of said notice shall be mailed to
each party to the appeal and to the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2708 POWERS AND JURISDICTIONS.
   The Planning and Zoning Board shall administer the details of appeals or
other matters referred to it regarding the application of the Zoning Ordinance.
The Board shall have the following specific powers:
   (a)   To hear and decide on appeals where it is alleged that there is error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance;
   (b)   To interpret the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in such a way as
to carry out the intent and purposes of the adopted Comprehensive Plan, and to
correct the several districts accompanying and made a part of this chapter
where the actual street layout varies from the street layout as shown on the
Zoning District Map;
   (c)   To authorize, in specific cases, a variance from the specific terms of
the regulations which will not be contrary to the public interest and where,
due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the
regulations, in an individual case, results in unnecessary hardship, and
provided that the spirit of the regulations shall be observed, public safety
and welfare secured and substantial justice done. Such variance shall not
permit any use not permitted by the zoning regulations in such district.
The Board must find that the granting of such variance will not merely serve as
a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable or unusual
hardship or difficulty; and
   (d)   To grant exceptions to the provisions of the zoning regulations in
those instances where the Board is specifically authorized to grant such
exceptions, and only under the terms of the zoning regulations. In no event
shall exceptions to the provisions of the zoning regulation be granted where
the use or exception contemplated is not specifically listed as an exception in
the zoning regulations. Further, under no conditions shall the Planning and
Zoning Board have the power to grant an exception when conditions of this
exception, as established in the zoning regulations by the governing body, are
not found to be present.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2709 PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Appeals to the Planning and Zoning Board may be taken by any person
aggrieved, or by any officer of the city or county, or any governmental agency
or body, affected by any decision of the official administering the provisions
of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (b)   Appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the
rules of the Board, by filing a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof
and payment of the required filing fee.
   (c)   Appeals and requests to the Board for variances and exceptions to this
Zoning Ordinance shall be prepared and submitted on forms approved by the
Board.
   (d)   After filing the required appeal or request and payment of the
required fee, the Planning and Zoning Board shall advertise and hold a public
hearing as provided in §
1-2707.
   (e)   Notice of the decision of the Planning and Zoning Board shall be in
writing and transmitted to the appellant. A copy of such decision shall also be
transmitted to the City Building Inspector for filing and action, if action is
required.
   (f)   Any person, official or governing agency dissatisfied with any order
or determination of said Board may, within 30 days of the order or
determination, bring an action in the District Court of the County to determine
the reasonableness of any such order or determination.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2710 VARIANCES TO THIS ZONING ORDINANCE.
   (a)   (1)   The Board may authorize, in specific cases, a variance from the
specific terms of this Zoning Ordinance which will not be contrary to the
public interest and where, because of special conditions, a literal enforcement
of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance will, in an individual case, result
in unnecessary hardship, providing that the spirit of the Zoning Ordinance is
observed, public safety and welfare are secured and substantial justice is
done. Such variance shall not permit any use not permitted by this Zoning
Ordinance.
      (2)   The following requirements must be met before the Board may grant a
variance.
         (A)   The applicant must show that his or her property was acquired in
good faith.
         (B)   The request for a variance must arise from a condition which is
unique to the property in question, is not ordinarily found in the same zone or
district, and is not created by an action or actions of the property owner or
applicant.
         (C)   The granting of a variance shall not adversely affect the rights
of adjacent property owners or residents.
         (D)   The strict application of this Zoning Ordinance will cause
unnecessary hardship upon the property owner represented in the application.
         (E)   The granting of a variance shall not adversely affect the public
health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity or general welfare.
         (F)   The granting of a variance will not violate the spirit and
intent of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (b)   Variances from yard regulations may not be more than one-half the
required yard and shall not encroach upon the required setback for adjacent
buildings.
   (c)   In exercising the above powers, the Board may reverse or affirm wholly
or partly, or may modify, the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from the City Building Inspector. The Board may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end,
shall have the same powers as the City Building Inspector from whom the appeal
is taken. If the Board approves the variance, it shall notify the City Building
Inspector of its decision and shall instruct him or her to issue a permit. A
time limit may be specified as a condition for granting the appeal.
   (d)   Every variation granted or denied by the Board shall be accompanied by
the written finding of fact, based on testimony and evidence, and specifying
the reason for granting or denying the variance, a copy of which shall be filed
in the office of the City Clerk to be available for public inspection.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2711 EXCEPTIONS TO THIS ZONING ORDINANCE.
   (a)   Exceptions to this Zoning Ordinance, as authorized by the district
regulations, shall be made by special use permit after the request has been
duly advertised and a public hearing held as required by law. All special use
permits shall be subject to the following requirements.
   (b)   Prior to review of the request for an exception by the Planning and
Zoning Board, the applicant shall:
      (1)   File an application on forms provided;
      (2)   File with the application a statement certifying that the applicant
is the lawful owner of the real estate upon which the excepted use is proposed
or that he or she has the lawful right to receive a conveyance thereof if the
application is granted; and
      (3)   File a form of declaration of restrictions indicating use which is
to be made by the legal owner if the application is granted. Said restrictions
must show that use of the land will be solely that which was applied for as an
excepted use. The restriction must provide that, if such use is abandoned or is
proposed to be changed, the subsequent use shall be in conformity with the
zoning restrictions in effect as to the land prior to authorization of the
exception unless a new application for an excepted use is made and granted.
   (c)   A site plan shall be filed with the application showing:
      (1)   Legal dimension of the tract to be used;
      (2)   Location of all proposed improvements, including curb-cut access,
off-street parking and other such facilities as the applicant proposes to
install;
      (3)   Grade elevations;
      (4)   Building setback from all property lines;
      (5)   Front, side and rear elevations of all improvements to be erected;
      (6)   Perspective drawings of the proposed improvements, in such detail
as will clearly show the finished appearance of the improvements proposed;
      (7)   Location and type of planting, screening or walls; and
      (8)   Such other items as the Board shall deem necessary to process the
application properly.
   (d)   In considering any application for an exception hereunder, the
Planning and Zoning Board shall give consideration to the Comprehensive Plan,
and to the health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the public,
including, but not limited to, the following factors:
      (1)   The stability and integrity of the various zoning districts;
      (2)   Conservation of property values;
      (3)   Protection against fire and casualties;
      (4)   Observation of general police regulations;
      (5)   Prevention of traffic congestion;
      (6)   Promotion of traffic safety and the orderly parking of motor
vehicles;
      (7)   Promotion of the safety of individuals and property;
      (8)   Provision for adequate light and air;
      (9)   Prevention of overcrowding and excessive intensity of land uses;
      (10)   Provision for public utilities and schools;
      (11)   Invasion by inappropriate uses;
      (12)   Value, type and character of existing or authorized improvements
and land uses;
      (13)   Encouragement of improvements and land uses in keeping with
overall planning; and
      (14)   Provision for orderly and proper urban renewal, development and
growth.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2712 PERFORMANCE.
   (a)   In making any decision varying or modifying any provisions of this
Zoning Ordinance or in granting an exception to the district regulations, the
Planning and Zoning Board shall impose such restrictions, terms, time
limitations, landscaping, improvement of off-street parking lots and other
appropriate safeguards as required to protect adjoining property.
   (b)   In lieu of actual construction of an approved off-street parking lot,
the Board of Appeals may accept, in the name of the city, a corporate surety
bond, cashier’s check, escrow account or other like security in an amount to be
fixed by the city and conditioned upon actual completion of such improvement
within a specified time, and the governing body may enforce such bond by all
equitable means. Bonds or other security shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
ARTICLE 28: AMENDMENTS
Section
   
1-2801   Amendments
   
1-2802   Applications
   
1-2803   Filing fee
   
1-2804   Public hearing and notice
   
1-2805   Zoning classifications of lesser change
   
1-2806   Protest
§ 1-2801 AMENDMENTS.
   The governing body may, from time-to-time, amend, supplement or change the
district boundaries or regulations contained in this Zoning Ordinance. A
proposal for an amendment or a change in zoning may be initiated by the
governing body or by the Planning Commission or upon application of the owner
of the property affected. All such proposed changes shall first be submitted to
the Planning Commission for public hearing, recommendation and report. The
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon and shall cause an
accurate, written summary to be made of the proceedings.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2802 APPLICATIONS.
   (a)   (1)   Any party desiring any change in zoning district boundaries or
regulations contained in this Zoning Ordinance as to any lot, tract or area of
land shall file with the City Clerk an application upon forms provided, and
such application shall be accompanied by such data and information as may be
prescribed by the Planning Commission. At the time of filing said application
with the City Clerk, the applicant shall provide the City Clerk with the names
and addresses of all owners of any land within the city boundary located within
200 feet of the outer limits of said area to which the applicant desires a
change of zoning.
      (2)   Where the proposed zoning amendment will include property located
adjacent to or outside the city limits, the applicant shall provide the City
Clerk with the names and addresses of all owners of any land located within
1,000 feet in the unincorporated area.
   (b)   (1)   An applicant for a change in zone to “PUD” Planned Unit
Development or “M–P” Manufactured Home Park District must satisfy the Planning
Commission that he or she has the ability to carry out the proposed plan and
shall prepare and submit a schedule for construction. The proposed construction
shall begin within a period of 18 months following approval by the governing
body, and 40% of the total planned construction shall be completed within a
period of three years following such approval.
      (2)   Such applicant shall also prepare and submit a preliminary
development plan for review and approval by the Planning Commission and
governing body. Applicants for the “PUD” or “M–P” Zones shall submit a plan
prepared in accordance with the requirements of the individual district
regulations.
      (3)   Upon approval of the zoning application and preliminary development
plan by the Planning Commission, the applicant shall prepare and submit a final
development plan, which shall incorporate any changes or alterations requested.
The final development plan and the Planning Commission recommendation shall be
forwarded to the governing body for their review and final action.
      (4)   In the event that, within 18 months following approval by the
governing body of a “PUD” or “M–P” District, the applicant does not proceed
with construction substantially in accordance with the plan so approved, the
Planning Commission shall initiate action to rezone the property. A public
hearing, as required by law, shall be advertised and held, at which time the
applicant shall be given an opportunity to show why construction has been
delayed. Following the hearing, the Planning Commission shall make findings of
fact and shall submit its recommendation to the governing body for official
action.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2803 FILING FEE.
   For the purpose of wholly or partially defraying the costs of the
proceedings prescribed herein, including publication costs, the applicant, upon
the filing of the application, shall pay to the City Clerk a fee in an amount
as required by a schedule of fees determined by the governing body. Promptly
upon the filing of any such application, the City Clerk shall refer the
application to the Planning Commission for study and recommendation.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2804 PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE.
   (a)   Before the Planning Commission shall, by proper action, formulate its
recommendation to the governing body on any such proposed or requested change
of zoning district boundary or regulation, whether initiated by the governing
body or Planning Commission or by others, the Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on such proposal.
   (b)   The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall cause a notice of
public hearing to be published once in the official newspaper, and at least 20
days shall elapse between the date of such publication and the date set for the
hearing. Such notice shall fix the time and place for such hearing and shall
contain a statement regarding the proposed changes in the regulations or
restrictions or in the boundary of any district, and if such proposed amendment
will affect specific property, the legal description and general street address
shall be given; provided that, in addition to such publication notice, at least
20 days before the hearing, written notice of such proposed change shall be
mailed to all the owners of land within the city boundary located within 200
feet of the area proposed to be altered, except that where the change will
include property located adjacent to or outside the city limits, the written
notice shall also be mailed to all owners of land outside the city boundary
located within 1,000 feet of the area proposed to be altered. Failure to
receive such notice shall not invalidate any subsequent action taken when the
notice has been properly addressed and deposited in the mail.
   (c)   Whenever five or more property owners of record owning ten or more
contiguous or non-contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of the same zoning
classification initiate a rezoning of their property from a less restrictive to
a more restrictive zoning classification, such amendment shall require notice
by publication and hearing; however, such zoning amendment shall not require
written notice and shall not be subject to protest petition.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2805 ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS OF LESSER CHANGE.
   (a)   In accordance with the provisions of K.S.A. 12-757, the Planning
Commission and the governing body may recommend and approve a lesser change in
zoning districts without re-publication of a notice or re-distribution of
notices to property owners when such change is more restrictive than the
district which is applied for as shown on the table below; provided, however,
that such recommendation and approval shall not be for a lesser classification
than the existing zoning district. If the applicant, at the governing body
meeting at which a zoning amendment is being considered, desires to amend the
application and/or the governing body desires to consider a “lesser” zoning
change, then such a proposed change shall be returned to the Planning
Commission for reconsideration and further recommendation to the governing body
without further publication or notice.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section, zoning classifications of lesser
change shall be as shown below, based on descending order of use restriction:
      (1)   Most restrictive to least restrictive.
         (A)   “A–L” Agriculture District;
         (B)   “R–S” Residential Suburban District;
         (C)   “R–1” Single-Family Dwelling District;
         (D)   “R–2” Two-Family Dwelling District;
         (E)   “R–3” Multiple-Family Dwelling District;
         (F)   “C–S” Highway Service District;
         (G)   “C–2” General Commercial District;
         (H)   “I–1” Light Industrial District; and
         (I)   “I–2” Heavy Industrial District.
      (2)   Zones not included. Because of the highly specialized purposes of
the “PUD” Planned Unit Development, “M–H” Manufactured Home, “M–P” Manufactured
Home Park, “C–1” Central Business” and “C–3” Adult Entertainment Districts,
they are not included in the table of lesser zoning changes and are excluded
from designation through the lesser change provisions.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 1-2806 PROTEST.
   (a)   If a protest against such amendment is filed in the office of the City
Clerk within 14 days after the date of the conclusion of the public hearing
pursuant to said publication notice, said protest being duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more of any real property proposed to be
rezoned or by the owners of 20% of the area, excepting public streets and ways
located within the corporate limits of the city, and located within 200 feet of
the boundaries of the property proposed to be rezoned, or within 1,000 feet in
the unincorporated area if the property to be rezoned is located adjacent to or
outside the city limits, such amendment shall not be passed except by at least
a three-fourths vote of the members of the governing body.
   (b)   Whenever the city initiates a rezoning from a less restrictive to a
more restrictive zoning classification of ten or more contiguous or non-
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of the same zoning classification having
five or more owners of record, only such owners shall be eligible to initiate a
protest petition.
(Ord. 252, passed 11-2-2004)
CHAPTER II: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
   Article
   
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
2.   PLAT APPROVALS, VACATION PROCEDURE AND VESTING OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
   
3.   APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS
   
4.   DOCUMENTATION REQUIRED FOR PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS
   
5.   MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
   
6.   DEDICATION OR RESERVATION OF PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES
   
7.   REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
   
8.   INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
   
9.   LOT SPLIT PROCEDURE
   
10.   APPEALS AND VARIANCES
   
11.   AMENDMENTS AND REVIEW
   
12.   ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
2-101   Title
   
2-102   Purpose and intent
   
2-103   Authority
   
2-104   Jurisdiction
   
2-105   Applicability
   
2-106   Exemptions
   
2-107   Restrictive covenants
   
2-108   Interpretation
   
2-109   Rules of construction
   
2-110   Notice to county
   
2-111   Definitions; Applicability
   
2-112   Severability
   
2-113   Effective date
   
Appendix A: Block Diagram Showing Lot Types, Setbacks and Terms
§ 2-101 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the “Subdivision
Regulations for Oxford, Kansas,” and shall hereinafter be referred to as “these
regulations.”
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-102 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose of these regulations to provide for proper and harmonious
development practices toward the goal of fostering wise use and conservation of
the land resources of the city’s planning and zoning jurisdiction. Within this
purpose, these regulations are intended to:
   (a)   Protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare
of the city;
   (b)   Preserve the natural beauty and topography of the municipality and
ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features;
   (c)   Provide for adequate light, air and privacy; secure safety from fire,
flood and other danger; and prevent overcrowding of the land and undue
congestion of population;
   (d)   Guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan;
   (e)   Establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivision and resubdivision; and further the orderly layout and use of land
to ensure proper legal descriptions and proper monumenting of subdivided land;
   (f)   Provide for the actual construction of physical improvements; and
   (g)   Provide equitable processing of all subdivisions and land development
proposals by providing uniform procedures and standards.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-103 AUTHORITY.
   These regulations are adopted pursuant to powers and jurisdictions
authorized by K.S.A. 12-741 et seq. and other applicable laws, statutes and
regulations of the state, and amendments thereto.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-104 JURISDICTION.
   These regulations shall apply to all land located within the zoning
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-105 APPLICABILITY.
   The regulations contained herein shall apply to the subdivision of a tract
or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts or other divisions of land for
the purpose of sale or building development, whether immediate or future,
including the resubdivision or replatting of land or lots.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-106 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from the requirements of these regulations:
   (a)   Any lot, parcel or tract of land within the area of jurisdiction which
was legally subdivided, resubdivided or replatted prior to the adoption of
these regulations;
   (b)   Any lot, parcel or tract of land which has been ordered by law to be
partitioned;
   (c)   Correction of a legal description in a prior conveyance;
   (d)   Land which is to be used for cemetery purposes;
   (e)   A division of land in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations which creates no more than one additional lot or tract and which
does not involve any new streets or easements of access; is not located in area
subject to flooding; which meets the standards set by these regulations for the
disposal of sewage and for water supply, including lot size; and which conforms
with any applicable zoning regulations, provided that the resulting tracts
shall not again be divided without replatting;
   (f)   A transaction between owners of adjoining land involving only a change
in the boundary between the land owned by such persons and which does not
create an additional lot or which does not result in the creation of a
substandard lot by either owner according to any applicable zoning regulations
or sanitary code;
   (g)   The resubdivision of land used for industrial purposes;
   (h)   A division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels or tracts of
not less than five acres, which will not involve any new streets or easements
of access and will not affect major streets;
   (i)   Land used for a public purpose, including the dedication of a parcel
of land for a public use or instruments relating to the vacation of land for a
public use; and
   (j)   Land used for street or railroad right-of-way, a drainage easement or
other public utilities subject to local, state or federal regulations, where no
new street or easement of access is involved.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-107 RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS.
   The city shall have the right to confer with the subdivider regarding the
type and character of development that will be permitted in the subdivision and
may require certain minimum regulations be incorporated in the subdivision and/
or deed restrictions. Such regulations shall protect the character and value of
the development within the subdivisions and the value of surrounding property.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-108 INTERPRETATION.
   (a)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these
regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (b)   These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or
annul any other resolution, regulation, statute or other provision of law.
Where any provision imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any
other provision of these regulations or any other resolution, regulation or
other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose
higher standards shall control.
   (c)   These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant
or other private agreement; provided, however, that where the requirements of
these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
regulations than such easement, covenant or other private agreement, the
requirements of these regulations shall govern.
   (d)   A subdivision of land which was not lawfully existing at the time of
the adoption of these regulations shall not become or be made lawful solely by
reason of the adoption of these regulations.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-109 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary:
   (a)   The word SHALL is always mandatory and the word MAY is always
permissive;
   (b)   The words USED or OCCUPIED, as applied to any land or building, shall
be construed to include the words INTENDED, ARRANGED OR DESIGNED TO BE USED OR
OCCUPIED;
   (c)   The word BUILDING includes STRUCTURE, and a building or a structure
includes any part thereof;
   (d)   The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular;
and
   (e)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future
the present.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-110 NOTICE TO COUNTY.
   Whenever amendments to the text of these regulations are proposed, written
notice of such proposed action shall be given to the Board of County
Commissioners at least 20 days prior to the proposed action.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-111 DEFINITIONS; APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   For the purposes of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations
and words used herein shall be used, interpreted and defined as set forth in
this article. Any word or phrase which is defined in this article, or elsewhere
in these regulations, shall have the meaning as so defined whenever the word or
phrase is used unless such definition is expressly limited in its meaning or
scope.
   (b)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ADMINISTRATOR. A person designated by the governing body as the
administrator of these regulations.
      AGRICULTURE. The use of a tract of land under one ownership for growing
crops, pasturage, horticulture, nurseries, truck farms, dairying or the raising
of poultry or cattle and other livestock, including commercial feed lots and
the structures necessary for carrying out farming operations and the dwelling
(s) of those owning and/or operating the premises, such as a member of the
family thereof or persons employed thereon and their families. The feeding or
disposal of community or collected garbage shall not be deemed an AGRICULTURAL
USE.
      ALLEY. A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on some other street.
      APPLICANT. The owner or duly designated representative of land proposed
to be subdivided, or for which other action has been requested. Consent shall
be required from the legal owner of the premises.
      APPROVED PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM. A sewage disposal plant, main
sanitary sewer lines and other lines approved by the city and by the State
Department of Health.
      APPROVED PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. Water supply and service lines approved by
the city and by the State Department of Health.
      AREA. The size of a piece of land, usually described in terms of square
feet or acres.
      ARTERIAL STREET. Any street serving major traffic movements which is
designed primarily as a traffic carrier between cities or between various
sections of a city or county which forms part of a network of through streets,
and which provides service and access to abutting properties only as a
secondary function.
      BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroads, rights-of-way, shorelines or boundary
lines of the municipality.
      BOND. A form of security, including a cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property or instrument of credit, in an amount and form
satisfactory to the city’s governing body.
      BUILDING. Any covered structure built for the support, shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind and
which is permanently affixed to the land.
      BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line on a lot indicating the limit beyond which
buildings or structures may not be erected or altered and establishing the
minimum open space to be provided. Such line may be more, but not less,
restrictive than applicable zoning or other regulations.
      CITY ENGINEER. The person responsible to perform the duties of the City
Engineer, including any and all special engineers as appointed by the governing
body.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The adopted “Comprehensive Development Plan for the
City of Oxford,” including modifications or refinements which may be made by
amendments from time-to-time.
      COUNTY. Sumner County, Kansas.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A street having only one outlet and being permanently
terminated by a vehicle turnaround at the other end.
      DEAD-END STREET. A street having only one outlet.
      DESIGN. The location of streets, alignment of streets, grades and widths
of streets, alignment of easements, grades and widths of easements, alignment
and rights-of-way for drainage and sanitary sewers and the designation of
minimum lot area, width and length.
      DEVELOPER. The legal or beneficial owner of all of the land proposed to
be included in a subdivision or planned development, or duly authorized agent
thereof, the holder of an option or contract to purchase or a lessee having a
remaining term of not less than 40 years, or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land, shall be deemed to be a DEVELOPER for the
purpose of these regulations.
      EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner of the specific use of a strip of
land by others.
      ENGINEER. When used in the sense as designing or surveying the plat or
subdivision, he or she shall be a professional engineer or a surveyor licensed
by the state or licensed to practice in the state. When used in connection with
designing or engineering any improvements either on-site or off-site, he or she
shall be a professional engineer licensed by the state or licensed to practice
in the state.
      FENCE. A freestanding structure of metal, plastic, masonry, composition
or wood, or any combination thereof, resting on or partially buried in the
ground and rising above ground level, used for confinement, screening or
partition purposes.
      FINAL PLAT. A subdivision represented as a formal document by drawing and
writing which is prepared in accordance with these regulations, to be placed on
record with the County Register of Deeds.
      FLOODPLAIN. A watercourse and land adjacent to a watercourse subject to
inundation from a flood having a chance occurrence in any one year of 1%.
      FRONTAGE. The property on one side of a street between two intersecting
streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street; or
with a dead-end street, all property abutting one side of such street measured
from the nearest intersecting street and the end of the dead-end street.
      GOVERNING BODY. The City Council of the City of Oxford, unless otherwise
identified as another city, township or county governing body cooperating in
the installation of improvements.
      HALF-STREET. A street bordering one or more property lines of a
subdivision tract to which the subdivider has allocated only a portion of the
ultimate and intended street width.
      IMPROVEMENTS. All facilities constructed or erected, by a subdivider or
the general public, within a subdivision to permit and facilitate the use of
lots or blocks for a principal residential, commercial or industrial use.
      LANDSCAPING. The improvement of a lot, parcel or tract of land with
grass, shrubs and/or trees. LANDSCAPING may include pedestrian walks, flower
beds, ornamental objects such as fountains, statuary and other similar natural
and artificial objects designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically
pleasing effect.
      LAND USE PLAN. A portion of the comprehensive plan indicating the general
anticipated use of the land within the city planning jurisdiction.
      LOCAL STREET. Any street designed primarily to provide access to abutting
property and of limited continuity within a neighborhood.
      LOT. A portion of land in a subdivision, or other parcel of land,
intended to be the unit by which such land would be individually transferred
and/or developed, whether immediate or future.
      LOT DEPTH. The distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and
the midpoint of the rear lot line.
      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot, two opposite lot lines of which abut upon
streets which are more or less parallel.
      LOT LINE. The boundary line of a lot.
      LOT SPLIT. The dividing or redividing of a lot or lots in a recorded plat
of a subdivision into not more than two tracts which meet the criteria
established within these regulations.
      LOT WIDTH. The distance on a horizontal plane between the side lot lines
of a lot, measured at right angles to the line establishing the lot depth at
the established building setback line.
      MAJOR STREET. A street, highway or roadway designated as such on the
official Major Street Plan of the Comprehensive Plan.
      MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS. A local street which is parallel with and
adjacent to a limited access highway or arterial street, and which provides
access to abutting properties and protection from fast through traffic on the
limited access highway or arterial street.
      OPEN SPACE. An area of land or water, or combination thereof, planned for
passive or active recreation, but does not include areas utilized for streets,
alleys, driveways or private roads; off-street parking or loading areas; or
required front, rear or side yards.
      OWNER. Any person or persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations,
or any other legal entity having legal title to land sought to be subdivided
under these regulations.
      PEDESTRIAN WAY. A right-of-way dedicated to public use which cuts across
a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties.
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The City Planning Commission of Oxford, Kansas.
      PRELIMINARY PLAT. A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision of
land showing the character and general details of the proposed development.
      PROTECTIVE COVENANTS. Restrictions governing the use of land within a
given subdivision placed on the land by the owner at the time of platting.
      RESUBDIVISION. The subdivision of a tract of land which has previously
been lawfully subdivided and a plat of such prior subdivision duly recorded.
(Sometimes also referred to as a REPLAT.)
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area between boundary lines of a street or other
easement.
      ROAD or ROADWAY. The paved or improved area existing on the street right-
of-way which is used for vehicular traffic, exclusive of sidewalks, driveways
or related uses.
      SECRETARY. The Secretary of the Planning Commission.
      SCREENING. Decorative fencing, evergreen vegetation, earthen mounds or a
combination of these maintained for the purpose of concealing from view the
area behind such structures or evergreen vegetation.
      SETBACK LINE or BUILDING LINE. A line on a plat, generally parallel to
the street right-of-way, indicating the limit beyond which buildings or
structures may not be erected or altered.
      SIDEWALK. A pedestrian walkway with a concrete surface constructed to
city minimum standards.
      SITE TRIANGLE. A triangular area at the intersection of streets
maintained in such a manner as to provide a safe and open line of vision for
drivers of vehicles and pedestrians approaching the intersection. Within the
vision triangle, no one shall install, construct, plant, park or maintain any
sign, fence, hedge, shrubbery, tree, natural growth or other obstruction which
would materially impede vision between the heights of three and ten feet above
the street level. Such restrictions shall not apply to official traffic signs
and signals and utility poles.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b7c1333007b5e87c549b5aedf1ee9d56046b1295/
IMAGES/0-0-0-613.png]
 
      SKETCH PLAN. A map or plan of a proposed subdivision preparatory to the
preparation of the preliminary plan to enable the subdivider to save time and
expense in reaching tentative general agreements by a discussion of the form
and objectives of these regulations.
      STREET. A right-of-way, other than an alley, dedicated to public use
which provides principal vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent
properties.
      STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A street having only one outlet and being permanently
terminated by a vehicle turnaround at the other end.
      STREET, FRONTAGE. A public or private marginal access street generally
paralleling and contiguous to any arterial street and designed to promote
safety by eliminating unlimited ingress and egress to such arterial street by
providing points of access at predetermined and more or less evenly spaced
intervals.
      STREET, PRIVATE. Any street designed for vehicular traffic not dedicated
as a public thoroughfare. The city has no maintenance responsibilities for a
PRIVATE STREET.
      STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the property lines abutting
both sides of a street right-of-way.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.
STRUCTURES include, but are not limited to, buildings, walls, sheds, towers and
bins.
      SUBDIVIDE LAND. To partition a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
tracts, lots or sites for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development,
whether immediate or future, when such parcel exists as a unit or as contiguous
units under a single ownership.
      SUBDIVIDER. The owner, or any other person, firm or corporation
authorized by the owner, undertaking proceedings under the provisions of these
regulations for the purpose of subdividing land.
      SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract of land into two or more lots or
parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or,
if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term
SUBDIVISION includes RESUBDIVISION, and the term RESUBDIVISION, as used herein,
shall include any further subdivision of a lot or parcel of land previously
subdivided for sale, use or other purposes which varies from the latest,
approved plat of the same.
      TURNAROUND. An area at the closed end of a dead-end street or cul-de-sac
within which vehicles may reverse their direction without any backing up.
      WATERCOURSE. A body of water flowing in an identifiable channel or
course, natural or human-made, and which is not dry more than six months a
year.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004; Ord. 335, passed 10-6-2020; Ord. 337, passed 10-6-
2020)
§ 2-112 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of these regulations are held to be unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such provisions
shall be considered separately and apart from the remaining provisions of these
regulations, said provisions to be completely severable from the remaining
provisions of these regulations, and the remaining provisions of these
regulations shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-113 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   These regulations shall take effect and be in force from and after their
recommendation by the Planning Commission, approval by the governing body by
ordinance and publication once in the official area newspaper.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
APPENDIX A: BLOCK DIAGRAM SHOWING LOT TYPES, SETBACKS AND TERMS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b7c1333007b5e87c549b5aedf1ee9d56046b1295/
IMAGES/0-0-0-669.png]
 
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
ARTICLE 2: PLAT APPROVALS, VACATION PROCEDURE AND VESTING OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
Section
   
2-201   Plat approval required
   
2-202   Approvals required for plat recording
   
2-203   Vacation of plats
   
2-204   Vesting of development rights
§ 2-201 PLAT APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   All plans, plats or replats of land laid out in building lots, and the
streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated for
public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of the lots fronting thereon
or adjacent thereto, shall be submitted to the City Planning Commission for
consideration. The Planning Commission shall submit its recommendation with the
final plat to the governing body for review and final action.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-202 APPROVALS REQUIRED FOR PLAT RECORDING.
   The Register of Deeds shall not record any plat until such plat is approved
by the Planning Commission and governing body and is signed by the Chairperson
and Secretary of the Planning Commission and the governing body of the city.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-203 VACATION OF PLATS.
   Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises
at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written instrument, to
which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated.
Such an instrument shall be approved by the Planning Commission in like manner
as plats of subdivision. The governing body, however, may reject any such
instrument which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its public
uses, improvements, streets or alleys. Such an instrument shall be executed,
acknowledged or approved, and recorded or filed, in like manner as plats of
subdivisions; and being duly recorded or filed, shall operate to destroy the
force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all
public rights in the streets, alleys and public grounds, and all dedications
laid out or described in such plat. When lots have been sold, the plat may be
vacated in the manner herein provided by all the owners of lots in such plat
joining in the execution of such written instrument.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-204 VESTING OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS.
   (a)   For the purpose of single-family residential development, development
rights in such land use shall vest upon recording of a plat of such land. If
construction is not commenced on such land within five years of recording a
plat, the development rights in such shall expire.
   (b)   For all purposes other than single-family developments, the right to
use land for a particular purpose shall vest upon the issuance of all permits
required for such use by the city, provided construction has begun and
substantial amounts of work have been completed under a valid permit.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
ARTICLE 3: APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS
Section
   
2-301   Pre-application requirements
   
2-302   Sketch plan
   
2-303   Preliminary plat
   
2-304   Final plat
   
2-305   Small tract platting procedure
§ 2-301 PRE-APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Prior to the filing of a sketch plan or preliminary plat, the subdivider
shall contact the city to determine:
   (a)   Subdivision requirements;
   (b)   Procedure for filing his or her plat;
   (c)   Availability of an approved public sewer system and public water
system;
   (d)   Comprehensive Plan requirements for major streets, land uses, parks,
easements, schools and public open spaces;
   (e)   Zoning requirements for the property being subdivided and adjacent
properties; and
   (f)   Special setback requirements for arterial and local streets.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-302 SKETCH PLAN.
   The subdivider is encouraged to submit a sketch plan in order to receive the
pre-plat comments of the Planning Commission. Such number of copies of the plan
as may be determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator shall be submitted
to the Administrator at least ten days prior to the next regular meeting of the
Commission. The sketch plan may be in a simple format sufficient in content to
show the general location of the subdivision; the existing and proposed
location of streets, lots, utilities and public service areas, such as parks
and schools; and any significant physical features; and to note any particular
site design problems. A narrative description of existing conditions and
development proposals may supplement the plan. Following Planning Commission
review, the Administrator shall, within 15 days, advise the subdivider of the
results of the review.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-303 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (a)   After reaching the preliminary conclusions regarding requirements of
the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat,
together with required supplementary information, to the Zoning Administrator.
The plat and accompanying documentation shall be filed with the Administrator
at least 20 days prior to the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission.
The subdivider shall submit such number of copies of the preliminary plat as
may be determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator for proper review by
affected and interested governmental and public and private organizations.
   (b)   A filing fee of $100 plus $2 for each lot shall accompany the filing
of each preliminary plat, but the maximum filing fee shall not exceed $200. The
preliminary plat shall not be accepted for filing until the filing fee therefor
has been paid by the subdivider.
   (c)   The subdivider shall submit, with the preliminary plat, a complete
list of the names and mailing addresses of all owners of record of land within
200 feet of property being proposed for subdividing or resubdividing, if the
subject property is entirely surrounded by land inside the city boundary, and
within 1,000 feet of the property where the lot or tract will border on lands
outside the city boundary. The 1,000-foot requirement shall only apply in the
unincorporated portion of the adjacent area.
   (d)   After the filing of the preliminary plat, the Administrator shall
distribute copies to affected and interested governmental and public and
private organizations as appropriate. Organizations receiving copies shall have
15 days to review the preliminary plat and to make their report and
recommendations to the Planning Commission. A lack of response of 15 days
shall, at the discretion of the Planning Commission, signify approval.
   (e)   The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plat and staff
report to determine compliance with these regulations, zoning resolutions and
the Comprehensive Plan for the city. If all considerations are satisfied, the
Planning Commission shall approve, by signature, the preliminary plat.
   (f)   If the Planning Commission determines that the preliminary plat does
not satisfy the applicable requirements, it may:
      (1)   Allow the subdivider to amend the preliminary plat so as to
incorporate such modification and resubmit the preliminary plat to the Planning
Commission. After resubmission, the Planning Commission shall grant its
approval provided that all modifications are made under the original agreement;
or
      (2)   The subdivider may reject the suggested modifications, or within
the allowed time limits, may refrain from taking action. In either case, the
effect shall be disapproval and the Planning Commission shall furnish the
subdivider with a written statement setting forth the reasons for disapproval.
   (g)   In any event, the Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove the
preliminary plat within 60 days from the date of filing of such plat or from
the date the subdivider has submitted the last item of required information,
whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent.
   (h)   The subdivider may appeal the disapproval of his or her preliminary
plat to the governing body. Such appeal shall be made in writing and filed with
the Administrator within 60 days after the date the Planning Commission issues
its disapproval of the preliminary plat.
   (i)   Approval of the preliminary plat shall have the following effects.
      (1)   Such approval shall be considered permission to submit the final
plat.
      (2)   Approval for submission shall be effective for no more than one
year from the date approval was granted, but an extension of time may be
granted for good cause for a maximum period of six months.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-304 FINAL PLAT.
   (a)   A final plat, together with a sufficient number of copies as
determined by the Planning Commission, shall be filed within 12 months of the
date of approval of the preliminary plat. The application for approval shall be
filed with the Administrator at least 20 days prior to the next regular meeting
of the Planning Commission.
   (b)   With the approval of the Planning Commission, the final plat may be
for the entire area of the preliminary plat or may be developed and submitted
as separate units, provided at least one such unit shall be filed within 12
months, and all of the tract shall be final platted within five years, unless
an extension of time has been granted by the Planning Commission. Any such
extension shall be for no more than one year.
   (c)   The Planning Commission shall, within 60 days after the final plat has
been filed, review and approve the final plat if:
      (1)   It is substantially the same as the approved preliminary plat;
      (2)   There has been compliance with all conditions which may have been
attached to the approval of the preliminary plat;
      (3)   It complies with all of the provisions contained in these
regulations and of other applicable regulations or laws; and
      (4)   The subdivision or resubdivision of the tract of lots does not
place an existing permanent structure in violation of the requirements of the
zoning regulations.
   (d)   If the Planning Commission fails to act on the final plat within 60
days after it has been submitted for approval, it shall be deemed to have been
approved unless the subdivider shall have consented in writing to extend or
waive such time limitation.
   (e)   Before a final plat is recorded, it shall be submitted to the
Governing Body for its approval and acceptance of dedications for streets and
other public ways, service and utility easements and any land dedicated for
public use. If the governing body disapproves the final plat, it shall advise
the subdivider in writing of the reasons for such disapproval.
   (f)   The governing body shall either approve or disapprove the final plat
within 60 days after it has been submitted to the governing body for final
approval. If it fails to act on the final plat within 60 days, the final plat
shall be deemed to have been approved unless the subdivider shall have
consented to extend or waive such time limitation.
   (g)   The final plat with all required signatures, and in the exact form as
approved by the governing body, shall be recorded by the subdivider with the
County Register of Deeds. The subdivider shall pay the recording fee. Approval
of the final plat by the Planning Agency and governing body shall be null and
void if the plat is not acceptable for recording in the office of the Register
of Deeds or not recorded within 60 days after final approval by the governing
body. The Register of Deeds shall reproduce copies of the recorded plat for the
record keeping purposes of county and other governmental agencies.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-305 SMALL TRACT PLATTING PROCEDURE.
   (a)   For certain small tracts, the Planning Commission may approve an
abbreviated platting process not requiring submittal of either a sketch plan or
a preliminary plat. To qualify for the abbreviated procedure, the proposed
subdivision shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   The subdivision shall not include more than ten acres for a
residential development, or more than five acres for any other type of
development.
      (2)   The proposed subdivision shall not create more than five lots,
tracts or parcels of land.
      (3)   The plat shall not create new streets or access easements or other
improvements requiring the dedication of public spaces.
      (4)   The plat shall be prepared in the manner required for final plats
by these regulations, including all information, documentation and
certifications.
      (5)   The plat shall be filed for processing and approval in the same
manner as required for preliminary and final plats by these regulations.
   (b)   In order to facilitate the processing and review of plats qualifying
for the abbreviated process, the Zoning Administrator may require the
subdivider to submit supplemental information with the plat, particularly where
there are special site conditions such as watercourses or other unique
features. Sufficient copies of the plat and supplemental information shall be
submitted, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, to allow review by
affected and interested governmental units and the general public.
   (c)   The approval process for plats filed under the abbreviated procedure
shall be the same as that specified by these regulations for a final plat,
except for the requirement of an approved preliminary plat.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
ARTICLE 4: DOCUMENTATION REQUIRED FOR PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS
Section
   
2-401   Preliminary plat
   
2-402   Final plat
   
2-403   Sample preliminary plat
§ 2-401 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (a)   General information.
      (1)   The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a registered land
surveyor, licensed engineer or registered landscape architect and shall be
drawn to a scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch on a sheet with
dimensions of 24 by 36 inches. Sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more
than one sheet is used.
      (2)   The plat shall contain the following:
         (A)   Name.
            (i)   Name of subdivision if property is within an existing
subdivision; and
            (ii)   Proposed name if property is not within a previously platted
subdivision. This name shall not be so similar to any existing subdivision name
as to cause confusion.
         (B)   Ownership.
            (i)   Name, address and telephone number of legal owner or agent of
property and citation of last instrument conveying title to each parcel or
property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving grantor, grantee, date
and land records reference;
            (ii)   Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements
affecting the property;
            (iii)   Existing covenants on the property, if any; and
            (iv)   Name, address and telephone number of the professional
person responsible for surveys, subdivision design and for the design of public
improvements.
         (C)   Description. Location of property by government lot, section,
township, range and county, north arrow, graphic scale, written scale and date
of preparation.
   (b)   Existing conditions.
      (1)   Location of property lines and names of all adjoining property
owners from the latest assessment rolls. The location of existing easements,
burial grounds, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses and wooded areas;
      (2)   Location, width and names of all existing or platted streets or
other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the tract and the location
and width of proposed streets;
      (3)   Location and sizes of existing sewers, water mains, culverts,
wells, septic tanks and other underground structures within the tract and
immediately adjacent thereto; existing permanent buildings and utility poles on
or immediately adjacent to the site and utility rights-of-way;
      (4)   If other than public systems are proposed, preliminary proposals
for alternative means of providing water supply and sanitary waste treatment
and disposal; preliminary provisions for collecting and discharging surface
water drainage;
      (5)   A vicinity map showing streets and other general development of the
surrounding area;
      (6)   The location of pertinent features such as swamps, parks, bridges
and towers;
      (7)   Whenever the plat covers only a part of an applicant’s contiguous
holdings, the applicant shall submit, at a scale of not more than 200 feet to
the inch, a sketch of the proposed subdivision area, together with its proposed
street system and an indication of the probable future street and drainage
system of the remaining portion of the tract;
      (8)   The location, bearings and dimensions of all boundary lines of the
property to be expressed to the nearest foot; this boundary survey shall be
prepared by a registered land surveyor;
      (9)   Contour lines or spot elevations based on mean sea level (MSL), or
other datum approved by the Planning Commission, having the following minimum
intervals:
         (A)   Slopes less than 10%. Two-foot contour intervals for ground
slopes less than 10%;
         (B)   Slopes exceeding 10%. Five-foot contour intervals for ground
slopes exceeding 10%; and
         (C)   Grounds too flat. Spot elevations where the ground is too flat
for contours.
      (10)   The date of the topographic survey(s) shall be shown, including
the location, elevation and description of the bench mark controlling the
vertical survey and the location of existing monuments and survey markers;
      (11)   The locations and dimensions of all proposed or existing lots,
which shall be expressed to the nearest foot;
      (12)   The locations and dimensions of all property proposed to be set
aside for park and playground use, or other public or private reservation, with
designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication
or reservation;
      (13)   The date of the plat, approximate north point, graphic and written
scale and sufficient data, acceptable to the City Engineer, to determine
readily the location, bearing and length of all lines, and to reproduce such
lines on the ground; the location of all proposed monuments;
      (14)   Names of all new streets;
      (15)   Front yard setback lines for all lots and portions of lots as
required by the zoning regulations;
      (16)   Blocks shall be consecutively numbered. All lots in each block
shall be consecutively numbered;
      (17)   A statement of the use of all lots as proposed by the applicant;
      (18)   Explanation of drainage easements, site easements and
reservations, if any;
      (19)   A statement as to the general nature and type of improvements
proposed for the subdivision, and in what manner the subdivider intends to
finance and provide for their installation, e.g., petition, actual
construction, monetary guarantee and the like; and
      (20)   The lack of information under any specified item herein, or
improper information supplied by the applicant, shall be cause for disapproval
of a preliminary plat.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-402 FINAL PLAT.
   (a)   The final plat shall be submitted in the form of an original drawing
in waterproof ink on Mylar or other polyester drafting film drawn to a scale no
smaller than one inch to 100 feet on a 24 by 36 inch sheet. The final
subdivision plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor. It is
desirable that the drawing of the final plat appear on a single sheet. When
this is impossible, a small scale key map shall appear on the first sheet
showing the entire area platted and the sheet on which each platted area
appears. All revision dates must be shown as well as the following:
      (1)   Name of the subdivision;
      (2)   Vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision relative to
adjacent subdivisions, tracts and other area development;
      (3)   A legal description prepared by a registered land surveyor of the
tract being subdivided;
      (4)   The perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision showing all
property corners, land lines, distances, bearings and angles, and other
references used in the legal description of the tract. The boundary of the
platted areas should be accurately indicated by a heavy solid line;
      (5)   All lot lines, right-of-way lines, streets and easements shall be
shown with their dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth (0.01) of a foot and
in actual respective location;
      (6)   All easements shall be denoted by fine dashed lines, clearly
identified, and if already on record, the recorded reference of such easements.
If an easement is not definitely located on record, a statement of such
easement shall be included. The width of the easement with sufficient ties to
locate it definitely with respect to the subdivision must be shown. If the
easement is being dedicated through the plat map, it shall be properly
referenced in the owner’s certificate of dedication and identification;
      (7)   Block numbers or letters continuing consecutively without omission
or duplication throughout the subdivision. Such identification shall be solid,
of sufficient size and thickness to stand out and so placed as not to
obliterate any figure;
      (8)   Lot numbers beginning with the number one and numbered
consecutively in each block;
      (9)   Minimum front yard building setback lines as established by
applicable zoning or other regulations, or more restrictive setbacks if desired
by the subdivider;
      (10)   The width of the portion of the streets being dedicated and the
width of any existing right-of-way;
      (11)   The name of each street shown on the subdivision plat;
      (12)   Land parcels to be dedicated for any purpose, public or private,
to be distinguished from lots or tracts intended for sale;
      (13)   Protective covenants, if any, shall be lettered on the final plat
or submitted on a separate sheet with appropriate references made on the final
plat and signed by the subdivider and/or owner;
      (14)   Any restrictions in addition to the protective covenants shall be
lettered on the plat;
      (15)   The flood fringe and floodway of any floodplain shall be
identified on the plat;
      (16)   North point, graphic scale, written scale and date of preparation;
and
      (17)   Sufficient information shall be shown on the plat to allow an
experienced surveyor to locate or relocate all points and lines shown on the
plat, including all pertinent curve data. The error of closure of the
boundaries of any enclosed area within the plat shall not exceed one foot in
3,000 feet.
   (b)   Prior to filing the final plat with the Register of Deeds, all
boundary, block and lot corners shall be marked by iron monuments no smaller
than three-quarters inch in diameter and three feet in length, driven into the
ground flush with the existing ground surface. Subdivision boundary corners
shall be monumented with an iron bar no smaller than three-quarters inch in
diameter and 30 inches in length, set rigidly in concrete.
   (c)   The following certificates, duly signed as appropriate, shall appear
on the final plat upon its submittal.
      (1)   Surveyor’s certificates shall be as follows.
 
SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF KANSAS      )
                  )   ss
COUNTY OF SUMNER      )
   I, the undersigned, do hereby certify that I am a registered land surveyor in
the State of Kansas, with experience and proficiency in land surveying; that the
heretofore described property was surveyed and subdivided by me, or under my
supervision; that all Subdivision Regulations of the City of Oxford, Kansas,
have been complied with in the preparation of this plat; and that all of the
monuments shown herein actually exist and their positions are correctly shown to
the best of my knowledge and belief.
Given under my hand and seal at _______________, Kansas, this _____ day of
____________, A.D. 20____
 
      (2)   County surveyor’s certificates shall be as follows.
COUNTY SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
COUNTY SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF KANSAS      )
                  )   ss
COUNTY OF SUMNER      )
   Reviewed by the Unified Government Surveyor this _____ day of ___________,
20____. This survey has been reviewed for filing, pursuant to K.S.A. 58-2005 and
K.S.A. 58-2001, for content only and is in compliance with those provisions. No
other warranties are extended or implied.
_____________________________
Surveyor, L.S. Number
SEAL
 
      (3)   Owner’s certification and dedications shall be as follows.
OWNER’S CERTIFICATION AND DEDICATION
OWNER’S CERTIFICATION AND DEDICATION
STATE OF KANSAS      )
                  )   ss
COUNTY OF SUMNER      )
   This is to certify that the undersigned owner(s) of the land described in
the Survey Certificate; have caused the same to be surveyed and subdivided on
the accompanying plat into lots, blocks, streets, and other public ways under
the name of ___________________________; that all highways, streets, alleys,
easements and public grounds as denoted on the plat are hereby dedicated to and
for the use of the public for the purpose of constructing, operating,
maintaining, and repairing public improvements; and further that the land
contained herein is held and shall be conveyed subject to any restrictions,
reservations, and covenants on file or hereafter filed in the Office of the
Register of Deeds of Sumner County, Kansas.
Date Signed: ______________________         Date Signed: ______________________
_________________________________         _________________________________
__________________________, Owner         __________________________, Owner
 
      (4)   Protective covenants shall be as follows.
 
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS
   Purchase and subsequent improvement of lots within the Subdivision shall be
subject to the provisions of “Protective Covenants of the Subdivision” submitted
separately herewith.
Date Signed: ______________________         Date Signed: ______________________
__________________________, Owner         __________________________, Owner
 
      (5)   Notary certificates shall be as follows.
NOTARY CERTIFICATE
NOTARY CERTIFICATE
STATE OF KANSAS      )
                  )   ss
COUNTY OF SUMNER      )
   The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this _____ day of
_____________, 20____, by ___________________________________________.
               _________________________________, Notary Public
               ______________________________________________
(SEAL)
My appointment expires: _______________________________________________
 
      (6)   Planning Commission certificates shall be as follows.
PLANNING COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
PLANNING COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
STATE OF KANSAS      )
                  )   ss
COUNTY OF SUMNER      )
   This plat was approved by the Oxford City Planning Commission on this _____
day of __________________, 20____, and was recommended for approval by the City
Council of Oxford, Kansas.
Date Signed: _________________________
               ________________________________________
                                    Chairperson
ATTEST:
________________________________________
                     Secretary
 
      (7)   City Council’s certificates shall be as follows.
CITY COUNCIL’S CERTIFICATE
CITY COUNCIL’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF KANSAS       )
                  )   ss
COUNTY OF SUMNER      )
 
   This plat approved and all dedications shown on this plat, if any, are
hereby accepted by the City Council, City of Oxford, Kansas, this ______ day of
_________________, 20_____.
                     __________________________________
                     Mayor
         (SEAL)
ATTEST:
_________________________________
City Clerk
 
      (8)   County Clerk and City Clerk certificates shall be as follows.
COUNTY CLERK AND CITY CLERK CERTIFICATE
COUNTY CLERK AND CITY CLERK CERTIFICATE
STATE OF KANSAS      )
                  )   ss
COUNTY OF SUMNER      )
   I do hereby certify that there are no delinquent general taxes, no unpaid
current general taxes, no unpaid forfeited taxes, and no redeemable tax sales
against any of the land included in this plat.
   I further certify that I have received all statutory fees in connection with
the plat.
   Given under my hand and seal at ________________________, Kansas, this ______
day of __________________, A.D. 20____.
_________________________________
County Clerk
_________________________________
City Clerk
 
      (9)   Certificates as to special assessments shall be as follows.
CERTIFICATE AS TO SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
CERTIFICATE AS TO SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
STATE OF KANSAS      )
                  )   ss
COUNTY OF SUMNER      )
   I do hereby certify that there are no delinquent or unpaid current or
forfeited special assessments or any deferred installments thereof that have
not been apportioned against the tract of land included in this plat.
Given under my hand and seal this _____ day of _________________, A.D. 20_____.
__________________________________
County Clerk
__________________________________
City Clerk
 
      (10)   Certificates of the City Attorney shall be as follows.
CERTIFICATE OF THE CITY ATTORNEY
CERTIFICATE OF THE CITY ATTORNEY
STATE OF KANSAS      )
                  )   ss
COUNTY OF SUMNER      )
Approved this _____ day of ___________________, A.D. 20_____.
City attorney for the city of Oxford, Kansas
_______________________________
CITY ATTORNEY
 
      (11)   Transfer records shall be as follows.
 
TRANSFER RECORD
Entered on transfer record this ______ day of ____________________, 20_____.
_________________________________
REGISTER OF DEEDS
 
      (12)   Register of Deeds certificates shall be as follows.
REGISTER OF DEEDS CERTIFICATE
REGISTER OF DEEDS CERTIFICATE
STATE OF KANSAS      )
                  )   ss
COUNTY OF SUMNER      )
   This is to certify that this instrument was filed for record in the Register of
Deeds Office, at ____________ a.m./p.m., on the _____ day of ___________________,
20_____.
      (SEAL)
                              _______________________________
                                    Register of Deeds
 
   (d)   The final plat shall also contain all other certifications, approvals
and acceptances which are now, or which may hereafter be, required by any
statute or regulation. The form of these certifications may be modified as
necessary by the city’s legal counsel to meet statutory or other requirements.
   (e)   The following additional information shall be submitted with the final
plat:
      (1)   A copy of any restrictive covenants applicable to the subdivision;
and
      (2)   A title report by an abstract or a title insurance company, or an
attorney’s opinion of title, showing the name of the owner of the land and all
other persons who have an interest in, or an encumbrance on, the plat. The
consent of all such persons shall be shown on the plat.
   (f)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to file the plat with
the County Register of Deeds’ office within 60 days of the date of signature.
If the plat is not recorded within 60 days, the Planning Commission may rescind
its approval of the plat.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004; Ord. 265, passed 7-11-2006)
§ 2-403 SAMPLE PRELIMINARY PLAT.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b7c1333007b5e87c549b5aedf1ee9d56046b1295/
IMAGES/0-0-0-671.png]
 
ARTICLE 5: MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
Section
   
2-501   General guidelines
   
2-502   Public facility requirements
   
2-503   Character of the land
   
2-504   Streets, alleys and public ways
   
2-505   Blocks
   
2-506   Lots
   
2-507   Subdivision design
§ 2-501 GENERAL GUIDELINES.
   (a)   In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdivision
plats shall comply with all applicable ordinances of the city and all city
policy documents, including all streets, drainage systems and parks shown on
the land use plan or other officially adopted plan; any rules of the local
Health Department and/or the State Department of Health; the rules of the State
Department of Transportation, if the subdivision or any lot contained therein
abuts a state highway or connecting street; the standards and regulations
adopted by the City Engineer and all boards, commissions, agencies and
officials of the city and county.
   (b)   Whenever county, state or other applicable regulations impose more
restrictive standards and requirements than those outlined herein, the more
restrictive regulations shall control.
   (c)   Subdivision plats shall conform to the following general guidelines.
      (1)   All portions of a tract being subdivided, unless otherwise
permitted, shall be designed as lots, streets, planned open spaces or other
uses to avoid the creation of vacant landlocked spaces.
      (2)   Subdivisions and land developments shall be laid out so as to avoid
the necessity for excessive cut and fill.
      (3)   Whenever possible, developers shall preserve trees, groves,
waterways, scenic points, historic sites and other local assets and landmarks.
      (4)   Land subject to flooding or other hazards to life, health or
property, and land deemed to be unsuitable from the standpoint of geology, soil
conditions or topography, shall not be platted for residential occupancy or
other such purposes as may increase danger to health, life or property, nor
aggravate erosion or flood hazard, unless all such hazards are properly
mitigated through the subdivision planning process as hereinafter provided.
      (5)   All subdivisions shall have frontage on and direct access to a
public right-of-way.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-502 PUBLIC FACILITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   In reviewing subdivision plans, the Planning Commission will consider
the adequacy of existing or proposed facilities to serve the additional
dwellings proposed by the subdivision.
   (b)   Where deemed essential by the Planning Commission, upon consideration
of the particular type of development proposed, and especially in large scale
residential developments, the Planning Commission may require the dedication or
reservation of such areas or sites of an extent and location suitable to the
needs created by the development.
   (c)   Areas provided for or reserved for such community facilities shall be
adequate to provide for building sites, landscaping and off-street parking as
appropriate to the use proposed.
   (d)   Areas set aside for recreational purposes, such as playgrounds in
manufactured home parks, shall be of adequate size and configuration to
accommodate the intended use. They should be so located as to serve all the
residents, and in large developments, more than one such area may be required
to serve the residents in close proximity to their dwellings.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-503 CHARACTER OF THE LAND.
   (a)   Land which the Planning Commission finds to be unsuitable for
subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes,
rock formation, adverse earth formations or topography; utility easements; or
other features which will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health and
general welfare of inhabitants of the land and surrounding areas shall not be
subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer
and approved by the Planning Commission to solve the problems created by the
unsuitable land conditions.
   (b)   No land subject to a flood having a chance occurrence in any one year
of 1%, including, but not limited to, areas identified by the Federal Flood
Insurance Administration as having special flood hazards, shall be subdivided
for residential use, or any other use which would be incompatible with such
flooding, except as provided below.
      (1)   Land subject to periodic flooding, or which has inadequate
drainage, may be subdivided only if improvements or structures are designed by
an engineer so as to assure adequate flood-proofing. Proposals for subdivision
of land in such areas shall include engineering evidence that the proposed
development will:
         (A)   Not unduly restrict or block the conveyance of flood water;
         (B)   Not result in an increase in height of the flood water of more
than one foot;
         (C)   Require residential structures to have the lowest floor
(including basement) to be at least one foot above such flood level, or
nonresidential structures to be elevated or flood-proofed to at least one foot
above such flood level; and
         (D)   Meet all zoning requirements for identified flood hazard areas.
      (2)   New or replacement water supply and/or sanitary sewer systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate the infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. It is also required
that on-site sewage disposal systems shall be located so as to avoid their
impairment or contamination during flooding.
   (c)   Proposals for the development of land subject to excessive erosion by
the forces of wind and/or water shall include necessary preventive measures as
a part of the subdivision platting process. Conservation standards endorsed by
the County Conservation District shall be incorporated as appropriate.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-504 STREETS, ALLEYS AND PUBLIC WAYS.
   (a)   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets shall conform to the intent of the Comprehensive Plan and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets; to reasonable
circulation of traffic within the subdivision and adjoining lands; to
topographical conditions; to the runoff of stormwater; to public convenience
and safety; and in their appropriate relations to the proposed uses of the land
to be served by such streets.
   (b)   Streets shall be logically related to topography so as to produce
reasonable grades, satisfactory drainage and suitable building sites.
   (c)   Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit future
street extensions into adjoining tracts or when designed as cul-de-sacs with
turnaround provisions.
   (d)   Stub streets greater in length than one lot depth shall be provided
with a temporary turnaround to the standards required for cul-de-sacs, or shall
be paved to the full width of the right-of-way for the last 50 feet of their
length.
   (e)   Streets that are obviously in alignment with other already-existing
and named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Street names
should not be similar to already platted street names.
   (f)   Arterial streets through subdivisions shall conform to the Major
Street Plan of the Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the Planning Commission and
the governing body.
   (g)   Local streets should be designed so as to discourage through or non-
local traffic. Local streets should not intersect arterial streets.
   (h)   Cul-de-sacs shall meet the following minimum standards.
      (1)   The maximum length of a cul-de-sac street shall be 500 feet, but a
length of up to 1,000 feet may be approved by the Planning Commission if
conditions warrant.
      (2)   Cul-de-sacs shall have at the closed end a turnaround with a right-
of-way having a minimum outside radius of not less than 50 feet and shall be
surfaced to a radius of not less than 35-and- one-half feet.
      (3)   Drainage of a cul-de-sac shall preferably be toward the open end.
   (i)   Where lots front or side, but do not back, on railroad rights-of-way,
major streets or highways, a marginal access street or frontage road shall be
provided parallel and adjacent to the boundary of such right-of-way. The
distance of the street from said right-of-way shall be determined with due
consideration given to the minimum distance required for approach connections
to future grade separations or intersections. The right-of-way of such frontage
road shall be 60 feet unless otherwise approved.
   (j)   The Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council that the
requirement for a frontage road be waived if:
      (1)   Existing physical conditions make it improbable that a frontage
road would be constructed; and
      (2)   A hardship is created and the full use of the property cannot be
obtained for lots or tracts that existed prior to the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter.
   (k)   Dedication of half-streets will not be approved, except where it is
essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and is in conformity
with the approved Major Street Plan and other requirements of these
regulations. In addition, satisfactory assurance that dedication of the
remaining part of the street will occur in a reasonable length of time will be
required.
   (l)   All streets, alleys and public ways included in any subdivision
hereafter dedicated and accepted shall be not less than the minimum dimensions
for each classification as follows.
Type Minimum Right-of-Way Width Maximum Grade
Type                         Minimum Right-of-Way Width      Maximum Grade
Alleys                       20 feet                         10%
Cul-de-sacs                  50-foot minimum radius on turn-
                             around
Local streets
   Residential            60 feet                         10%
   Industrial and commerci80 feet                         6%
Major streets
   Arterials              100 feet                        6%
Marginal access streets or frontage roads
   Two-way                50 feet                         10%
   One-way                50 feet                         10%
Pedestrian ways              10 feet
 
   (m)   These minimum dimensions may be modified by the city, as necessary, to
allow for special conditions such as parallel drainage and roadway systems,
utility requirements, provision for pedestrian movement, grade problems,
intersection design and similar considerations in the process of establishing a
safe and efficient street system.
   (n)   To ensure proper street layout and function, street alignment shall
conform to the following.
      (1)   Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of five degrees,
connection shall be made by horizontal curves.
      (2)   Residential streets should approach major streets at an angle of
not less than 80 degrees or more than 100 degrees.
      (3)   Wherever possible, there shall be an inside tangent at least 100
feet in length between reverse curves on arterial streets.
      (4)   (A)   Streets shall be laid out so as to provide for horizontal
sight distances on all curves depending upon design speed. These distances
shall be as follows.
 
Type                Distance
Horizontal
   Arterial stree500 feet
   Local streets 200 feet
Vertical
   Arterial stree350 feet
   Local streets 200 feet
 
         (B)   The sight distance shall be measured within street rights-of-way
from a height of four- and-one-half feet above the proposed pavement surface in
the right-hand lane of the roadway.
      (5)   Street jogs should be avoided on arterial streets. On local
streets, centerline offsets of less than 150 feet should be avoided.
      (6)   Multiple street intersection involving the junction of more than
two streets shall be avoided. Where this proves impossible, such intersection
shall be designed with extreme care for both pedestrian and vehicular safety.
   (o)   Street and roadway grades should not exceed the following recommended
standards.
      (1)   Centerline grades should not be less than 1%.
      (2)   The maximum street grades for residential streets should be no
greater than 10%.
   (p)   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets. Existing street names shall be used where they
are or would be logical extensions of existing streets even though separated by
undeveloped land.
   (q)   Clear sight triangles of 90 feet, measured along the street
centerlines from their points of junction, shall be provided at all
intersections, and no obstruction shall exist between three feet and ten feet
above the curb of the intersecting streets within the sight triangle.
   (r)   Alleys shall conform with the following standards.
      (1)   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial areas, except
that the Planning Commission may recommend waiving this requirement where other
definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street
loading, unloading and parking spaces consistent and adequate for the uses
proposed. Alleys in residential districts are optional unless recommended by
the Planning Commission.
      (2)   When provided, the minimum width of an alley shall be 20 feet.
      (3)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be
avoided, but where necessary, a turning radius shall be provided to permit safe
vehicular movement.
      (4)   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if
unavoidable, such alleys shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities
at the dead end.
   (s)   Where alleys are not provided, permanent easements of not less than
ten feet in width shall be provided on all rear lot lines, and on side lot
lines where necessary, for utility poles, wires and conduits; sanitary sewers;
gas, water and heat mains; and other public utilities and drainage
requirements.
      (1)   A 12-foot temporary construction easement shall be provided on each
side of the permanent easement required above for the initial construction of
water, sewer and other utility lines.
      (2)   Where a lot or group of lots side or back on an existing high-
pressure oil line or existing high-pressure gas line, a 75-foot easement shall
be provided on each side of said oil line or gas line. The 75-foot easement
shall be provided on that part of the lot which abuts the oil line or gas line,
and no building or structure shall be located or constructed within said 75-
foot easement.
   (t)   If a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway or
channel, a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way shall be provided. Such
easement or right-of-way shall conform substantially to the lines of such
watercourse and shall be of such width or construction, or both, as may be
necessary to provide adequate stormwater drainage and for access for
maintenance purposes.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004; Ord. 269, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 2-505 BLOCKS.
   (a)   The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to the following:
      (1)   Provision of adequate sites for types of buildings proposed;
      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot size, dimension and minimum lot area
per dwelling unit;
      (3)   The limitations and opportunities of the topography;
      (4)   Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation and access; and
      (5)   The limitations and characteristics of the soil and slope relative
to the requirements for the installation of utilities, including any unusual
requirements for septic lateral fields, package processing plants or sewerage
holding lagoons.
   (b)   Blocks should not exceed 1,320 feet in length unless topographic
conditions justify a variation. In general, blocks shall not be less than 300
feet unless necessary because of existing street patterns.
   (c)   All blocks shall be so designed so as to provide two tiers of lots
unless a different arrangement is required in order to comply with or be
permitted by other sections of these regulations.
   (d)   Blocks may be irregular in shape, provided they are harmonious with
the overall pattern of blocks in the proposed subdivision.
   (e)   In extra-long blocks, a public pedestrian way may be required to
provide access to public or private facilities such as schools or parks.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-506 LOTS.
   (a)   Lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and minimum building
setback lines, shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for
the type of development and use contemplated.
   (b)   Lot dimensions shall conform to the minimum standards of any
applicable zoning regulations or sanitary code based on the availability of a
public water supply and/or a public sewer system, unless higher standards are
required in accordance with these regulations.
   (c)   Minimum lot width shall be measured at the building setback line;
however, in no case shall the lot width be less than 50 feet at the front
property line. In addition, corner lots should have a width 15 feet greater
than the minimum width.
   (d)   Minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet. (Said measurement shall be made
through the center of the lot and shall be perpendicular to the property line,
or radial to the property line on curved streets.)
   (e)   As a general guideline, the maximum depth of lots shall not exceed two
and one-half times the width thereof.
   (f)   There shall be no double frontage lots except where the lots abut upon
a limited access highway or arterial street or where the topography of the land
prevents reasonable subdivision otherwise.
   (g)   Corner lots shall have extra width where necessary to permit
appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets.
   (h)   Side lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to the street
line, or substantially so.
   (i)   Residential lots shall front on a residential street, existing or
proposed, and this requirement shall not be satisfied by providing an access
easement to the street.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-507 SUBDIVISION DESIGN.
   (a)   In the interest of public safety and for the preservation of the
traffic-carrying capacity of the street system, the Planning Commission and
governing body shall have the right to restrict and regulate points of access
to all property from the public street system.
   (b)   The design of the subdivision shall provide for efficient traffic
flow, proper mixing of land uses and a logical link between surrounding,
existing development and the proposed layout. The Comprehensive Plan should be
used as a guide in determining if the design of the proposed subdivision is
proper. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to deny a plat or
request redesign if, in its opinion, the layout is not suitable for the site,
or if the development of the subdivision would be premature.
   (c)   The subdivider may be required to have an engineer’s study prepared to
determine the amount of increased stormwater runoff that will be created by the
proposed development and a plan of how this runoff will be accommodated. The
city may require design modification of the proposed stormwater system to
reduce increased runoff.
   (d)   Where appropriate, conservation of energy through the use of both
passive and active solar systems is encouraged. To accommodate solar design,
streets in residential subdivisions should, where possible, have an east-west
alignment. Lots intended for detached dwellings should be of sufficient width
to allow the structure to be built with its longest axis running east-west.
   (e)   Any subdivider may grant or establish a solar skyspace easement to
protect solar energy systems from being shaded. The easements shall be created
in writing and shall be recorded separately or be written on the face of the
plat. Any such easements shall be written to run with the land.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
ARTICLE 6: DEDICATION OR RESERVATION OF PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES
Section
   
2-601   Determination of need
   
2-602   Dedication of sites
§ 2-601 DETERMINATION OF NEED.
   In subdividing land, due consideration shall be given by the subdivider to
the dedication or reservation of sites for schools, parks, playgrounds and
other public areas or open spaces. Any areas so dedicated or reserved shall
conform with the recommendation of the Comprehensive Plan and to the
recommendations of the Planning Commission. All areas to be reserved for, or
dedicated to, public use shall be indicated on the preliminary plat in order
that it may be determined when and in what manner such areas will be dedicated
to or acquired by the appropriate agency.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-602 DEDICATION OF SITES.
   After proper determination of its necessity by the Planning Commission and
the appropriate city official or public agency involved in the acquisition and
use of each such site, and a determination has been made to acquire the site by
the public agency, the site may be dedicated by the applicant to the city or
other appropriate agency on the final plat.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
ARTICLE 7: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
2-701   Improvement provisions
   
2-702   Relocation of existing facilities
   
2-703   Erosion control
   
2-704   Existing improvements
   
2-705   Financing of required improvements
§ 2-701 IMPROVEMENT PROVISIONS.
   As a condition to the approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall agree
to install, or provide for the installation of, the following necessary
facilities and improvements:
   (a)   All roadways, alleys, curbs, gutters and street drainage facilities in
the subdivision, in accordance with standard specifications provided by the
city. All paved streets shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt or asphaltic
concrete. Unpaved rural-type roadways may be constructed with gravel or sanded
surface. If other than gravel or sanded surface materials are used, urban
construction standards shall govern. Streets may require cooperative agreements
for maintenance;
   (b)   Sidewalks, when required, shall be constructed in accordance with
specifications provided by the city under the following conditions: sidewalks
shall be installed on both sides of all arterial streets, and sidewalks shall
be required on both sides of the streets in commercial districts. All sidewalks
shall be not less than four feet in width of portland cement concrete and shall
comply with the specifications of the governing body. Sidewalks shall be
located in the platted street right-of-way, adjacent to the property line where
possible. Walks shall also be installed in any pedestrian easements as may be
required by the Planning Commission;
   (c)   The subdivider shall be responsible to provide for and pay the full
cost for the proper installation of all utilities, including: sanitary sewers
and connection to approved treatment facilities, water supply, natural gas,
electricity and telephone service. Such utilities shall be installed according
to the specifications of the controlling utility company or public agency;
   (d)   All telephone and cable television lines, electrical services and
distribution lines shall be placed underground, except that this provision
shall not include meters, electric and telephone service pedestals,
transformers, three-phase feeder lines, sub-transmission and transmission lines
(34.5 kv and above), electrical substations and such other facilities as the
utility may deem necessary to install utilizing “overhead”-type construction;
   (e)   All gas meters must be located within three feet of the building
foundation if located within front yards in all subdivisions. All of the above
will apply to any final plat which is approved by the Planning Commission after
the passage of these regulations;
   (f)   Fire hydrants, in accordance with the standards of the applicable
water supplier, but not less than the minimum standards of the National Board
of Fire Underwriters, shall be provided wherever there shall be constructed a
water supply system capable of sustaining fire hydrant service;
   (g)   A storm drainage system shall be provided, separate and independent of
the sanitary sewer system, meeting all of the standard specifications provided
by the city. Such storm drainage shall be connected to any existing storm
drainage system, where available, or if such connection is not available, other
adequate means for the discharge shall be provided into the nearest major water
channel;
   (h)   Street signs of such location, type and size as shall be approved by
the governing body, giving due regard to the prevailing type, size and pattern
of location utilized in the area;
   (i)   Underground wiring for electric power, street lights and telephone
service is encouraged, but not required;
   (j)   Street trees may be planted by the subdivider on all streets in the
subdivision. Such trees may be planted on both sides, but not less than five
feet from the back of curb lines;
   (k)   All lot and block corners, angle points, points of curve in streets
and at intermediate points, as required, shall be set prior to the final
acceptance of the plat by the city. Said stakes shall be three-fourths-inch
iron bars, three feet long, and shall be set flush with the existing ground
surface;
   (l)   A minimum of two benchmarks (monuments) shall be placed in each
subdivision, located and installed as required by the Engineer. In subdivisions
larger than 40 acres, one benchmark shall be installed for each additional 20-
acre area. The monument shall be a three-inch brass cap set permanently in
concrete, ten inches in diameter by 24 inches deep, approved by the Engineer.
The elevation of the monuments shall be identified on each;
   (m)   The city shall install street lights; and
   (n)   Where landscaping of public areas is to be provided or the screening
of private areas is required, a planting plan shall be submitted and the
landscaping installed in accordance with the plan.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-702 RELOCATION OF EXISTING FACILITIES.
   Whenever existing sanitary or stormwater sewers, water lines, drainage
channels, culverts, underground or overhead electric and communication lines,
gas lines, pipe lines or transmission lines are required to be relocated due to
the subdivision or construction of improvements required as a condition of
approval of the subdivision, and in the event such was not known at the time of
subdivision approval for any reason, provision for such relocation shall be the
sole responsibility of the subdivider.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-703 EROSION CONTROL.
   Where required, applicable measures will be taken during construction to
minimize soil erosion and sedimentation by wind or water. Conservation
standards shall be observed as recommended by the County Conservation District.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-704 EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   Where the proposed subdivision is a resubdivision or concerns an area
presently having any or all required improvements as previously set out, and
where such improvements meet the requirements of these regulations and are in
good condition, as determined by the governing body based upon its
consideration of the opinion of the City Engineer, no further provision need be
made by the subdivider to duplicate such improvements. However, where such
existing improvements do not meet said requirements, the subdivider shall
provide for the repair, correction or replacement of such improvements so that
all final improvements will then meet the requirements of these regulations.
   (b)   Where the proposed subdivision is a resubdivision or concerns an area
presently abutting or continuing any existing public street of less than the
minimum required right-of-way width or roadway width, land shall be dedicated
so as to provide a minimum street right-of-way width established by these
regulations and/or by the policy of the governing body, and the subdivider of
such proposed subdivision shall provide an additional roadway pavement meeting
the minimum standards set by these regulations and the governing body. The
governing body shall determine what adjustment to make where the aforesaid
widenings merge with existing streets which are of smaller width at the
boundary of such proposed subdivision. The governing body may reduce the
minimum roadway system if the extension of such roadway is already improved at
each end of the roadway in the subdivision and the roadway in the subdivision
to be reduced is two blocks or less in length. Lanes to be painted on such
widened streets designating driving and parking areas may also be required by
the governing body.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-705 FINANCING OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   When the construction or installation of street improvements, a
central sanitary sewer system, a storm sewer system or other drainage
improvements are required to serve the proposed development within a
subdivision, a prerequisite for approval of the final plat shall be the
submission of a plan specifically setting forth the extent, time schedule and
method of financing such construction or installation as proposed by the owner
or developer. The plan shall show the quantity, quality and geometric details
of the proposed construction or installation, which shall meet or exceed the
standards set forth in these Subdivision Regulations and the City Building
Code.
   (b)   Upon final approval of plans and specifications for required
improvements, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the governing
body under which the subdivider agrees to install such required improvements.
Such agreement shall be conditioned upon the approval of the final plat by the
governing body.
   (c)   (1)   Simultaneously with execution of the agreement, unless otherwise
approved, the subdivider shall furnish a corporate completion bond by a firm
authorized to do business in the state with good and sufficient sureties
thereon, or a cashier’s check, escrow account or irrevocable letter of credit
in favor of the governing body in the amount of the estimated cost as approved
by the official responsible for setting and enforcing the applicable design and
construction standards of the installation of the required improvements.
      (2)   Such financial guarantee shall be conditioned upon the approval of
the final plat, and further, conditioned upon the actual completion and
satisfactory installation of such required improvements within two years from
the date that the final plat is approved by the governing body.
   (d)   As an alternative method of providing for the financing of
improvements, petitions to the governing body may be submitted as a means of
guaranteeing to such governing body the authority to install improvements at
such time as they deem appropriate. Petitions may be submitted only when the
following conditions exist.
      (1)   The petitions, to be secured from the governing body, must be valid
petitions as may be provided for under state law.
      (2)   The petitions must be approved by the governing body, concurrent
with the approval and acceptance of the final plat.
      (3)   The initiating resolution for such improvements must be adopted by
the governing body concurrently with the petition approval, or as soon
thereafter as may be provided by law. The cost of the publication of said
resolution shall be born by the subdivider.
      (4)   The initiating resolution must be recorded with the County Register
of Deeds after it has been adopted by the governing body showing that the land
described in the resolution will be liable in the future for special
assessments for the improvements authorized.
   (e)   The subdivider shall, prior to the approval of the final plat, submit
a letter from the utility(ies) involved stating that satisfactory arrangements
have been made by the subdivider guaranteeing the installation of their
respective services.
   (f)   Unless the required improvements have been installed or guaranteed by
a bond or special assessment petition for a lot or tract, no building permits
shall be issued for that lot or tract.
   (g)   No occupancy shall be allowed until all improvements have been
installed.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
ARTICLE 8: INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
2-801   Plans and specifications required
   
2-802   Content of plans and specifications
   
2-803   Construction of improvements
§ 2-801 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   Where installation of improvements by the petition method has not been
authorized, the subdivider shall be responsible for the submission of
engineering drawings and specifications meeting the requirements of these
regulations and subject to approval by the governing body. Such plans and
specifications shall be prepared by a licensed engineer and shall be submitted
in duplicate to the Zoning Administrator at least 15 days prior to the date of
anticipated final plat approval. Failure to do so shall be considered consent
for the extension of any time limitation for plat approval by the governing
body.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-802 CONTENT OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   Construction documents for the installation of improvements shall
contain all information necessary for the installation of improvements in
accordance with applicable standards and guidelines. In general, these
documents shall contain plans, profiles, details, specifications and cost
estimates, as appropriate, for the following:
      (1)   Roadways, alleys and sidewalks;
      (2)   Storm drainage improvements;
      (3)   Water supply and distribution systems;
      (4)   Sanitary sewerage systems; and
      (5)   Any additional utilities not the responsibility of the service
company.
   (b)   Engineering plans, profiles, details and specifications shall be
prepared at such scale and in such format as may be approved by the governing
body.
   (c)   The engineer, official or agency responsible for determining
specifications and standards shall review all engineering drawings in order to
determine whether such drawings are consistent with the approved preliminary
plat and comply with established design standards. The reviewing official shall
forward to the Planning Commission the results of the review process.
   (d)   The Planning Commission and governing body shall not approve a final
plat until the engineering documents have been approved, or petitions, if
authorized, have been properly filed.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-803 CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   All improvements installed shall be subject to inspection and approval
by the engineer or official designated by the governing body. The subdivider
shall provide at least 48 hours’ notice prior to any inspection work.
   (b)   After the final inspection is made and before acceptance of the
improvement by the governing body, the subdivider shall file a statement
certifying that all obligations incurred in the engineering and construction of
the improvement involved have been properly paid and settled.
   (c)   Upon proof of compliance with the requirements of these regulations
and all other standards and guidelines, the governing body may, by resolution,
accept the improvements. Upon approval and acceptance, the improvements, where
applicable, shall become the property of the appropriate governing body or
utility company.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
ARTICLE 9: LOT SPLIT PROCEDURE
Section
   
2-901   Authority for approval
   
2-902   Application
   
2-903   Lot split approval
   
2-904   Exemption for industrial plats
§ 2-901 AUTHORITY FOR APPROVAL.
   The intent of this article is to provide for the issuance of building
permits on lots divided into not more than two tracts without having to replat
said lot, provided that the resulting lots shall not again be divided without
replatting. The Planning Commission may approve or disapprove lot splits in
accordance with the following regulations.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-902 APPLICATION.
   (a)   Applications for lot split approval shall be made by the owner of the
land to the Zoning Administrator. Four copies of a scale drawing of the lots
involved, if there are no structures thereon, or if structures are located on
any part of the lot being split, four copies of a survey of the lot(s) and the
location of the structures thereon, together with the precise nature, location
and dimensions of the proposed lot split, shall accompany the application. The
application shall be accompanied by a list of the names and addresses of all
persons who own property within 200 feet of the property proposed to be split
if such property is within the city boundary. For properties adjoining or
outside the city boundary, names and addresses shall be provided for all owners
within 1,000 feet in the unincorporated area. Written notices shall be given by
the applicant to all such owners. Such owners shall have ten days from the date
of notification to notify the Zoning Administrator of any protests they may
have concerning the lot split. The ten-day waiting period may be waived upon
submission in writing of statements from those to be notified that they have no
objection to the proposed lot split.
   (b)   No lot split shall be approved if:
      (1)   A new street or alley or other public improvement is needed or
proposed;
      (2)   A vacation of streets, alleys, setback lines, access control or
easements is required or proposed;
      (3)   Such action will result in significant increases in service
requirements (e.g., utilities, schools, traffic control, streets and the like),
or will interfere with maintaining existing service levels (e.g., additional
curb cuts, repaving and the like);
      (4)   There is less street right-of-way than required by these
regulations or the Comprehensive Plan;
      (5)   All easement requirements have not been satisfied;
      (6)   Such split will result in a tract without direct access to a street
(i.e., property must abut a street and meet minimum lot width requirements);
      (7)   A substandard-sized lot or parcel will be created; and
      (8)   The lot has been previously split in accordance with these
regulations.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-903 LOT SPLIT APPROVAL.
   (a)   (1)   The Planning Commission shall, within 30 days of an application,
in writing approve, disapprove or continue for cause those applications which,
in the opinion of the Planning Commission, do not meet the requirements of
these regulations.
      (2)   When the lot split application has been approved, and after all
conditions have been met, the Chairperson and Secretary of the Planning
Commission shall sign the following certificate of approval, as required, for
the lot split drawing or survey.
CERTIFICATE OF LOT SPLIT APPROVAL
CERTIFICATE OF LOT SPLIT APPROVAL
STATE OF KANSAS      )
                  )   ss
COUNTY OF SUMNER      )
   I hereby certify that this lot split has been examined and found to comply
with the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Oxford, Kansas, and is,
therefore, approved for recording.
Date Signed: __________________________
                        ________________________________________
                                 Planning Commission Chairperson
                        ________________________________________
                                 Planning Commission Secretary
 
   (b)   A copy of the lot split approval shall be filed by the Administrator
with the applicable official designated to issue building and/or zoning
permits, and two copies shall be furnished to the applicant, one of which the
applicant shall file with the County Register of Deeds.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-904 EXEMPTION FOR INDUSTRIAL PLATS.
   A lot which is zoned for industrial purposes and for which a plat has been
officially recorded may be further divided into two or more tracts without
further replatting or splitting such a lot, provided that none of the
conditions under §
2-902(b) are found to exist.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
ARTICLE 10: APPEALS AND VARIANCES
Section
   
2-1001   Appeals
   
2-1002   Variances
   
2-1003   Waivers
§ 2-1001 APPEALS.
   The subdivider of a proposed subdivision may appeal to the governing body
decisions made in the enforcement or interpretation of these regulations by the
Zoning Administrator, the Planning Commission or the City Engineer. In the
event the governing body sustains such decisions, the prior enforcement or
interpretation shall be final, except as otherwise provided by law. If the
governing body overrules the decision, the governing body shall state its
decisions and the reasons therefor in writing and submit the decision and plat
to the Planning Commission seeking concurrence. In cases of non-concurrence,
the decision of the governing body shall be final.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-1002 VARIANCES.
   (a)   Whenever the Planning Commission shall recommend that full conformance
to the provisions of these regulations is impractical or impossible due to the
size, shape, topographic location or condition, or such usage, of land included
in a subdivision plat being presented for approval, the governing body may
authorize variances of these regulations.
   (b)   In authorizing such variances or exceptions, the governing body shall
find all of the following.
      (1)   Strict application of these regulations will create an undue
hardship upon the subdivider.
      (2)   The proposed variance is in harmony with the intended purpose of
these regulations.
      (3)   The proposed variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare
or injurious to other property in the vicinity in which the property is
situated.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-1003 WAIVERS.
   Any waiver of the required improvements shall be made by the governing body
only on a showing that such improvements are technically not feasible.
Provided, however, that any request for a waiver shall first be submitted to
and a recommendation made by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
ARTICLE 11: AMENDMENTS AND REVIEW
Section
   
2-1101   Amendment procedure
   
2-1102   Annual review
§ 2-1101 AMENDMENT PROCEDURE.
   (a)   These regulations may be amended at any time after the Planning
Commission shall have held a public hearing on the proposed amendment. A notice
of such public hearing shall be published at least once in the official city
newspaper. Such notice shall be published at least 20 days prior to the
hearing. Such notice shall fix the time and place for such hearing and shall
describe such proposal in general terms. Notice shall also be provided to the
county at least 20 days prior to the hearing on the proposed amendments.
   (b)   At or after such public hearing is held, the Planning Commission may
recommend approval of such amendments, but such amendments shall not become
effective until approved by the governing body by an ordinance and published
once in the official city newspaper.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-1102 ANNUAL REVIEW.
   In order to maintain these regulations, the Planning Commission shall
annually hold a public review to consider amendments, if any, to these
regulations. Notification of such a public review may be distributed to
governmental agencies and interested parties. During the intervening period
between reviews, the Administrator shall maintain a list of possible
amendments, which may be periodically brought to the attention of the Planning
Commission.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
ARTICLE 12: ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
2-1201   Duties of Zoning Administrator
   
2-1202   Duties of the Planning Commission
   
2-1203   Duties of the governing body
§ 2-1201 DUTIES OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   Maintain permanent and current records with respect to these
regulations, including amendments thereto. Keep minutes and agendas of all
meeting and hearings;
   (b)   Accept applications, filing fees and preliminary and final plats;
   (c)   Transmit preliminary and final plats to the Planning Commission;
   (d)   Transmit Planning Commission recommendations regarding acceptance of
dedications or easements to the governing body for its action; and
   (e)   Transmit final plats to the City Clerk to file with the County
Register of Deeds on behalf of the city.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-1202 DUTIES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (a)   Review and approve, approve conditionally or disapprove preliminary
plats;
   (b)   Review and recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval of
final plats and transmit the same, together with recommendations for acceptance
of dedications of easements and rights-of-way, to the governing body for its
review; and
   (c)   Make other determinations and decisions as may from time to time be
required by these regulations and by the applicable sections of the state
statutes.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 2-1203 DUTIES OF THE GOVERNING BODY.
   (a)   Consider Planning Commission recommendations on final plats and accept
or reject dedications of easements and rights-of-way;
   (b)   Approve engineering drawings of proposed improvements prior to
construction;
   (c)   Accept or reject financial guarantees from subdividers in lieu of
immediate completion or installation of improvements required by the
regulations; and
   (d)   Take other actions as required from time to time, including the
consideration of amendments to these regulations.
(Ord. 248, passed 6-8-2004)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
   
I.   REZONING AND ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE I: REZONING AND ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. Date         Description
No.  Passed   
253  11-2-2004    Adopts the Municipal Zoning Map of the City of Oxford; declares said map the Official Municipal
                  Zoning Map.
                  Adopts the Revised Zoning District Map for the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction surrounding
254  11-2-2004    the City of Oxford; declares said map the Official Zoning Map for the city’s extraterritorial
                  zoning jurisdiction.
270  4-3-2007     Rezones part of Original Town, Block 33, Lots 16–18 from “R–1” to “C–1;” amends zoning map.
                  Rezones part of Block 36, Lots 3–6, from “C–S” to “C–2;” rezones part of Block 36, north one-
301  11-5-2013    half of Lot 2 from “R–1” to “C–2;” rezones part of Original Town, north 375’ of Outlot 4, from
                  “R–1” to “A–L;” amends zoning map.
                  Rezones part of Original Town, Range 2 east, Township 32, Section 14, Block 39, Lot 1, from
306  5-5-2015     “R–1” to “C–S;” Block 39, Lots 1–6, from “R–1” to “C-S;” Block 39, Lots 7–8, 5–6 and 4, from
                  “R–1” to “C–S;” Block 40, Lots 19–21 and 18, from “R–1” to “C–S;” all to create an expanded
                  Commercial Highway Service District; amends zoning map.
                  Rezones part of West Division, Section 11, 32, R02E acres 7.8, OL 34–35, from “R–1” to “AL;”
321  5-8-2018     rezones part of West Division, Section 11, 32, R02E acres 5.4, OL 36 and W2, from “R–1” to “AL;”
                  rezones part of West Division, Section 11, Township 32, R02E acres 5, OL 8 West Division and OL
                  8 Original Town and E2, from “R–1” to “AL;” amends zoning map.
323  9-4-2018     Rezones part of Original Town, S12, T32, R02E, Block 12, Lots 4–5 and N2 Lot 6, from “R–1” to
                  “R–2;” amends zoning map.
327  10-8-2019    Rezones part of Original Town, Section 14, Township 32, Range 2 East, Block 72, Lots 1–8, from
                  “R–1” and “I–2” to “A–L;” amends zoning map.
330  4-7-2020     Rezones 0.42 acres, more or less, in Outlot 29, West Division, from “C–2” to “R–1;” amends
                  zoning map.
334  10-6-2020    Rezones part of Original Town, S11, T32, R02E, Block 24, Lots 6–10, from “C–1” to “R–1;” amends
                  zoning map.
335  10-6-2020    Rezones part of Original Town, S11, T32, R02E, Block 24, Lots 6–10, from “C–1” to “R–1;” amends
                  zoning map.
338  1-5-2021     Rezones part of Original Town, S13, T32, R02E, Block 46, Lots 5 and 6, from “R–1” to “R–2;”
                  amends zoning map.
343  4-5-2022     Rezones part of Original Town, S13, T32, R02E, Block 63, Lots 4 and 5, from “R–1” to “R–2;”
                  amends zoning map.
345  6-7-2022     Rezones part of Original Town, S13, T32, R02E, Block 43, Lots 1–4, from “R–1” to “C–S;” amends
                  zoning map.
                 
 
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
   
References to Kansas Statutes Annotated
   
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO KANSAS STATUTES ANNOTATED
K.S.A. Cite Code Section
K.S.A. Cite     Code Section
12-741 et seq.  2-103
12-757          1-303; 1-2805
12-759          1-2701
58-2001         2-402
58-2005         2-402
58-3101 et seq. 1-2401
58-3701 et seq. 1-2401
                
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
                     2-101—
                     2-113;
                     Ch. II, Art. 1, Appx. A;
                     2-201—
                     2-204;
                     2-301—
                     2-305;
                     2-401;
                     2-402;
                     2-501—
                     2-507;
                     2-601;
248      6-8-2004    2-602;
                     2-701—
                     2-705;
                     2-801—
                     2-803;
                     2-901—
                     2-904;
                     2-1001—
                     2-1003;
                     2-1101;
                     2-1102;
                     2-1201—
                     2-1203
                     1-101—
                     1-105;
                     Ch. I, Art. 1, Appx. A;
                     1-201—
                     1-203;
                     1-301—
                     1-304;
                     1-401—
                     1-408;
                     1-501—
                     1-508;
                     1-601—
                     1-609;
                     1-701—
                     1-709;
                     1-801—
                     1-809;
                     1-901—
                     1-909;
                     1-1001—
                     1-1010;
                     1-1101—
                     1-1110;
                     1-1201—
                     1-1205;
                     1-1301—
                     1-1311;
252      11-2-2004   1-1401—
                     1-1410;
                     1-1501—
                     1-1510;
                     1-1601—
                     1-1611;
                     1-1701—
                     1-1710;
                     1-1801—
                     1-1811;
                     1-1901—
                     1-1905;
                     1-2001—
                     1-2007;
                     1-2101;
                     1-2201;
                     1-2301—
                     1-2303;
                     1-2401—
                     1-2413;
                     1-2501;
                     1-2502;
                     1-2601—
                     1-2604;
                     1-2701—
                     1-2712;
                     1-2801—
                     1-2806
253      11-2-2004   1-302;
                     TSO Table I
254      11-2-2004   1-302;
                     TSO Table I
259      3-8-2005    1-2701;
                     1-2702
264      3-13-2006   1-2701;
                     1-2702
265      7-11-2006   2-402
269      10-3-2006   2-504
270      4-3-2007    1-302;
                     TSO Table I
275      11-10-2007  1-2403
294      11-15-2011  1-1403
301      11-5-2013   1-302;
                     TSO Table I
306      5-5-2015    1-302;
                     TSO Table I
321      5-8-2018    1-302;
                     TSO Table I
323      9-4-2018    1-302;
                     TSO Table I
327      10-8-2019   1-302;
                     TSO Table I
330      4-7-2020    1-302;
                     TSO Table I
334      10-6-2020   1-302;
                     TSO Table I
                     1-105;
                     1-2401;
335      10-6-2020   1-2402;
                     2-111;
                     TSO Table I
                     1-105;
337      10-6-2020   1-2301;
                     2-111
338      1-5-2021    1-302;
                     TSO Table I
343      4-5-2022    1-302;
                     TSO Table I
345      6-7-2022    1-302;
                     TSO Table I
