CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF THE
CITY OF ALTOONA, IOWA
Adopted May 19, 2025, by Ordinance No. 05-19-2025 #01 (673)
 
Prepared By:   Local Government Professional Services, Inc.
DBA Iowa Codification
P. O. Box 244
114 E 5 th Street
Storm Lake, Iowa 50588
(641) 355-4072
www.sc-ic.com
SUPPLEMENT RECORD
SUPPLEMENT ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No.  Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No. Date Subject
SUPPLEMENT ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No.  Repeals, Amends or Ord. No.        Date     Subject
           Adds
Nov-25     165.03             06-02-2025_#01_ 6-2-25   Rezoning from A-1 to
                              (674)                    M-1
           161.04             07-21-2025_#01_ 7-21-25  Fireworks
                              (675)
           165.03             09-15-2025_#01_ 9-15-25  Rezoning from A-1 to
                              (676)                    M-1
                              09-15-2025_#02_          2005 Addition to the
           Ch.10              (677)           9-15-25  Altoona Urban
                                                       Renewal Area
           165.02(19)         10-20-2025_#01_ 10-20-25 Shipping Containers
                              (678)
           168.02(4);
           168.03(4);         10-20-2025_#02_ 10-20-25 District Regulations
           168.04(4);         (679)
           168.06(4)(S)
           Ch. 89             11-17-2025_#01_ 11-17-25 Water Supply
                              (680)                    Protection
           Table 159.05E      11-17-2025_#02_ 11-17-25 Sign Code
                              (681)
 
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
 
1.01 Title                  1.08 Amendments
1.02 Definitions            1.09 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers            1.10 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity              1.11 Severability
1.05 Personal Injuries      1.12 Warrants
1.06 Rules of Construction  1.13 General Standards for Action
1.07 Extension of Authority 1.14 Standard Penalty
 
1.01   TITLE.
   This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Altoona, Iowa.
1.02   DEFINITIONS.
   Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined in the
Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council or repugnant to the context of the provision. Other words and phrases
used herein have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise
in another portion of this Code of Ordinances or unless such construction would
be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the
context of the provision:
   1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.
   2.   “City” means the city of Altoona, Iowa.
   3.   “Clerk” means the city clerk of Altoona, Iowa.
   4.   “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a
specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the
Building Code or a standard code adopted by reference).
   5.   “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Altoona, Iowa.
   6.   “Council” means the city council of Altoona, Iowa.
   7.   “County” means Polk County, Iowa.
   8.   “IAC” means the Iowa Administrative Code.
   9.   “May” confers a power.
   10.   “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution, or motion.
   11.   “Must” states a requirement.
   12.   “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   13.   “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Altoona, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance
adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
   14.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other
legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar
representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
   15.   “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
   16.   “Shall” imposes a duty.
   17.   “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge
of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
   18.   “State” means the State of Iowa.
   19.   “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
   20.   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa
have their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the
provision.
1.03   CITY POWERS.
   The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if
not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power
and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the
rights, privileges, and property of the City and of its residents, and to
preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and
convenience of its residents, and each and every provision of this Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and
the performance of the foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04   INDEMNITY.
   The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by
making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for any injury to or death
of any person or persons whomsoever, and any loss of or damage to property
whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising
from or related to, directly, indirectly, or remotely, the issuance of the
permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such
applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such applicant, to abide by
or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms
and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such
application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents, and
employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury, or death,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing.
The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or
license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the
City, whether expressly recited therein or not.
1.05   PERSONAL INJURIES.
   When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to
have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person
by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the
pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the
court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from
which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is
liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person
to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any
action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the
defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City
to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage
or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified to
recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by
the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the rules of statutory
construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to
ascertain the intent of the Council, with the understanding that the term
“statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term
“ordinance” when applied to this Code of Ordinances.
1.07   EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY.
   Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a
provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed as
authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate, or a duly
authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1.08   AMENDMENTS.
   All ordinances that amend, repeal, or in any manner affect this Code of
Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection, or
paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09   CATCHLINES AND NOTES.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code of Ordinances, titles,
headings (chapter, section, and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references,
and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself,
contained in this Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law and
are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement, or clarify the contents
of a section.
1.10   ALTERING CODE.
   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of this Code of Ordinances, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code of
Ordinances in any manner that will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented.
1.11   SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, provision, or part of this Code of Ordinances is adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of
this Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof
not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
1.12   WARRANTS.
   If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure, or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful
right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or
conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the
County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative
search warrant. No owner, operator or occupant, or any other person having
charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure,
building, or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search
warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.14)
1.13   GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION.
   Whenever this Code of Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the
Council or any commission, board, or officer or employee of the City and does
not specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be
exercised in light of the following standard: The discretionary power to grant,
deny, or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and
circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due
consideration shall be given to the impact upon the public health, safety and
welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under
similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1.14   STANDARD PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code of Ordinances for
violation of any particular provision, section, or chapter, any person failing
to perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise violating
any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted
herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of at least
$105.00 but not to exceed $855.00. The court may order imprisonment not to
exceed 30 days in lieu of a fine or in addition to a fine. † 1
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3(2) and 903.1(1)(a))
 
Notes
1 †  EDITOR’S NOTE: For civil penalty for violations of this Code of Ordinances, see
  Chapter 3.
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
 
2.01 Title                              2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government                 2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties of City Officers 2.06 Copies on File
 
2.01   TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Altoona, Iowa. † 2
 
Notes
2 †  EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 19 adopting a charter for the City was passed and
  approved by the Council on June 23, 1975, and was published on June 23, 1975.
2.02   FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03   POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City.
2.04   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
   The Council consists of five Council Members elected at large for
overlapping terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05   TERM OF MAYOR.
   The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06   COPIES ON FILE.
   The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the
official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies
of the charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1(3))
CHAPTER 3
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
 
3.01 Municipal Infraction    3.04 Civil Citations
3.02 Environmental Violation 3.05 Alternative Relief
3.03 Penalties               3.06 Alternative Penalties
 
3.01   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
   A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein
adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty
required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically
provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious
misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code
of Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided
herein. † 3
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22(3))
 
Notes
3 †  EDITOR’S NOTE: For criminal penalty for violations of this Code of
  Ordinances, see Section 1.14.
3.02   ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION.
   A municipal infraction that is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of
Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the
Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental
violation. However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable
until the City has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding
the violation or to the following specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22(1))
   1.   A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
   2.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial
production or manufacturing of grain products.
   3.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production
or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
3.03   PENALTIES.
   A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22(1))
   1.   Standard Civil Penalties.
      A.   First offense – not to exceed $750.00.
      B.   Each repeat offense – not to exceed $1,000.00.
   Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a
repeat offense.
   2.   Special Civil Penalties.
      A.   A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an
industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each
day a violation exists or continues.
      B.   A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is
punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence.
However, an environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of
the following conditions are satisfied:
         (1)   The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup,
cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a
shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to
reduce or eliminate the violation.
         (2)   The City is notified of the violation within 24 hours from the
time that the violation begins.
         (3)   The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight
hours.
3.04   CIVIL CITATIONS.
   Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may
issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. A copy
of the citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil
Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s
last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the
manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the
conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be
retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the
Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a
civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22(4))
   1.   The name and address of the defendant.
   2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer
issuing the citation.
   3.   The location and time of the infraction.
   4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief
sought, or both.
   5.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
   6.   The time and place of court appearance.
   7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
   8.   The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the
condition of the property, including a building code violation, a local housing
regulation violation, a housing code violation, or a public health or safety
violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of the District Court, the
City shall also file the citation in the office of the County Treasurer.
3.05   ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.
   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the
City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such
alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement
or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22(9))
3.06   ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES.
   This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal
citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal
penalties are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit
the authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances
by criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22(12))
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
 
5.01 Oaths                 5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds                 5.08 Resignations
5.03 Powers and Duties     5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04 Books and Records     5.10 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.11 Gifts
5.06 Meetings               
 
5.01   OATHS.
   The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for
office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The
oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after such officer is certified as
elected but not later than noon of the first day that is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer
was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
   2.   Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear
that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best
of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in
Altoona as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
   3.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to
administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the
business of their respective offices:
      A.   Mayor.
      B.   City Clerk.
      C.   Members of all boards, commissions, or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02   BONDS.
   Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
   1.   Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or
blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk, and
such other officers and employees as may be necessary and advisable except as
allowed in Subsection 5.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
   2.   Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
   3.   Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be
filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23(6))
   4.   Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of
Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City
officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24(1)(a))
   5.   Insurance Policy in Lieu of Bond. In lieu of a bond, a public officer
required to obtain a bond pursuant to Chapter 64 of the Code of Iowa may obtain
an insurance policy in an amount not less than the amounts required of a bond.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.3)
5.03   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by the
Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
5.04   BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open
to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law
expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.
Access to public records that are combined with data processing software shall
be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 and 22.3A)
5.05   TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.
   Each officer shall transfer to their successor in office all books, papers,
records, documents, and property in the officer’s custody and appertaining to
that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
5.06   MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held
in accordance with the following:
   1.   Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section.
      A.   “Closed session” means a meeting to which all members of the public
do not have access as allowed by Section 21.5 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   “Hybrid meeting” means a meeting involving both remote participation
and in-person participation by members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(a))
      C.   “Open session” means a meeting to which all members of the public
have access.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.2(3))
      D.   “Remote participation” means real-time participation by a remotely
located individual in a meeting which is being held in a different physical
location using integrated audio, video, and other digital tools.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(b))
      E.   “Reasonable notice” means advising the news media who have filed a
request for notice with the governmental body and posting the notice on a
bulletin board or other prominent place which is easily accessible to the
public and clearly designated for that purpose at the principal office of the
body holding the meeting, or if not such office exists, at the building in
which the meeting is to be held.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4(1))
      F.   “Teleconference participation” means participation using audio
conference tools involving multiple participants in at least two separate
locations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(c))
      G.   “Virtual meeting” means a meeting involving real-time interaction
using integrated audio, video, and other digital tools, in which participants
do not share a physical location.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(d))
   2.   Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice, as defined by State law, of the
time, date, and place of each meeting and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
   3.   Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
   4.   Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time
and place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The
minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to
indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member present shall
be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to
public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
   5.   Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote
of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting
and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
   6.   Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices
at any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
   7.   Electronic Meetings. A governmental body shall provide for hybrid
meetings, teleconference participation, virtual meetings, remote participation,
and other hybrid options for the members of the governmental body to
participate in official meetings. A governmental body conducting a meeting
pursuant to this subsection shall comply with all of the provisions of Chapter
21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
5.07   CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect,
in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services
to be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A
contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of
this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
   1.   Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City
officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding
of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(a))
   2.   Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(b))
   3.   City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as
Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(c))
   4.   Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an
interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind
described in Subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contracts are made
by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened, or if the
remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the
contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement
or preparation of any part of the contract. The competitive bid qualification
of this subsection does not apply to a contract for professional services not
customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(e))
   5.   Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(f))
   6.   Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has
an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee
was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(g))
   7.   Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil defense
volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(h))
   8.   Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five
percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate
family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(i))
   9.   Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(d))
   10.   Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this
section, for the purchase of goods or services that benefit a City officer or
employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a
cumulative total purchase price of $6,000.00 in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(j))
   11.   Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a
utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential
City utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(k))
   12.   Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other
obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from the City
but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may not be the
original underwriter, purchaser, or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(l))
5.08   RESIGNATIONS.
   An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a
resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and
considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for
appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was elected
if, during that time, the compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(9))
5.09   REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to
City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the
appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall
give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent
by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk
within 30 days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public
hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The
hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date the request is filed unless
the person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10   VACANCIES.
   A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled
in accordance with Section 372.13(2) of the Code of Iowa.
5.11   GIFTS.
   Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series
of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted
donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or
more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a
public official, public employee, or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
 
6.01 Nominating Method to Be Used 6.05 Filing; Presumption; Withdrawals;
                                  Objections
6.02 Nominations by Petition      6.06 Persons Elected
6.03 Adding Name by Petition      6.07 Voting Precincts
6.04 Preparation of Petition and   
Affidavit
 
6.01   NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.
   All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the
provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02   NOMINATIONS BY PETITION.
   Nominations for elective municipal offices of the City may be made by
nomination paper or papers signed by not less than 50 eligible electors,
residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
6.03   ADDING NAME BY PETITION.
   The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than by
petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)
6.04   PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT.
   Nomination papers shall include a petition and an affidavit of candidacy.
The petition and affidavit shall be substantially in the form prescribed by the
State Commissioner of Elections, shall include information required by the Code
of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5, and 45.6)
6.05   FILING; PRESUMPTION; WITHDRAWALS; OBJECTIONS.
   The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of
validity thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the
effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency of
such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed by
the appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)
6.06   PERSONS ELECTED.
   The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office on
the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8(3))
6.07   VOTING PRECINCTS.
   The City is divided into six voting precincts described as follows:
   1.   Precinct Number 1.
      All of the area within the corporate boundaries of the City lying north
of 8 th Street SW, west of 5 th Avenue SW, south of 3 rd and 4 th Street SW,
west of 12 th Avenue SW/NW, south of Adventureland Drive, west of 17 th Avenue
NW, and north of Interstate 80.
   2.   Precinct Number 2.
      All of the area within the corporate boundaries of the City lying south
of Interstate 80, west of 1 st Avenue North and South, north of the Iowa
Interstate Rail Road, north of 3 rd Street and 4 th Street SW, east of 12 th
Avenue SW/NW, north of Adventureland Drive, and east of 17 th Avenue NW.
   3.   Precinct Number 3.
      All of the area within the corporate boundaries of the City lying south
of Interstate 80, west of 14 th Avenue NE/SE, north of Lake Shore Drive SE,
east of 10 th Avenue SE, north of 13 th Street SE, east of 1 st Avenue South,
north of 8 th Street SW, east of 5 th Avenue SW, south of the Iowa Interstate
Rail Road, and east of 1 st Avenue North.
   4.   Precinct Number 4.
      All of the area within the corporate boundaries of the City lying south
of 8 th Street SW and west of 5 th Avenue SW.
   5.   Precinct Number 5.
      All of the area within the corporate boundaries of the City lying east of
5 th Avenue SW, south of 8 th Street SW, and west of 1 st Avenue South, except
the northeast ¼ of the southwest ¼ of Section 25, Township 79 North, Range 23
West.
   6.   Precinct Number 6.
      All of the area within the corporate boundaries of the City lying east of
1 st Avenue South, south of 13 th Street SE, west of 10 th Avenue SE, south of
Lake Shore Drive SE, and east of 14 th Avenue SE.
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
 
7.01 Purpose                      7.06 Budget Amendments
7.02 Finance Director             7.07 Accounting
7.03 Cash Control                 7.08 Financial Reports
7.04 Fund Control                 7.09 Setoff Program Provisions
7.05 Operating Budget Preparation  
 
7.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules
and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02   FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   The Finance Director is the finance and accounting officer of the City and
is responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
7.03   CASH CONTROL.
   To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the following
shall apply:
   1.   Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any
City officer shall be deposited through the office of the Finance Director. If
any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check
drawn by the Finance Director and approved by the Council only upon such
officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law,
ordinance, or Council directive.
   2.   Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be
promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not
exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or
invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law,
including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, and 12C.1)
   3.   Petty Cash Fund.
      A.   Finance Director. The Finance Director shall be custodian of a petty
cash fund not to exceed $100.00 for the payment of small claims for minor
purchases, collect-on-delivery transportation charges and small fees
customarily paid at the time of rendering a service, for which payments the
Finance Director shall obtain some form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid
by the vendor or agent. At such time as the petty cash fund is approaching
depletion, the Finance Director shall draw a check for replenishment in the
amount of the accumulated expenditures and said check and supporting detail
shall be submitted to the Council as a claim in the usual manner for claims and
charged to the proper funds and accounts. It shall not be used for salary
payments or other personal services or personal expenses.
      B.   Library. The Librarian is the custodian of the Library’s petty cash
fund, which is not to exceed $50.00 for the payment of small claims for minor
purchases, collect-on-delivery transportation charges and small fees
customarily paid at the time of rendering a service for which payments the
Librarian shall obtain some form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the
vendor or agent. At such time as the petty cash fund is approaching depletion,
the Librarian shall draw a check for replenishment in the amount of the
accumulated expenditures and said check and supporting detail shall be
submitted to the Council as a claim in the usual manner for claims and charged
to the proper funds and accounts. It shall not be used for salary payments or
other personal services or personal expenses.
   4.   Change Fund. The Finance Director is the custodian of a change fund not
to exceed $200.00 for the purpose of making change without commingling other
funds to meet such requirements.
7.04   FUND CONTROL.
   There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in
accordance with the following:
   1.   Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the
proper fund as required by law, ordinance, or resolution.
   2.   Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such
disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance, or resolution, was properly
budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
   3.   Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency
Fund.
(545 IAC 2.5(2))
   4.   Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to
meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by
the original budget or a budget amendment.
(545 IAC 2.5(3))
   5.   Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited
by State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital
Improvements Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original
budget or a budget amendment.
(545 IAC 2.5(4))
   6.   Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund
may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund, by
resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all required
transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in accordance with the
terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the
Utility or Enterprise Fund. A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the
operating account or the unrestricted net position calculated in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, after adding back the net
pension and other postemployment benefits, liabilities, and the related
deferred inflows of resources and deducting the related deferred outflows of
resources, in excess of:
      A.   The amount of the expenses of disbursements for operating and
maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three months; and
      B.   The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted
accounts for the succeeding three months.
(545 IAC 2.5(5))
   7.   Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of
each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05   OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION.
   The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with
the following:
   1.   Proposal Prepared. The Finance Director is responsible for preparation
of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption
by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
   2.   Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions, and other
administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and
administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the Finance Director
for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such form as
required by the Council.
   3.   Submission to Council. The Finance Director shall submit the completed
budget proposal to the Council each year at such time as directed by the
Council.
   4.   Annual Statement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 24.2A(2))
      A.   On or before 4:00 p.m. on March 5 of each year, the City shall file,
with the Department of Management, a report containing all necessary
information for the Department of Management to compile and calculate amounts
required to be included in the statement mailed under Paragraph B.
      B.   Not later than March 15, the County Auditor, using information
compiled and calculated by the Department of Management shall send to each
property owner or taxpayer within the County, by regular mail, an individual
statement containing all of the required information as provided under Section
24.2(2)(B)(1-10) of the Code of Iowa.
      C.   The Department of Management shall prescribe the form for the report
required under Paragraph A, the statements to be mailed under Paragraph B, and
the public hearing notice required under Paragraph D.
      D.   The Council shall set a time and place for a public hearing on the
City’s proposed property tax amount for the budget year and the City’s
information included in the statements under Paragraph B.
   The proposed property tax hearing shall be set on a date on or after March
20 of the budget year immediately preceding the budget year for which the tax
is being proposed. At the hearing, the Council shall receive oral or written
testimony from any resident or property owner of the City. This public hearing
shall be separate from any other meeting of the Council, including any other
meeting or public hearing relating to the City’s budget, and other business of
the City that is not related to the proposed property tax amounts and the
information in the statements shall not be conducted at the public hearing.
After all testimony has been received and considered, the governing body may
decrease, but not increase, the proposed property tax amount to be included in
the City’s budget.
         (1)   Notice of the public hearing shall be published not less than 10
nor more than 20 days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper published at least
once weekly and having general circulation in the City. However, if the City
has a population of 200 or less, publication may be made by posting in three
public places in the City.
         (2)   Notice of the hearing shall also be posted and clearly
identified on the City’s internet site for public viewing beginning on the date
of the newspaper publication and shall be maintained on the City’s internet
site with all such prior year notices.
         (3)   Additionally, if the City maintains a social media account on
one or more social media applications, the public hearing notice or an
electronic link to the public hearing notice shall be posted on each such
account on a date no later than the date of publication of the notice.
         (4)   Failure of a newspaper to publish a required notice under this
paragraph shall not be considered a failure of a political subdivision to
provide required notice under this paragraph if all of the following conditions
are met:
            a.   Notice of the public hearing was provided to each property
owner and each taxpayer within the political subdivision in statements required
under Section 24.2A(2)(b) of the Code of Iowa.
            b.   The political subdivision can demonstrate to the county
auditor that the political subdivision provided sufficient time for the
newspaper to publish the notice.
   5.   Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may
make any adjustments it deems appropriate in the budget before accepting such
proposal for publication, hearing, and final adoption.
   6.   Notice of Hearing. Following, and not until the requirements of
Subsection 4 of this section are completed, the Council shall set a time and
place for public hearing on the budget to be held before April 30 and shall
publish notice of the hearing not less than 10 nor more than 20 days before the
hearing. A summary of the proposed budget and a description of the procedure
for protesting the City budget under Section 384.19 of the Code of Iowa, in the
form prescribed by the Director of the Department of Management, shall be
included in the notice.  Proof of publication of the notice under
this subsection must be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16(3))
   7.   Copies of Budget on File. Not less than 20 days before the date that
the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than 10 days
before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number
of copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and
organizations, and have them available for distribution at the offices of the
Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16(2))
   8.   Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt,
by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall
certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor
and the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than,
but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget submitted at the
final hearing, unless an additional tax levy is approved at a City election.
Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of the tax certificate
must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16(5))
7.06   BUDGET AMENDMENTS.
   A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes
effective July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and
purpose specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
   1.   Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program
must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as the
original budget.
(545 IAC 2.2)
   2.   Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to
another must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as
the original budget.
(545 IAC 2.3)
   3.   Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to
another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the
Council.
(545 IAC 2.4)
   4.   Administrative Transfers. The Finance Director shall have the authority
to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a
specific activity without prior Council approval.
(545 IAC 2.4)
7.07   ACCOUNTING.
   The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:
   1.   Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained
books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and
disbursed.
   2.   General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general
ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording
unappropriated surpluses.
   3.   Checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the Mayor and Finance
Director following Council approval, except as provided by Subsection 5 hereof.
   4.   Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to
record receipts by source and expenditures by program and activity as will
provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and
approved by the Council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its
proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared
with revenue estimates, and expenditures can be related to the authorizing
appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for
the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred.
   5.   Immediate Payment Authorized. The Finance Director is authorized to
make timely payments of certain bills of accounts for services or merchandise
furnished to the City upon presentation of the bills of account and after
having ascertained that said bills of account are correct and proper
obligations of the City, and without obtaining prior Council approval therefor,
and shall include the following classification of accounts:
      A.   Utilities, including gas, telephone, and electricity;
      B.   Payroll;
      C.   Payroll taxes, including monthly withholding deposits and payments
due on quarterly report of IPERS, FICA, and sales tax;
      D.   Payroll deductions, including child support, credit union, union
dues, dental insurance;
      E.   Contract payments previously approved by Council;
      F.   Legal publication expenses;
      G.   Postage;
      H.   Credit card accounts for vehicle gas;
      I.   Bills submitted on a specific project previously approved by the
Council;
      J.   Membership dues previously approved by the Council;
      K.   Registration fees, educational fees;
      L.   Interest coupons, and matured bonds.
   “Previously approved” is defined as bills that do not appear on the payable
list but have had separate Council action at the Council meeting. At the next
regular meeting of the Council following the payment of said bills of account,
the Finance Director shall submit to the Council a list of all bills paid for
ratification and approval of such action.
   6.   Utilities. The Finance Director shall perform and be responsible for
accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities.
7.08   FINANCIAL REPORTS.
   The Finance Director shall prepare and file the following financial reports:
   1.   Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a
report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program, and
activity for the preceding month.
   2.   Annual Report. Not later than December 1 of each year there shall be
published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year
of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all
expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of
the City for the current fiscal year. The Annual Financial Report shall be
prepared on forms and pursuant to instructions prescribed by the Auditor of
State. Beginning with the Annual Financial Report published by December 1,
2025, each report shall include a list of bonds, notes, or other obligations
issued by the City during the most recently completed fiscal year, and the
applicable lists for other fiscal years beginning on or after July 1, 2024, for
which obligations remain unpaid, payable from any source, including the amount
of the issuance, the project or purpose of the issuance, whether the issuance
was approved at election, eligible to be subject to a petition for an election,
or was exempt from approval at election as the result of statutory exclusions
based on population of the City or amount of the issuance, and identification
of issuances from the fiscal year or prior fiscal years related to the same
project or purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
7.09   SETOFF PROGRAM PROVISIONS.
   This section shall establish policies and procedures for the City pursuant
to Section 421.65 of the Code of Iowa, to allow the City to utilize and invoke
the setoff program provisions of the State for collection of debts owed to the
City and for which the City has provided the obligor with an opportunity to
contest.
   1.   Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section:
      A.   “Department” means the Iowa Department of Revenue.
      B.   “Obligor” means a person, not including a public agency, who has
been determined to owe a qualifying debt.
      C.   “Public agency” means a board, commission, department, including the
Department of Revenue, or other administrative office or unit of the State or
any other State entity reported in the Iowa Annual Comprehensive Financial
Report, or a political subdivision of the State, or an office or unit of a
political subdivision. Public agency does include the Clerk of the District
Court as it relates to the collection of a qualifying debt. Public agency does
not include the general assembly or Office of the Governor.
      D.   “Public payment” means any claim a public agency owes to an obligor.
      E.   “Qualifying debt” means any of the following:
         (1)   Any debt, which is assigned to the Department of Health and
Human Services, or which is owed to the Department of Health and Human Services
for unpaid premiums under Section 249A.3(2)(a)(1) of the Code of Iowa, or which
child support services is otherwise attempting to collect, or which foster care
services of the Department of Health and Human Services is attempting to
collect on behalf of a child receiving foster care provided by the Department
of Health and Human Services.
         (2)   Any debt which is in the form of a liquidated sum due, owing,
and payable to the Clerk of the District Court.
         (3)   Any liquidated sum certain, owning, and payable to a public
agency, with respect to which the public agency has provided the obligor an
opportunity to protest or challenge the sum in a manner in compliance with
applicable law and due process, and which has been determined as owing through
the challenge or protest, or for which the time period provided by the public
agency to challenge, or protest has expired.
   2.   Memorandum of Understanding. The City shall enter into a memorandum of
understanding with the Department which shall outline the program guidelines
for use of the State Setoff Program.
   3.   Qualifying Debt. The Clerk shall only certify to the Department
qualifying debt as approved by the Department through the completion of a
qualifying debt questionnaire and for which the City has provided appropriate
documentation showing the City’s legal authority for charging, implementing a
fine or fee for violation of, or imposing costs related to the abatement of
certain conditions when appropriate legal authority exists to the City. The
qualifying debt questionnaire may be updated from time to time as required by
the City to add or remove qualifying debt or as needed by the Department.
   4.   Due Process. Prior to submission of a debt to the Department the City
shall provide the obligor due process as outlined in this section prior to the
submission of a debt:
      A.   With respect to the qualifying debt, the City shall provide the
obligor with 15 days’ advance written notice to the obligor’s last-known
address. Such notice shall provide the obligor with a minimum period of 15 days
in which they may file an appeal in writing to the Clerk.
      B.   Upon receipt of a written request for an appeal on a debt to be
submitted to the Setoff Program the Clerk shall schedule a hearing with the
Council for the next regularly scheduled meeting and notify the obligor of the
hearing date and time at least five days in advance of the hearing.
      C.   At the time and date of the hearing, the Council shall hear any
evidence brought forth by the obligor and shall examine the City’s file
regarding the matter. The Council shall make a ruling upon a majority vote of
the members in attendance.
      D.   If the qualifying debt is upheld by the Council and the debt has not
yet been paid by the obligor, the Clerk may certify the delinquency to the
Department pursuant to Section 421.65 of the Code of Iowa and the memorandum of
understanding between the City and the Department.
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
 
8.01 Purpose                        8.06 Applications
8.02 Definitions                    8.07 Approval
8.03 Period of Partial Exemption    8.08 Exemption Repealed
8.04 Amounts Eligible for Exemption 8.09 Dual Exemptions Prohibited
8.05 Limitations                     
 
8.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from
property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the
new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities,
warehouses, and distribution centers.
8.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year
for which the exemption is received.
   2.   “Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for
the storage of goods that are intended for subsequent shipment to retail
outlets. Distribution center does not mean a building or structure used
primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer
to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the
storage of petroleum products, or used for the retail sale of goods.
   3.   “New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes new
buildings and structures that are constructed as additions to existing
buildings and structures. New construction does not include reconstruction of
an existing building or structure that does not constitute complete replacement
of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or
structure unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is
required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to
implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of
specific products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the
building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or process those
products, which determination shall receive prior approval from the Council.
   4.   “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings
devoted primarily to research and development activities, including (but not
limited to) the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for
experimental use and corporate research services that do not have a primary
purpose of providing on-site services to the public.
   5.   “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse
for the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of
Iowa, except that it does not mean a building or structure used primarily to
store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail.
8.03   PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION.
   The actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of
industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, and
distribution centers is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation
for a period of five years. The exemption shall also apply to the acquisition
of or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant
to Section 427A.1(1)(e) of the Code of Iowa, unless the machinery or equipment
is part of the normal replacement or operating process to maintain or expand
the existing operational status.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.04   AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION.
   The amount of actual value added, which is eligible to be exempt from
taxation, shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
   1.   For the first year, 75 percent.
   2.   For the second year, 60 percent.
   3.   For the third year, 45 percent.
   4.   For the fourth year, 30 percent.
   5.   For the fifth year, 15 percent.
8.05   LIMITATIONS.
   The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new construction
constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall
not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced
below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of the
new construction added.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.06   APPLICATIONS.
   An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value
added for which an exemption is claimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
   1.   The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the
property with the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which
the value added is first assessed for taxation.
   2.   Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the
Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of
the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the
Director of Revenue.
8.07   APPROVAL.
   A person may submit a proposal to the Council to receive prior approval for
eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the Council resolves to
consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public hearing
thereon. Thereafter, at least 30 days after such hearing, the Council, by
ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction
if the new construction is in conformance with City zoning. Such prior approval
shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the new
construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
8.08   EXEMPTION REPEALED.
   When in the opinion of the Council continuation of the exemption granted by
this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the Council may repeal this
chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)
8.09   DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED.
   A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the
property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax
exemption authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances have been adopted granting prior approval:
6-90 #1 (71) — Warren Frozen Food, Lot 4, Rosecrest Acres
6-91 #1 (91) — Warren Frozen Food, Lot 4, Rosecrest Acres
CHAPTER 9
HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX
 
9.01 Definitions   9.04 Collection
9.02 Tax Imposed   9.05 Use of Revenues
9.03 Tax Exemption
 
9.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Lodging” means rooms, apartments, or sleeping quarters in a hotel,
motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house, or manufactured or mobile home
which is tangible personal property, or in a tourist court, or in any place
where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent,
whether with or without meals. Lodging does not include rooms that are not used
for sleeping accommodations.
   2.   “Renting” or “rent” means a transfer of possession or control of
lodging for a fixed or indeterminate term for consideration and includes any
kind of direct or indirect charge for such lodging or its use.
   3.   “Sales price” means the consideration for renting of lodging and means
the same as the term is defined in Section 423.1 of the Code of Iowa.
   All other words and phrases used int this chapter and defined in Section
423.1 of the Code of Iowa have the meaning given them by Section 423.1 for the
purposes of this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.2)
9.02   TAX IMPOSED.
   There is hereby imposed a seven percent local hotel and motel tax upon the
sales price form the renting of lodging within the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.4)
9.03   TAX EXEMPTION.
   All of the following are exempted from the provisions of this chapter and
from the computation of any amount of tax imposed by Section 9.02:
   1.   The sales price from the renting of lodging to a person where the
lodging is rented by the same person for a period of more than 31 consecutive
days, except as provided in Subsection 2 of this section.
   2.   The sales price from the renting of lodging to a person where the
lodging is rented by the same person for the period beginning after 90
consecutive days of rental by such person, if the rental is a room, apartment,
or sleeping quarter in a hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, or rooming
house, or in any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to a
transient guest.
   3.   The sales price of lodging furnished to the guests of a religious
institution if the property is exempt under Section 427.1[8] of the Code of
Iowa, and the purpose of renting is to provide a place for a religious retreat
or function and not a place for transient guests generally.
   4.   The sales price from the renting of sleeping rooms in dormitories and
in memorial unions at all universities and colleges located in the City.
   5.   The sales price of lodging furnished to the guests of a nonprofit
lodging provider and the purpose of renting is to provide a place for the
friends and family of a hospital patient during a time of medical need of the
patient and the length of stay is based upon the needs of the friends, family,
or patient. For purposes of this subsection, “nonprofit lodging provider” means
a nonprofit entity which is exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code that maintains an established
facility that provides lodging to friends and family of a hospital patient
during a time of medical need of the patient.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.5)
9.04   COLLECTION.
   The tax imposed in this chapter shall be remitted by the person or company
liable for same to the State Director of Revenue in the manner required by
State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.6)
9.05   USE OF REVENUES.
   All revenue received by the City from the imposition of the hotel and motel
tax shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City and shall be used as
follows:
   1.   At least 50 percent of the revenue derived from the hotel and motel tax
shall be spent for the acquisition of sites for, or constructing, improving,
enlarging, equipping, repairing, operating, or maintaining of recreation,
convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities including, but not limited
to, memorial buildings, halls, and monuments, civic center convention
buildings, auditoriums, coliseums, and parking areas or facilities located at
those recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities or the
payment of principal and interest, when due, on bonds or other evidence of
indebtedness issued by the City for those recreation, convention, cultural, or
entertainment facilities; or for the promotion and encouragement of tourist and
convention business in the City and surrounding areas.
   2.   The remaining revenues may be spent by the City for any City operation
authorized by law as a proper purpose for the expenditure within statutory
limitations of City revenue derived from ad valorem taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.7)
   3.   The City may pledge an amount not to exceed 30 percent of the revenues
derived from such tax to the payment of bonds which the City may issue for one
or more of the purposes set forth in Subsection 1. Any revenue pledged to the
payment of such bonds may be credited to the spending requirement of Subsection
1.
CHAPTER 10
URBAN RENEWAL
 
10.01 Purpose                            10.04 Property to be Deleted from the
                                         Altoona Urban Renewal Area
10.02 Altoona Urban Renewal Plan Area     
10.03 1994 Addition to the Altoona Urban  
Renewal Area
 
10.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the division of taxes levied
on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Areas of the City each year by and
for the benefit of the State, City, County, Southeast Polk Community School
District, and other taxing districts in order to create a special fund to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, advances, or indebtedness, including
bonds proposed to be issued by the City, to finance projects in such areas.
10.02   ALTOONA URBAN RENEWAL PLAN AREA.
   The provisions of this section apply to the Altoona Urban Renewal Plan Area,
the boundaries of which are set out below, such area having been identified in
the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the Council by resolution adopted on
December 10, 1990:
Northeast Portion:
Commencing at the southeast corner of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of Section
11, Township 79 North, Range 23 West of the 5th P.M., Polk County, Iowa, thence
west along the south line of said Southwest Quarter (SW¼) 450.5 feet; thence
north 576.4 feet to the south right-of-way (ROW) line of Interstate Hwy. No.
80; thence northeasterly along said ROW to a point on the east line of the
Northeast Quarter (NE¼) of Section 12-79-23; thence northeasterly along said
southerly ROW to a point on the west line of NE 72nd Street, approximately 400
feet north and 80 feet west of the southeast corner of the Northeast Quarter
(NE¼) of Section 12-79-23; thence southeasterly along said west line to a point
approximately 1,100 feet north and 33 feet west of the southeast corner of the
Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter (NE¼ SE¼) of Section 12-79-23;
thence south along said west line to the south line of said NE¼ SE¼; thence
east along said south line 33 feet to the northwest corner of the Southwest
Quarter of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼ SW¼) of Section 7-79-22; thence east
along the north line of said SW¼ SW¼ to the northeast corner thereof; thence
south along the east line of said SW¼ SW¼ to the northwest corner of the
Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter (NE¼ NW¼) of Section 18-79-22;
thence east along the north line of said NE¼ NW¼ to the northeast corner of the
NW¼ of said Section 18-79-22; thence south along the east line of said NW¼ to
the center of said Section 18-79-22; thence south along the east line of the
Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter (NE¼ SW¼) to a point on the
centerline of Fourth Street Southeast; thence west along the centerline of
Fourth Street Southeast to a point on the west line of the Northwest Quarter of
the Southwest Quarter (NW¼ SW¼) of Section 18-79-22; thence westerly along the
centerline of Fourth Street Southwest to a point on the west line of the
Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter (NE¼ SE¼) of Section 13-79-23;
thence north along said line to the southwest corner of the Southeast Quarter
of the Northeast Quarter (SE¼ NE¼) of said Section 13-79-23; thence north along
the west line of said SE¼ NE¼ 658.8 feet; thence east 652.13 feet; thence north
329.5 feet; thence east 618.9 feet to a point on the east line of said SE¼ NE¼;
thence north along said east line approximately 1650 feet to the northeast
corner of Section 13-79-23; thence west along the north line of the Northeast
Quarter (NE¼) of Section 13-79-23 2601 feet; thence west along the north line
of the Northwest Quarter (NW¼) 2609 feet; thence west along the north line of
the Northeast Quarter (NE¼) of Section 14-79-23 2662 feet to the point of
beginning. Said parcel contains 640 acres more or less.
Northwest Portion:
Commencing at the southeast corner of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of Section
10, Township 79 North, Range 23 West of the 5th P.M. Polk County, Iowa, thence
west along the south line of said SE¼, 1979.86 feet; thence north 678.47 feet
to the south right-of-way line of Interstate Hwy. No. 80; thence southwesterly
along said right-of-way 833.0 feet; thence northwesterly 348 feet; thence
southwesterly along said Interstate 80 ROW to a point on the west line of the
Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of Section 10-79-23; thence south along said west line
350 feet to the southwest corner thereof; thence south along the west line of
the Northwest Quarter (NW¼) of Section 15-79-23 to the southwest corner of the
Northwest Quarter (NW¼) of said Northwest Quarter (NW¼); thence east along the
south line of the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter (NW¼ NW¼) to the
northeast corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter (SW¼ NW¼);
thence south along the west line of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest
Quarter (SE¼ NW¼) to the north-west corner of the Northeast Quarter of the
Southwest Quarter (NE¼ SW¼) of said Section 15-79-23; thence continuing south
to the southwest corner of the Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of
the Southwest Quarter (NW¼ SE¼ SW¼) of said Section 15-79-23; thence east along
the south line of said Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of the
Southwest Quarter (NE¼ SE¼ SW¼) to a point on the northwesterly ROW line of
U.S.
   Hwy. No. 65 as it is presently established; thence northeasterly along said
northwesterly ROW line to a point on the east line of the Northeast Quarter
(NE¼) of Section 15-79-23; thence north along said east line to the northeast
corner of said Section 15, said point also the point of beginning. Said parcel
contains 350 acres more or less.
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Altoona Urban Renewal Plan Area
each year by and for the benefit of the State, City, County, Southeast Polk
Community School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the
effective date of Ordinance No. 12-90 #1 (80) shall be divided as follows:
   1.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which
the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the
total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Altoona Urban
Renewal Plan Area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1, 1989, shall
be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective
taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other
property taxes are paid.
   2.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such base period taxes
shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special tax increment
fund of the City to pay the principal of and interest on loans, advances or
indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed, or otherwise, including bonds
or obligations issued under the authority of Sections 403.9 and 403.12 of the
Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in whole or in
part, projects in the Altoona Urban Renewal Plan Area, except that taxes for
the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected
against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by
the provisions of this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation
of the taxable property in the Altoona Urban Renewal Plan Area exceeds the
total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown on the
assessment roll referred to in Subsection 1 of this section, all of the taxes
levied and collected upon the taxable property in the Altoona Urban Renewal
Plan Area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as
taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same manner as all other property
taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest
thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the
taxable property in the Altoona Urban Renewal Plan Area shall be paid into the
funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all
other property.
10.03   1994 ADDITION TO THE ALTOONA URBAN RENEWAL AREA.
   The provisions of this section apply to the 1994 Addition to the Altoona
Urban Renewal Area, the boundaries of which are set out below, such area having
been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the Council by resolution
adopted on August 15, 1994:
Beginning at a point 33 feet east of the northwest corner of the Southwest
Quarter of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼ SW¼) of Section 7, Township 79 North,
Range 22 West of the 5th P.M., Polk County, Iowa, proceed north along the east
right-of-way line of First Avenue North in the City of Altoona, Iowa,
approximately 800 feet; thence east 37 feet; thence north 375 feet to a point
approximately 46 feet south of the north line of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of
Section 7; thence northeasterly to a point on said north line, approximately
240 feet east of the West Quarter Section Corner of said Section 7; thence east
600 feet along the Quarter Section Line; thence north 70 feet; thence
northeasterly along the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 80 to
a point on the east line of said Section 7; thence south to the southeast
corner of said Section 7; thence continuing south to the southeast corner of
Section 18, Township 78 North, Range 22 West; thence west to the South Quarter
Section Corner of said Section 18; thence north to the North Quarter Section
Corner of said Section 18; thence west to the southeast corner of the Southwest
Quarter of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼ SW¼) of said Section 7; thence north to
the northeast corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼
SW¼) of said Section 7; thence west to the point of beginning.
EXCEPT the following property:
The South One-half (S½) and the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter (NE¼
SE¼) of Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 22 West of the 5th P.M., Polk
County, Iowa.
ALSO,
Beginning at the southeast corner of Section 10, Township 79 North, Range 23
West of the 5th P.M., Polk Co., Iowa, proceed west 1946.86 feet along the south
line of said Section 10; thence north 678.47 feet to the south right-of-way
line of Interstate Highway No. 80; thence northerly along said right-of-way to
a point 175 feet normally distant south of the centerline of said Interstate
Highway; thence easterly along said south right-of-way to the west right-of-way
of Northeast 56th Street; thence south 315 feet, parallel to and 100 feet west
of the east line of said Section 10; thence southerly approximately 514 feet to
a point 33 feet west of the east line of said Section 10; thence east 66 feet;
thence northerly along the east right-of-way of Northeast 56th Street
approximately 604 feet to a point 100 feet east of the west line of Section 11,
Township 79 North, Range 23 West; thence north, parallel to the east line of
said Section 11, 225 feet to the south right-of-way line of Interstate Highway
No. 80; thence easterly along the said south right-of-way line to the west
right-of-way of U.S. Highway No. 65; thence southwesterly along said west
right-of-way line to the south line of said Section 11; thence west to the
point of beginning;
ALSO
Beginning at a point on the south line of Section 11, Township 79 North, Range
23 West of the 5th P.M., Polk County, Iowa, which is 450.5 feet west of the
South Quarter Section Corner; proceed west along the section line to the east
right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 65; thence northeasterly along said east
right-of-way line to the south right-of-way line of Interstate Highway No. 80;
thence northeasterly along said south right-of-way line to a point due north of
the point of beginning; thence south 576.4 feet to the point of beginning.
ALSO
The North One-Half (N½) and the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter (NW¼
SW¼) of Section 14, Township 79 North, Range 23 West of the 5th P.M., Polk
County, Iowa.
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the 1994 Addition to the Altoona
Urban Renewal Area each year by and for the benefit of the State, the City, the
County, and any school district or other taxing district in which such Urban
Renewal Area is located, from and after the effective date of Ordinance No. 8-
94 #4 (143), shall be divided as follows:
   1.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which
the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the
total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the 1994 Addition to
the Altoona Urban Renewal Area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January
1, 1993, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the
respective taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which
all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied
by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the 1994
Addition to the Altoona Urban Renewal Area on the effective date of Ordinance
No. 8-94 #4 (143), but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise
included after said effective date, the assessment roll as of January 1, 1993,
shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in
said 1994 Addition to the Altoona Urban Renewal Area on the effective date.
   2.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, advances, or indebtedness, whether
funded, refunded, assumed, or otherwise, including bonds issued under the
authority of Section 403.9[1] of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to
finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the 1994 Addition to the
Altoona Urban Renewal Area, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and
interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable
property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of
this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable
property in the 1994 Addition to the Altoona Urban Renewal Area exceeds the
total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown on the
assessment roll referred to in Subsection 1 of this section, all of the taxes
levied and collected upon the taxable property in the 1994 Addition to the
Altoona Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for the respective
taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same manner as
all other property taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds,
if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received
from taxes upon the taxable property in the 1994 Addition to the Altoona Urban
Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts
in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
   3.   The portion of taxes mentioned in Subsection 2 of this section and the
special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged
by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances,
bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9[1] of the Code of Iowa, or
indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in whole or in part,
projects in the 1994 Addition to the Altoona Urban Renewal Area.
   4.   As used in this section, the word “taxes” includes, but is not limited
to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property.
10.04   PROPERTY TO BE DELETED FROM THE ALTOONA URBAN RENEWAL AREA.
   The following described property shall be deleted from the Altoona Urban
Renewal Area and shall not be subject to any further division of taxes for the
purposes of the Altoona Urban Renewal Area after the effective date of
Ordinance No. 4-96 #2 (171):
The Northeast Quarter (NE¼) of Section 14, T-79N, R-23W of the 5th P.M., Polk
County, Iowa
ALSO
Beginning at the intersection of the south right-of-way line of Interstate Hwy.
No. 80 and the east right-of-way line of relocated U.S. Hwy. No. 65; thence
southwesterly along said Interstate 80 right-of-way to a point on the west line
of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of Section 10-79-23; thence south along said
west line 350 feet to the southwest corner thereof; thence south along the west
line of the Northwest Quarter (NW¼) of Section 15-79-23 to the southwest corner
of the Northwest Quarter (NW¼) of said Northwest Quarter (NW¼); thence east
along the south line of the Northwest Quarter (NW¼) of the Northwest Quarter
(NW¼) to the northeast corner of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of the Northwest
Quarter (NW¼); thence south along the west line of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼)
of the Northwest Quarter (NW¼) to the northwest corner of the Northeast Quarter
(NE¼) of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of said Section 15-79-23; thence
continuing south to the southwest corner of the Northwest Quarter (NW¼) of the
Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of said Section 15-79-
23; thence east along the south line of said Northeast Quarter (NE¼) of the
Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) to a point on the
northwesterly right-of-way line of U.S. Hwy. No. 65 as it is presently
established; thence northeasterly along said northwesterly right-of-way line to
a point on the east right-of-way line of said Relocated U.S. Hwy. No. 65;
thence northerly along said east right-of-way line to the point of beginning.
The following described property shall be deleted from the Altoona Urban
Renewal Area and shall not be subject to any further division of taxes for the
purposes of the Altoona Urban Renewal Area after the effective date of
Ordinance No. 10-03-2016 #01 (441):
Lot 1 of Linden Oaks Plat 1, City of Altoona, Polk County, Iowa.
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED NAME OF AREA
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO.        ADOPTED            NAME OF AREA
11-7-05 #1(196)      November 7, 2005   2005 Addition to the Altoona Urban
                                        Renewal Area
6-4-07 #1(251)       June 18, 2007      2007 Addition to the Altoona Urban
                                        Renewal Area
11-19-07 #1(270)     November 19, 2007  2007 Addition to the Altoona Urban
                                        Renewal Area
05-12-2012 #01(342)  May 7, 2012        North Urban Renewal Area
01-07-2013 #01(363)  January 7, 2013    Southeast Urban Renewal Area
11-20-2017 #02(476)  November 20, 2017  2017B Amendment to the Altoona Urban
                                        Renewal Area
08-06-2018 #01 (500) August 6, 2018     2018 Property
11-16-2020 #01 (562) November 16, 2020  2020D Property
12-07-2020 #02 (565) December 7, 2020   Amended 2018 Property
11-21-2022 #01 (616) November 21, 2022  2022 Addition to the Altoona Urban
                                        Renewal Area
4-17-2023 #03 (629)  April 17, 2023     Deleted Property from Altoona Urban
                                        Renewal Area
5-15-2023 #01 (631)  May 15, 2023       2023 Addition to the Altoona Urban
                                        Renewal Area
11-06-2023 #01 (645) November 6, 2023   November 2023 Addition to the Altoona
                                        Urban Renewal Area
09-03-2024 #01 (662) September 3, 2024  Repealed Ordinance No. 6-2-03 #3
11-18-2024 #01 (667) November 18, 2024  Deleted Property from Altoona Urban
                                        Renewal Area
01-06-2025 #01 (670) January 6, 2025    January, 2025 Tax Increment Financing
                                        District
09-15-2025_#02_(677) Setpember 15, 2025 2005 Addition to the Altoona Urban
                                        Renewal Area
 
CHAPTER 11
URBAN REVITALIZATION
11.01   DESIGNATION OF REVITALIZATION AREA.
   In accordance with Chapter 404 of the Code of Iowa, a revitalization area is
established for the City. The area consists of the entire corporate limits of
the City as of June 1, 1992, and is hereby designated as the Altoona
Revitalization Area.
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
 
15.01 Term of Office    15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties 15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments
 
15.01   TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
   1.   Chief Executive Officer. Act as the chief executive officer of the City
and presiding officer of the Council, supervise all departments of the City,
except for supervisory duties delegated to the City Administrator, give
direction to department heads concerning the functions of the departments, and
have the power to examine all functions of the municipal departments, their
records and to call for special reports from department heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14(1))
   2.   Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the police
and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of
emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all
the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14(2))
   3.   Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor
deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14(1))
   4.   Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto, or take no action on an ordinance, amendment,
or resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an ordinance,
amendment, or resolution within 14 days after passage. The Mayor shall explain
the reasons for the veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the
veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 and 380.6(2))
   5.   Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as
required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the
municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
   6.   Negotiations. Represent the City in all negotiations properly entered
into in accordance with law or ordinance. The Mayor shall not represent the
City where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law,
ordinance, or Council direction.
   7.   Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf
of the City.
   8.   Professional Services. Upon order of the Council, secure for the City
such specialized and professional services not already available to the City.
In executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in accordance with
this Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State.
   9.   Licenses and Permits. Sign all licenses and permits that have been
granted by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be
issued by another municipal officer.
   10.   Nuisances. Issue written order for removal, at public expense, any
nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.
   11.   Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any
absentee officer be carried on during such absence.
15.03   APPOINTMENTS.
   The Mayor shall appoint the following officials.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
   1.   Mayor Pro Tem.
   2.   The following appointments shall be made by the Mayor subject to
Council approval:
      A.   Police Chief.
      B.   Library Board of Trustees.
      C.   Zoning Board of Adjustment.
      D.   Parks Board.
      E.   Arts and Culture Commission.
      F.   Building Board of Appeals.
15.04   COMPENSATION.
   The salary of the Mayor is $12,000.00 per year, paid monthly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(8))
15.05   VOTING.
   The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
 
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties         16.04 Compensation
 
16.01   VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.
   The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall
serve as vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14(3))
16.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem
shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the
Mayor to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the
Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ, or discharge from
employment officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint,
employ, or discharge without the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14(3))
16.03   VOTING RIGHTS.
   The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14(3))
16.04   COMPENSATION.
   If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s
absence or disability for a continuous period of 15 days or more, the Mayor Pro
Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council,
based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the
compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(8))
CHAPTER 17
CITY COUNCIL
 
17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Council Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties          17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power          17.06 Compensation
 
17.01   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
   The Council consists of five Council members elected at large for
overlapping terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 and 376.2)
17.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to the
following:
   1.   General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2(1))
   2.   Wards. By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into wards based
upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards, or create new
wards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(7))
   3.   Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all
funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls, and claims, and order
payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street
improvements, sidewalks, sewers, and other work, improvement, or repairs that
may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2(1), 384.16, and 384.38(1))
   4.   Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the
construction of any improvements, bridges, or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2(1))
   5.   Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all
contracts. No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless
approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 26)
   6.   Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number,
duties, term of office, and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise
provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   7.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council
shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other
elected City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not
become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the
Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any
elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of a
regular City election. A change in the compensation of Council members becomes
effective for all Council members at the beginning of the term of the Council
members elected at the election next following the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(8))
17.03   EXERCISE OF POWER.
   The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3(1))
   1.   Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution
requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a
motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must
be passed to spend public funds in excess of $100,000.00 on a public
improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their
completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure
that fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered
defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
   2.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within 30 days after the Mayor’s veto, the
Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all
of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(2))
   3.   Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become
effective in one of the following ways:
      A.   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective when
the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(1)(a))
      B.   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon
signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(1)(b))
      C.   A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(1)(c))
      D.   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment, or resolution and the
Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes
effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a
law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(2))
      E.   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment, or
resolution, a resolution becomes effective 14 days after the date of passage,
and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of
the ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the date of
passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(3))
   “All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the
Council including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does
not include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason of a
conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1(a))
17.04   COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions
regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section
5.06. Additional particulars relating to Council meetings are the following:
   1.   Time. All regular or special Council meetings shall begin at 6:30 p.m.,
unless the Council members shall vote to commence a meeting at another time.
   2.   Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor
or upon the request of a majority of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(5))
   3.   Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(1))
   4.   Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and
maintain records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(5))
   5.   Compelling Attendance. Any three members of the Council can compel the
attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or duly called
meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
17.05   APPOINTMENTS.
   The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their
powers, duties, compensation, and term of office:
   1.   City Clerk.
   2.   City Attorney.
   3.   City Administrator.
   4.   Planning and Zoning Commission.
17.06   COMPENSATION.
   The salary of each Council member is $9,000.00 per year, payable monthly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(8))
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
 
18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General   18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Publication of Minutes       18.10 Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures           18.11 Notification of Appointments
18.05 Other Publications           18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication               18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certification                 
 
18.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
   At its first meeting in January following the regular City election, the
Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Clerk to serve for a term of two
years. The Clerk shall receive such compensation as established by resolution
of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(3))
18.02   POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL.
   The Clerk (or, in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk)
has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code of Ordinances,
and the law.
18.03   PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.
   Within 15 days following a regular or special meeting of the Council, the
Clerk shall cause the minutes of the proceedings of the Council, including the
total expenditure from each City fund, to be delivered to a newspaper of
general circulation in the City for publication. The publication shall include
a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall show the
gross amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(6))
18.04   RECORDING MEASURES.
   The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council and
record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the
Mayor signed, vetoed, or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure
was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7(1 and 2))
18.05   OTHER PUBLICATIONS.
   The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments,
proceedings, and official notices requiring publication as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3)
   1.   Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is
required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at
least once, not less than four or more than 20 days before the date of the
election, hearing, or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
   2.   Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of
Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and
having general circulation in the City.
18.06   AUTHENTICATION.
   The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s
signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7(4))
18.07   CERTIFICATION.
   The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district,
building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or
limits to the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08   RECORDS.
   The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:
   1.   Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances
and codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7(5))
   2.   Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all
writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise
specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   3.   Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents (or accurate
reproductions) for at least five years except that ordinances, resolutions,
Council proceedings, records, and documents (or accurate reproductions)
relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption, or replacement of
public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least 11 years following the
final maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council
proceedings, records, and documents (or accurate reproductions) relating to
real property transactions shall be maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(3 and 5))
   4.   Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of
any record, paper, or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be
necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a
copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council
resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix
the seal of the City to those public documents or instruments that by this Code
of Ordinances are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4 and 5) and 380.7(5))
   5.   Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and
petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall
endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such
communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
18.09   ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
   The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and, at the
direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees,
boards, and commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record
of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
18.10   LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this
Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which
shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number,
name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit, and purpose for which
issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
18.11   NOTIFICATION OF APPOINTMENTS.
   The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to
offices in the City government of their positions and the time at which they
shall assume the duties of their offices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
18.12   ELECTIONS.
   The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance with
Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
18.13   CITY SEAL.
   The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the
Clerk to all transcripts, orders, and certificates that it may be necessary or
proper to authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the center of
which are the words “ALTOONA, IOWA” and around the margin of which are the
words “CITY SEAL.”
CHAPTER 20
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
 
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.03 Powers and Duties
20.02 Authority                     
 
20.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
   The City Administrator is appointed by a majority vote of the entire Council
at a regular meeting of such body. The appointment is made solely on the basis
of administrative qualifications. The City Administrator shall receive
compensation in an amount set by resolution of the Council.
20.02   AUTHORITY.
   The Mayor shall have general supervisory authority over the City
Administrator to carry out the policies established by the Council.
20.03   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The City Administrator’s powers and duties are as follows:
   1.   To attend all meetings of the Council;
   2.   To advise Mayor and Council on current problems and future needs of the
City and recommend alternative solutions and directions for meeting the needs
of the community;
   3.   To supervise employees responsible for carrying out the policies and
programs of the City;
   4.   To direct and coordinate the implementation of policy made by the
Council;
   5.   To evaluate current City policies and community needs and recommend
alternatives for Mayor and Council consideration;
   6.   To perform other duties as required by law or delegated by the Mayor
and Council.
CHAPTER 21
CITY ATTORNEY
 
21.01 Appointment and Compensation 21.06 Provide Legal Opinion
21.02 Attorney for City            21.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
21.03 Power of Attorney            21.08 Prepare Documents
21.04 Ordinance Preparation        21.09 Parliamentarian
21.05 Review and Comment            
 
21.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
   The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve at the
discretion of the Council. The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
21.02   ATTORNEY FOR CITY.
   The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters
affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any
court, tribunal, commission, or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or
defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
21.03   POWER OF ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to
all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution
of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the
same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
21.04   ORDINANCE PREPARATION.
   The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances that the Council may desire
and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such ordinances
before their final passage by the Council and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
21.05   REVIEW AND COMMENT.
   The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council giving
an opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to
or coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
21.06   PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION.
   The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City
contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the
Council, any Board, or the head of any City department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
21.07   ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the
Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
21.08   PREPARE DOCUMENTS.
   The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts,
forms, and other writings that may be required for the use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
21.09   PARLIAMENTARIAN.
   The City Attorney shall, upon request, serve as parliamentarian for the
Council and any Board or Commission.
CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 
22.01 Public Library                   22.07 Nonresident Use
22.02 Library Trustees                 22.08 Expenditures
22.03 Qualifications of Trustees       22.09 Annual Report
22.04 Organization of the Board        22.10 Injury to Books or Property
22.05 Powers and Duties                22.11 Theft
22.06 Contracting with Other Libraries 22.12 Notice Posted
 
22.01   PUBLIC LIBRARY.
   The public library for the City is known as the Altoona Public Library. It
is referred to in this chapter as the Library.
22.02   LIBRARY TRUSTEES.
   The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
consists of seven resident members. All members are to be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council.
22.03   QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.
   All members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the
City. Members shall be over the age of 18 years.
22.04   ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.
   The organization of the Board shall be as follows:
   1.   Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for six years,
except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. Appointments
shall be made every two years of one-third the total number or as near as
possible, to stagger the terms.
   2.   Vacancies. The position of any Trustee shall be vacated if such member
moves permanently from the City and shall be deemed vacated if such member is
absent from six consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in the case
of sickness or temporary absence from the City. Vacancies in the Board shall be
filled in the same manner as an original appointment except that the new
Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made.
   3.   Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their
services.
22.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary,
and such other officers as it deems necessary.
   2.   Physical Plant. To have charge, control, and supervision of the
Library, its appurtenances, fixtures, and rooms containing the same.
   3.   Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
   4.   Hiring of Personnel. To employ a Librarian, and authorize the Librarian
to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper
management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, prior
to such employment, the compensation of the Librarian, assistants, and
employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of
the Board voting in favor thereof.
   5.   Removal of Personnel. To remove the Librarian, by a two-thirds vote of
the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or
employees for misdemeanor, incompetence, or inattention to duty, subject
however, to the provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
   6.   Purchases. To select, or authorize the Librarian to select, and make
purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals,
other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery, and supplies for the
Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
   7.   Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by
nonresidents and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service
exists.
   8.   Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify, or repeal
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the
law, for the care, use, government, and management of the Library and the
business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
   9.   Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by
gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other
moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals collected under the
rules of the Board.
   10.   Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed
property, and devises, and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title
to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale
for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them
from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.
   11.   Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the
performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises, and bequests accepted
by the City by action against the Council.
   12.   Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
   13.   County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements
with the local County historical association where such exists, and to set
apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the
possession of the association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase
necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such
articles as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and
pay for the same out of funds allocated for Library purposes.
22.06   CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES.
   The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees
of free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or
semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County,
or with the trustees of any County library district for the use of the Library
by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 and Ch. 28E)
   2.   Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority
vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing
body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent
in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the
contracting party at the last general election. The petition must be presented
to the governing body not less than 40 days before the election. The
proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law which is held in
the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
22.07   NONRESIDENT USE.
   The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents of
the City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
   1.   Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to
nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or
County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
   2.   Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other
materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
   3.   Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that
books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
   4.   Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or
other Library materials to nonresidents.
22.08   EXPENDITURES.
   All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of
the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. Expenditures
shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and
Secretary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 and 392.5)
22.09   ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close of
the fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of
the Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of
fines collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the
Library during the year, together with such further information as may be
required by the Council.
22.10   INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear,
deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper,
periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture, or other property belonging to
the Library or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
22.11   THEFT.
   No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with
the intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
22.12   NOTICE POSTED.
   There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library notices
informing the public of the following:
   1.   Failure to Return. Failure to return Library materials for two months
or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library materials, or
failure to return Library equipment for one month or more after the date the
person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence of intent to deprive
the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the mailing by restricted
certified mail of notice that such material or equipment is overdue and
criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the materials or
equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
   2.   Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be
detained and searched pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)
CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
 
23.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 23.04 Compensation
23.02 Term of Office                 23.05 Powers and Duties
23.03 Vacancies                       
 
23.01   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
Commission, consists of seven members appointed by the Council. The Commission
members shall be residents of the City and shall not hold any elective office
in the City government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 and 392.1)
23.02   TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five years. The
terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year.
Two unexcused absences, or three total absences from regularly scheduled
meetings in any one calendar year, are grounds for dismissal from the
Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.03   VACANCIES.
   If any vacancy exists on the Commission, caused by resignation or otherwise,
a successor for the remainder of the term shall be appointed in the same manner
as the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.04   COMPENSATION.
   All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its
first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as
Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during
the Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   2.   Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   3.   Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and
duties and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other
related matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments,
supplements, changes, or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
   4.   Recommendations on Improvements. The design and proposed location of
public improvements shall be submitted to the Commission for its
recommendations prior to any actions being taken by the City for the
construction or placement of such improvements. Such requirements and
recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement if
the Commission, after 30 days’ written notice requesting such recommendations,
has failed to file the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   5.   Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of
subdivisions or re-subdivisions of land in the City or adjacent thereto, laid
out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same
intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to
the Commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   6.   Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete, and
exclusive authority to expend, for and on behalf of the City, all sums of money
appropriated to it and to use and expend all gifts, donations, or payments that
are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   7.   Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power to
contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as
approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   8.   Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the
Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts and
disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 24
PARKS BOARD
 
24.01 Parks Board Created 24.04 Compensation
24.02 Term                24.05 Powers and Duties
24.03 Conduct of Business 24.06 Liaison Officer
 
24.01   PARKS BOARD CREATED.
   A Parks Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board) is hereby created to
advise the Council on needed facilities such as parks, playgrounds, or other
forms of recreation. The Board shall oversee City programs and aid in the
creation of new programs for the leisure time of the City’s residents.
24.02   TERM.
   The members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval
of the Council at the organization Council meeting each year, for a term of two
years with staggered terms, whereby not more than four terms shall expire in
any one year. The Board shall consist of seven citizens of the City of legal
age. Two unexcused absences, or three total absences from regularly scheduled
meetings in any one calendar year are grounds for dismissal from the Board.
24.03   CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
   The Board shall, at its first meeting in January of each year, elect one of
its members as Chairperson and such other officers as the Board shall deem
necessary to conduct its business. The Board shall adopt such rules as it deems
necessary to conduct its business and duties as required by this chapter. The
Board meetings shall be conducted pursuant to the rules adopted by the Board
and in the event of a specific rule not being adopted by the Board, Robert’s
Rules of Order Revised shall apply. The Board shall keep a record of all
transactions and proceedings and submit copies to the Council promptly.
24.04   COMPENSATION.
   There shall be no compensation attached to the office of Parks Board and all
services performed by said Board member shall be rendered without compensation
therefore.
24.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The jurisdiction of the Board shall consist of all parks, pleasure grounds
owned by the City and set apart for leisure time or recreation, within or
outside the City. The Board shall have and exercise, without request, the
powers and duties set out herein, but the Council shall have final authority of
said powers and duties. They are:
   1.   To recommend development and extension of playgrounds to the Council,
and accomplish the same as municipal budget allocations permit.
   2.   To monitor all facilities, appurtenances, fixtures, and equipment owned
by or under control of the City used for parks or recreation purposes.
   3.   To aid, review, and recommend charges for the use of parks when
applicable.
   4.   To seek citizens’ input with and serve as a liaison between the
residents of the City and the Council and to promote City parks and
recreational programs.
   5.   To recommend to the Council a long-term capital improvement program for
parks, including the acquisition or leasing of park sites.
   6.   To recommend rules and regulations concerning the use of parks.
24.06   LIAISON OFFICER.
   A liaison officer will be supplied from the Council who will forward all
recommendations of the Parks Board to either the Mayor or Council for their
consideration.
CHAPTER 25
ARTS AND CULTURE COMMISSION
 
25.01 Arts and Culture Commission Created 25.05 Compensation
25.02 Term                                25.06 Powers and Duties
25.03 Qualification                       25.07 Liaison Officer
25.04 Conduct of Business                   
 
25.01   ARTS AND CULTURE COMMISSION CREATED.
   An Arts and Culture Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission)
is hereby created to advise the Council on needed public art. The Commission
shall oversee City programs and aid in the creation of new programs for the
leisure time of the City’s residents.
25.02   TERM.
   Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval
of the Council at the organization Council meeting each year, for a term of two
years with staggered terms, whereby not more than four terms shall expire in
any one year. The Commission shall consist of seven citizens of the City of
legal age. Two unexcused absences, or three total absences from regularly
scheduled meetings in any one calendar year are grounds for dismissal from the
Commission.
25.03   QUALIFICATION.
   The members shall be appointed on the basis of experience or interest in the
arts.
25.04   CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
   The Commission shall, at its first meeting in January of each year, elect
one of its members as Chairperson and such other officers as the Commission
shall deem necessary to conduct its business. The Commission shall adopt such
rules as it deems necessary to conduct its business and duties as required by
this chapter. The Commission meetings shall be conducted pursuant to the rules
adopted by the Commission and in the event of a specific rule not being adopted
by the Commission, Robert’s Rules of Order Revised shall apply. The Commission
shall keep a record of all transactions and proceedings and submit copies to
the Council promptly.
25.05   COMPENSATION.
   There shall be no compensation attached to the office of the Arts and
Culture Commission member and all services performed by said Commission member
shall be rendered without compensation therefore.
25.06   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The jurisdiction of the Commission shall consist of the incorporated City
limits. The Commission shall have and exercise, without request, the powers and
duties set out herein, but the Council shall have final authority of said
powers and duties. They are:
   1.   Make recommendations to the Council for the provision of an environment
in which arts will flourish within the corporate limits of the City;
   2.   Promote Fine Arts Month during the month of March;
   3.   Review the appropriate placement of purchased, commissioned, or donated
public art work in public areas where residents and visitors live and
congregate, and that are highly visible and accessible;
   4.   Establish public arts donation guidelines and related review process.
25.07   LIAISON OFFICER.
   A liaison officer will be supplied from the Council who will forward all
recommendations of the Arts and Culture Commission to either the Mayor or
Council for their consideration.
CHAPTER 30
POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
30.01 Department Established       30.06 Peace Officers Appointed
30.02 Organization                 30.07 Powers and Duties of Police Chief
30.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 30.08 Departmental Rules
30.04 Required Training            30.09 Summoning Aid
30.05 Compensation                 30.10 Taking Weapons
 
30.01   DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   The Police Department of the City is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.
30.02   ORGANIZATION.
   The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement
officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the
Council.
30.03   PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.
   In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement
officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification standards
established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
30.04   REQUIRED TRAINING.
   All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law
at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment.
Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11(2))
(501 IAC 3 and 8)
30.05   COMPENSATION.
   Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
30.06   PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED.
   The Mayor shall appoint and dismiss the Police Chief subject to the consent
of a majority of the Council. The Police Chief shall select, subject to the
approval of Council, the other members of the department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
30.07   POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
   The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval
of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   1.   General. Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by law or
ordinance.
   2.   Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances, and regulations and bring
all persons committing any offense before the proper court.
   3.   Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the
Police Chief.
   4.   Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to
the State Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
   5.   Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including
conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
   6.   Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers,
boards, and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
   7.   Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for
the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
   8.   Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by
showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City
ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest, and the disposition of the
charge.
   9.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report
as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
   10.   Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and
be responsible for the care, maintenance, and use of all vehicles, equipment,
and materials of the department.
30.08   DEPARTMENTAL RULES.
   The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the Code
of Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary
for the operation of the department.
30.09   SUMMONING AID.
   Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as
the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
30.10   TAKING WEAPONS.
   Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items
that are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have
within such person’s control, to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
CHAPTER 31
RESERVE PEACE OFFICERS
 
31.01 Establishment of Force     31.07 No Reduction of Regular Force
31.02 Training                   31.08 Compensation
31.03 Status of Reserve Officers 31.09 Benefits When Injured
31.04 Carrying Weapons           31.10 Liability and False Arrest Insurance
31.05 Supplementary Capacity     31.11 No Participation in Pension Fund or
                                 Retirement System
31.06 Supervision of Officers     
 
31.01   ESTABLISHMENT OF FORCE.
   A force of reserve peace officers is hereby established. A reserve peace
officer is a volunteer, non-regular, sworn member of the Police Department who
will serve with or without compensation and has regular police powers while
functioning as the Police Department’s representative, and will participate on
a regular basis in the agency’s activities, including those of crime prevention
and control, preservation of the peace, and enforcement of the law.
31.02   TRAINING.
   Training for individuals appointed as reserve peace officers shall be
provided by instructors in a community college or other facility, including a
law enforcement agency, selected by the individual and approved by the law
enforcement agency and the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy. All standards and
training required under Chapter 80D of the Code of Iowa constitute the minimum
standards for reserve peace officers. Upon satisfactory completion of training,
the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy shall certify the individual as a reserve
peace officer. There shall be no exemptions from the personal and training
standards provided for in this chapter.
31.03   STATUS OF RESERVE OFFICERS.
   Reserve peace officers shall serve as peace officers on the orders and at
the discretion of the Police Chief. While in the actual performance of official
duties, reserve peace officers shall be vested with the same rights,
privileges, obligations, and duties as any other peace officer.
31.04   CARRYING WEAPONS.
   A member of the reserve force shall not carry a weapon in the line of duty
until he or she has been approved by the Council and certified by the Iowa Law
Enforcement Academy Council. After approval and certification, a reserve peace
officer may carry a weapon in the line of duty only when authorized by the
Police Chief.
31.05   SUPPLEMENTARY CAPACITY.
   Reserve peace officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the
regular force and shall not assume full-time duties of regular peace officers
without first complying with all the requirements of regular peace officers.
31.06   SUPERVISION OF OFFICERS.
   Reserve peace officers shall be subordinate to regular peace officers, shall
not serve as peace officers unless under the direction of regular peace
officers, and shall wear a uniform prescribed by the Police Chief, unless that
superior officer designates alternate apparel for use when engaged in
assignments involving special investigations, civil process, court duties, jail
duties, and the handling of mental patients. The reserve peace officers shall
not wear an insignia of rank.
31.07   NO REDUCTION OF REGULAR FORCE.
   There shall be no reduction of the authorized size of the regular law
enforcement department of the City because of the establishment or utilization
of reserve peace officers.
31.08   COMPENSATION.
   While performing official duties, each reserve peace officer shall be
considered an employee of the City and shall be paid a minimum of $1.00 per
year. The Council may provide additional monetary assistance for the purchase
and maintenance of uniforms and equipment used by reserve peace officers.
31.09   BENEFITS WHEN INJURED.
   Hospital and medical assistance and benefits, as provided in Chapter 85 of
the Code of Iowa, shall be provided by the Council to members of the reserve
force who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties.
31.10   LIABILITY AND FALSE ARREST INSURANCE.
   Liability and false arrest insurance shall be provided by the City to
members of the reserve force while performing official duties in the same
manner as for regular peace officers.
31.11   NO PARTICIPATION IN PENSION FUND OR RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   This chapter shall not be construed to authorize or permit a reserve peace
officer to become eligible for participation in a pension fund or retirement
system created by the laws of the State and of which regular peace officers may
become members.
CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
35.01 Establishment and Purpose 35.09 Departmental Rules and Regulations
35.02 Organization              35.10 Accidental Injury Insurance
35.03 Administration            35.11 Liability Insurance
35.04 Training                  35.12 Calls Outside City
35.05 Compensation              35.13 Mutual Aid
35.06 Officers                  35.14 Authority to Cite Violations
35.07 Fire Chief: Duties        35.15 Emergency Ambulance Service and Fees
35.08 Obedience to Fire Chief    
 
35.01   ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   A paid and career Fire Department is hereby established to prevent and
extinguish fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote
fire prevention and life safety, and to respond to all emergency medical and
rescue requests for which there is no other established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
35.02   ORGANIZATION.
   The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers and
personnel as may be authorized by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
35.03   ADMINISTRATION.
   The Fire Chief is directly responsible to the City Administrator for
administration of the Fire Department.
35.04   TRAINING.
   All members of the department shall meet the minimum training standards
established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively participate in
regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2(4))
35.05   COMPENSATION.
   Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
35.06   OFFICERS.
   The City Administrator shall appoint a Fire Chief, subject to the approval
of the Council. The Fire Chief shall be responsible to the City Administrator
for the functions of the Fire Department. The Fire Chief shall appoint any
other officers in the department. In case of absence of the Chief, the officer
next in rank shall be in charge and have and exercise all the powers of Chief.
35.07   FIRE CHIEF: DUTIES.
   The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or
ordinance, including, but not limited to, the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   1.   Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention
and the investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires and
explosions.
   2.   Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits, and
development of fire emergency plans.
   3.   Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation
as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation,
investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other
hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the
reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   4.   Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle, or vessel from
approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel,
or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the Fire
Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   5.   Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect
ropes, guards, barricades, or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-
of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to
prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the Fire
Department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete,
or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
   6.   Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline, and control of the Fire Department. The members of the Fire
Department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
   7.   Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all
fire apparatus, tools, equipment, and other property used by or belonging to
the Fire Department.
   8.   Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage
in excess of $200,000.00 has occurred as a result of a fire, or if arson is
suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately. For all other
fires causing an estimated damage of $50.00 or more or emergency responses by
the Fire Department, file a report with the Fire Marshal’s Division within 10
days following the end of the month. The report shall indicate all fire
incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of the
property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated
total loss to the property, origin of the fire as determined by investigation,
and other facts, statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 and 100.3)
   9.   Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any
building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of
making such investigation or inspection which under law or ordinance may be
necessary to be made and is reasonably necessary to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare.
Code of Iowa, Sec. 10A.514)
   10.   Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers, or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
   11.   Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal,
and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by
investigating, preventing, and reporting data pertaining to fires.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.4)
   12.   Records. Cause to be kept records of the Fire Department personnel,
firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number
of responses to alarms, their cause and location, and an analysis of losses by
value, type, and location of buildings.
   13.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor, Council, and City
Administrator an annual report of the status and activities of the department
as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor, Council, or
City Administrator.
   14.   Personnel. Recruit, select, and train personnel to provide the
necessary proficiency level for emergency service responses.
   15.   Budget. Prepare annual budgetary requests and Capital Improvement Plan
(CIP) for personnel, apparatus, equipment, and maintenance to ensure safe and
efficient emergency response for Council approval.
35.08   OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Chief.
35.09   DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Fire Chief shall establish such rules and regulations, not in conflict
with this Code of Ordinances and subject to the approval of the Council, as may
be necessary to accomplish the object contemplated for the safe, efficient, and
proper performance operations of the department.
35.10   ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE.
   The Council contract to insure the City against liability for worker’s
compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization,
nursing, and medical attention for firefighters and medical personnel injured
in the performance of their duties whether within or outside the corporate
limits of the City. All Fire Department staffing shall be covered by the
contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61, and 410.18)
35.11   LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The Council shall contract to ensure against liability of the City or
members of the Fire Department for injuries, death, or property damage arising
out of and resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or
outside the corporate limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 and 517A.1)
35.12   CALLS OUTSIDE CITY.
   The Fire Department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies
outside the City limits if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists
and that such action will not endanger persons and property within the City
limits.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4(2 and 3))
35.13   MUTUAL AID.
   Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the Fire Department may
enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire
departments. Copies of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4(2 and 3))
35.14   AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS.
   Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 10A, Subchapter V, Part
2 of the Code of Iowa, may issue citations in accordance with Chapter 805 of
the Code of Iowa, for violations of Chapter 10A, Subchapter V, Part 2 of the
Code of Iowa or a violation of a local fire safety code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
35.15   EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE AND FEES.
   The Fire Department is authorized to provide emergency ambulance and rescue
services and the accidental injury and liability insurance provided for herein
shall include such operation. The Fire Department shall charge a fee to the
user of such service as set forth in a schedule of fees adopted by Council in
resolution form. Payment of such fee shall be made to the City Fire Department
and deposited in the General Funds.
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
 
40.01 Assault            40.04 Failure to Disperse
40.02 Harassment         40.05 Peeping; Loitering
40.03 Disorderly Conduct 40.06 Disorderly House
 
40.01   ASSAULT.
   No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
   1.   Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to cause pain or injury to
another or that is intended to result in physical contact that will be
insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute
the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1(1))
   2.   Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to place another in
fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting,
or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1(2))
   An act described in Subsections 1 and 2 shall not be an assault under the
following circumstances: (i) if the person doing any of the enumerated acts,
and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other
activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable
incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk of
serious injury or breach of the peace; (ii) if the person doing any of the
enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic
school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a
school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle or
other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or
staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school
grounds, or at an official school function, regardless of the location, whether
the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between
students or other individuals, if the degree and the force of the intervention
is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those
assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02   HARASSMENT.
   No person shall commit harassment.
   1.   A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy, or
alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
      A.   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing, or via
electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to
cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      B.   Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      C.   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      D.   Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law
enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing
that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal
act, knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   2.   A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without
legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent
to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section,
unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in
which two or more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other.
“Personal contact” does not require a physical touching or oral communication,
although it may include these types of contacts.
40.03   DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   No person shall do any of the following:
   1.   Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or
in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in
athletic contests may engage in such conduct that is reasonably related to that
sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4(1)(a))
   2.   Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or
public building which intentionally or recklessly causes unreasonable distress
to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4(1)(b))
   3.   Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening
gesture that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a
violent reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4(1)(c))
   4.   Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of
authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct
intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4(1)(d))
   5.   False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate
a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such
report to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4(1)(e))
   6.   Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United
States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the
United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will
provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault. As used in this
subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4(1)(f))
      A.   “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
      B.   “Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
      C.   “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be
flown from a pole or mast.
      D.   “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make
imperfect.
      E.   “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate, or trample.
      F.   “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a
machine, vehicle, or animal to tread upon.
   7.   Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 1,000 feet of the building or other
location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within
1,000 feet of a funeral procession or burial:
      A.   Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable distress to the
persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the
funeral procession.
      B.   Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction
by another.
      C.   Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral
procession, or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral,
memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.
   This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during, and
within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or
burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
40.04   FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or
persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse.
No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
40.05   PEEPING; LOITERING.
   It is unlawful to loiter on the public sidewalks, streets, or alleys of the
City, or on any private property, with the intent to peep, or in the act of
peeping, spying, or looking into the windows of dwellings, apartments, homes,
or any private place whether in close proximity thereto or not.
40.06   DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   1.   Disorderly House Defined: for the purpose of this section, the term
“disorderly house” means and includes any building, house, enclosure, or place
in or upon which occurs any of the following prohibited activities:
      A.   Disorderly conduct as defined in Section 40.03;
      B.   Any noise in violation of the provisions set forth in Chapter 58;
      C.   The open storage, use, or consumption of a controlled substance as
defined in Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, under which possession of such
substance would be an offense;
      D.   Gambling in violation of Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa;
      E.   Dispensing, selling, or consumption of an alcoholic beverage in
violation of Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa;
      F.   Acts of prostitution, pimping, or pandering as defined in Chapter
725 of the Code of Iowa;
      G.   Engaging in a massage business without a license or any other
illegal acts as specified in Chapter 152C of the Code of Iowa;
      H.   Illegal use of fireworks and individual, owner, lessee, renter,
proprietor, or any other person with control of the real property to allow,
permit, host, consent to, or facilitate the use or exploding of consumer or
display fireworks without a permit.
   2.   Prohibited. No person (individual, owner, lessee, renter, proprietor,
or any other person with control of the real property) shall knowingly keep,
maintain, operate, or be concerned in keeping, maintaining, or operating within
the City any disorderly house; nor shall any person knowingly own or be
interested as a proprietor or landlord in any such place.
   3.   Authority to Restore Order and Disperse; Failure to Disperse. Upon
issuance of a citation for a violation of this section, any peace officer of
the City shall have the authority to restore order upon the subject premises,
up to and including ordering the dispersal of persons from the subject
premises. Any person who fails or refuses to obey and abide by such an order
shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
   4.   Penalty.
      A.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a simple misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in
accordance with Section 1.14.
      B.   Any repeat violation of this subsection by a property owner or
tenant may be considered a municipal infraction and punished in accordance with
Chapter 3.
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
 
                                                         41.08 Abandoned or
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances                  Unattended
                                                         Refrigerators
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public     41.09 Antenna and
Safety Entities                                          Radio Wires
41.03 Providing False Identification Information         41.10 Barbed Wire and
                                                         Electric Fences
41.04 Refusing to Assist Officer                         41.11 Discharging
                                                         Weapons
41.05 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees        41.12 Throwing and
                                                         Shooting
41.06 Interference with Official Acts                    41.13 Urinating and
                                                         Defecating
41.07 Removal of an Officer’s Communication or Control 41.14 Failure to
Device                                                   Assist
 
41.01   DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.
   No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any
corrosive, caustic, poisonous, or other injurious substance unless the person
delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes
reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or
animals from the place where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02   FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES.
   No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
   1.   Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department,
a law enforcement authority, or other public safety entity, knowing that the
information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act
knowing the act did not occur.
   2.   Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that they are
not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or
assistance.
   3.   Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who
enters the information on a citation.
41.03   PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION.
   No person shall knowingly provide false identification information to anyone
known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider, or
firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is
within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency
medical care provider, or firefighter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)
41.04   REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.
   Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to
render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an
arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render
assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause,
refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
41.05   HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer
or employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.06   INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.
   No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to
be a peace officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider under Chapter 147A
of the Code of Iowa, medical examiner, or firefighter, whether paid or
volunteer, or a person performing bailiff duties pursuant to Section 602.1303
(4) of the Code of Iowa, in the performance of any act that is within the scope
of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, jailer, emergency medical care
provider, medical examiner, or firefighter, or person performing bailiff
duties, or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any
authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order of any court. The
terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in this section do not include verbal
harassment unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present ability and
apparent intention to execute a verbal threat physically.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
41.07   REMOVAL OF AN OFFICER’S COMMUNICATION OR CONTROL DEVICE.
   No person shall knowingly or intentionally remove or attempt to remove a
communication device or any device used for control from the possession of a
peace officer or correctional officer, when the officer is in the performance
of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that
officer and the person knew or should have known the individual to be an
officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.12)
41.08   ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.
   No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice
box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such
refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on
premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so
accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.09   ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.
   It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio
wires, or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground, or public building without written consent of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2))
41.10   BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
   It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose
land within the City limits without the written consent of the Council unless
such land consists of 10 acres or more and is used as agricultural land.
41.11   DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
   1.   It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers,
pistols, guns, or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except by
written consent of the Council.
   2.   No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner.
41.12   THROWING AND SHOOTING.
   It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks, or missiles of any kind
or to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB guns,
or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building, without written
consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2))
41.13   URINATING AND DEFECATING.
   It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk,
street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building,
including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway,
doorway, or window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
41.14   FAILURE TO ASSIST.
   A person who reasonably believes another person is suffering from a risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death shall, if the person is able,
attempt to contact local law enforcement or local emergency response
authorities, if doing so does not place the person or other person at risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death. No person shall without
lawful cause violate the provisions of this section. A person shall not be
required to contact local law enforcement or emergency response authorities if
the person knows or reasonably believes that the other person is not in need of
help or assistance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.12)
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
 
42.01 Trespassing                       42.05 Fraud
42.02 Criminal Mischief                 42.06 Theft
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.07 Other Public Property Offenses
42.04 Unauthorized Entry                 
 
42.01   TRESPASSING.
   1.   Prohibited. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the
property of another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.8)
   2.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7(1))
      A.   “Property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance,
vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly or
privately owned.
      B.   “Public utility” is a public utility as defined in Section 476.1 of
the Code of Iowa or an electric transmission line as provided in Chapter 478 of
the Code of Iowa.
      C.   “Public utility property” means any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure owned, leased,
or operated by a public utility and that is completely enclosed by a physical
barrier of any kind.
      D.   “Railway corporation” means a corporation, company, or person
owning, leasing, or operating any railroad in whole or in part within this
State.
      E.   “Railway property” means all tangible real and personal property
owned, leased, or operated by a railway corporation, with the exception of any
administrative building or offices of the railway corporation.
      F.   “Trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7(2)(a))
         (1)   Entering upon or in property without the express permission of
the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a
public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place
thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
         (2)   Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification
after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or
vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or the
agent or employee of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by
any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise
the use or maintenance of the property.
         (3)   Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect
of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
         (4)   Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing
therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein
anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the
owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession.
         (5)   Entering or remaining upon or in railway property without lawful
authority or without the consent of the railway corporation which owns, leases,
or operates the railway property. This paragraph does not apply to passage over
a railroad right-of-way, other than a track, railroad roadbed, viaduct, bridge,
trestle, or railroad yard, by an unarmed person if the person has not been
notified or requested to abstain from entering onto the right-of-way or to
vacate the right-of-way and the passage over the right-of-way does not
interfere with the operation of the railroad.
         (6)   Entering or remaining upon or in public utility property without
lawful authority or without the consent of the public utility that owns,
leases, or operates the public utility property. This paragraph does not apply
to passage over public utility right-of-way by a person if the person has not
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering onto the right-of-way or to vacate the right-of-way.
   3.   Specific Exceptions. “Trespass” does not mean either of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7(2)(b))
      A.   Entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of
retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been
thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that
the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route
to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is
possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
This paragraph does not apply to public utility property where the person has
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering.
      B.   Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway.
42.02   CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally
damage, deface, alter, or destroy property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03   DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES.
   It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down,
or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of
the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement, or
notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by
order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04   UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY.
   No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public building,
premises, or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said
building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open
to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an
unauthorized entry.
42.05   FRAUD.
   It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06   THEFT.
   It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
42.07   OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES.
   The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other activities or conditions that are also deemed
to be public property offenses:
   1.   Chapter 22 – Library
      A.   Section
22.10 – Injury to Books or Property
      B.   Section
22.11 – Theft of Library Property
   2.   Chapter 105 – Solid Waste Control and Recycling
      A.   Section
105.10 – Littering Prohibited
   3.   Chapter 135 – Street Use and Maintenance
      A.   Section
135.01 – Removal of Warning Devices
      B.   Section
135.02 – Obstructing or Defacing
      C.   Section
135.03 – Placing Debris On
      D.   Section
135.04 – Playing In
      E.   Section
135.05 – Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
      F.   Section
135.08 – Burning Prohibited
      G.   Section
135.12 – Dumping of Snow
   4.   Chapter 136 – Sidewalk Regulations
      A.   Section
136.11 – Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
      B.   Section
136.15 – Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
      C.   Section
136.16 – Defacing
      D.   Section
136.17 – Debris on Sidewalks
      E.   Section
136.18 – Merchandise Display
      F.   Section
136.19 – Sales Stands
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
 
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.02 Public Consumption or   45.04 Social Host
Intoxication
 
45.01   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
   As used in this section, “legal age” means 21 years of age or more.  
   1.   A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase, consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic beverages in their
possession or control; except in the case of any alcoholic beverage given or
dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the
knowledge, presence, and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or
medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or
dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under
legal age may handle alcoholic beverages during the regular course of the
person’s employment by a retail alcohol licensee, or wine or beer permittee
under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47(3))
   2.   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for
the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage from
any retail alcohol licensee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(3))
45.02   PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
   1.   As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
      A.   “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of
Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code of
Iowa.
      B.   “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine
to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using
devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
      C.   “Peace officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
      D.   “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a
public or private school that provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten
through Grade 12.
   2.   A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer upon
the public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic
liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a retail alcohol
license. A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer
on public school property or while attending any public or private school-
related function. A person shall not be intoxicated in a public place.
   3.   A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
   4.   When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public
intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that
the person may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own expense.
If a device approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample
of a person’s breath to determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is
available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a
prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test
performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper
foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or
urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours
after the person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be
the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03   OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES. [See Sections
62.01(50) and (51).]
45.04   SOCIAL HOST.
   A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has control over,
property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any person,
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under the age of
18, to consume or possess on such property any alcoholic beverage. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a landlord or manager of the
property or to a person under legal age who consumes or possesses any alcoholic
beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony, or rite.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47)
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
 
46.01 Curfew                      46.04 Minors in Billiard Rooms
46.02 Cigarettes and Tobacco      46.05 Persons Under 21 in Gambling Facility
46.03 Contributing to Delinquency  
 
46.01   CURFEW.
   A curfew applicable to minors is established and shall be enforced as
follows:
   1.   Definition. The term “minor” means, in this section, any person below
the age of 18 years.
   2.   Time Limits. It is unlawful for any minor to be or reman upon any of
the alleys, streets, or public places or to be in places of business and
amusement in the City between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the
following day on days commencing on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and
Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday and
Sunday.
   3.   Exceptions. The restriction provided by Section
46.01(2) shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by a guardian, parent,
or other person charged with the care and custody of such minor, or other
responsible person over 21 years of age, nor shall the restriction apply to any
minor who is traveling between their home or place of residence and the place
where any approved employment, church, municipal, or school function is being
held.
   4.   Responsibility of Adults. It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, or
other person charged with the care and custody of any minor to allow or permit
such minor to be in or upon any of the streets, alleys, places of business or
amusement, or other public places within the curfew hours set by Section
46.01(2), except as otherwise provided in Section
46.01(3).
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 613.16)
   5.   Responsibility of Business Establishments. It is unlawful for any
persons operating a place of business or amusement to allow or permit any minor
to be in or upon any place of business or amusement operated by them within the
curfew hours set by Section
46.01(2).
   6.   Enforcement. Any peace officer of the City while on duty is hereby
empowered to arrest any minor who violates any of the provisions of Section
46.01(2) and (3). Upon arrest, the minor shall be returned to the custody of
the parent, guardian, or other person charged with the care and custody of the
minor.
46.02   CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO.
   It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to smoke, use, possess,
purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes. Possession of tobacco,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes
by an individual under 21 years of age shall not constitute a violation of this
section if the individual under 21 years of age possesses the tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as part
of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a
valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers for
sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.03   CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY.
   It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under 18 years of age
to commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
46.04   MINORS IN BILLIARD ROOMS.
   It is unlawful for any person who keeps a billiard hall where beer, liquor,
or wine is sold, or the agent, clerk, or employee of any such person, or any
person having charge or control of any such hall, to permit any minor under
legal age to remain in such hall or to take part in any of the games known as
billiards or pool.
46.05   PERSONS UNDER 21 IN GAMBLING FACILITY.
   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to enter or attempt
to enter a facility licensed under Chapter 99F of the Code of Iowa, to operate
gambling games. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a person
under the age of 21 years who is:
   1.   An employee of the licensee or performing a contracted service for the
licensee at the facility.
   2.   A public official or employee while at the facility in the performance
of such person’s official duties.
   3.   A person going directly to or from an area at the facility specifically
designated for activities for persons under the age of 21 years, if accompanied
by a person over the age of 21 years and if such person first contacts a
representative of the licensee.
   The provisions of this section shall also not apply to a facility or that
portion of a facility licensed by the State for pari-mutuel gambling.
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
 
47.01 Purpose                47.05 Parks Closed
47.02 Use of Drives Required 47.06 Camping
47.03 Fires                  47.07 Parking
47.04 Littering              47.08 Skate Parks
 
47.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park
facilities by the general public by establishing rules and regulations
governing the use of park facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
47.02   USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED.
   No person shall drive any car, cycle, or other vehicle, or ride or lead any
horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or roadways
therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the City.
   1.   No car, bicycle, moped, motorcycle or other vehicle, other than
vehicles designated or authorized by the City, may be operated on the access
road running north to south between the parking area of the Sam Wise Youth
Complex at Eighth Street SE and Eighth Avenue SE.
   2.   The fine for violating this section is $10.00.
47.03   FIRES.
   No fires shall be built, except in a place provided therefore, and such fire
shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be immediately
used by some other party.
47.04   LITTERING.
   No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter, or
foreign substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that
purpose.
47.05   PARKS CLOSED.
   No person, except those camping in designated areas, shall enter or remain
within any park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except for one-
half hour after softball games.
47.06   CAMPING.
   No person shall camp or set up any temporary camping site in any portion of
a park, public area, City street, or right-of-way, except in portions
prescribed or designated by the Council, and the City may refuse camping
privileges or rescind any and all camping privileges for cause.
47.07   PARKING.
   No parking shall be allowed in the City parks between 12:00 a.m. and 5:00
a.m., except as designated by the Council.
47.08   SKATE PARKS.
   1.   Skate Park Use.
      A.   All skaters must skate safely and responsibly. No skater may enter
the skate park when it is already being used to capacity. When skaters are
waiting to enter, a time limit of 20 minutes per person shall be imposed.
      B.   The hours of operation for the skate park are from sunrise to
sunset. Any person attempting to use the skate park during any other time shall
be subject to immediate removal, in addition to any other penalties provided in
this section.
      C.   The skate park is for non-motorized vehicles only. No other use is
permitted in or on the skate park whatsoever. Unauthorized equipment or
obstacles are prohibited.
      D.   Use of profanity or abusive language is strictly prohibited and
shall result in immediate removal from the skate park, in addition to other
penalties provided in this section.
      E.   No skating is permitted when surfaces are wet or icy.
      F.   No alcohol shall be permitted. No glass containers shall be
permitted.
      G.   No loud music shall be permitted.
      H.   No skating against traffic.
      I.   No use of ramps and runs until clear of other skaters.
      J.   No waxing of skate park surfaces shall be permitted.
      K.   No graffiti shall be permitted.
      L.   No pets shall be permitted in the skating area.
   2.   Violations and Penalties. Any person violating or failing to comply
with any of the provisions of this section, or any of the rules and regulations
established pursuant hereto, shall be immediately removed from the skate park
and shall be subject to a fine of $25.00 for a first offense, a fine of $100.00
for a second offense, and a permanent revocation of the privilege to use the
skate park for a third offense.
   3.   Rules and Regulations. The Mayor and Council shall have the power to
establish, by resolution or ordinance, additional rules and regulations for the
use and control of he skate park. Any such rules and regulations shall be
posted at the skate park and shall have the same force and effect as any other
provisions of this section, and the violation thereof shall constitute
violation of this section.
CHAPTER 48
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
 
48.01 Purpose                      48.04 Determining Factors
48.02 Controlled Substance Defined 48.05 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
48.03 Drug Paraphernalia Defined   48.06 Manufacture, Delivery, or Offering For
                                   Sale
 
48.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with intent
to use, manufacture, and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined herein.
48.02   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED.
   The term “controlled substance” as used in this chapter is defined as the
term “controlled substance” is defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
48.03   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED.
   The term “drug paraphernalia” as used in this chapter means all equipment,
products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or
designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing, containing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa. It includes, but is not limited to:
   1.   Growing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designated for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of
plant which is controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be
derived.
   2.   Processing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances.
   3.   Isomerization Devices. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance.
   4.   Testing Equipment. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or
designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or
purity of controlled substances.
   5.   Scales. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
   6.   Diluents. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose, or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances.
   7.   Separators - Sifters. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for
use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise
cleaning or refining marijuana.
   8.   Mixing Devices. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices
used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances.
   9.   Containers. Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
   10.   Storage Containers. Containers and other objects used, intended for
use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
   11.   Injecting Devices. Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects
used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting
controlled substances into the human body.
   12.   Ingesting-Inhaling Device. Objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin, marijuana,
cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
      A.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with
or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
      B.   Water pipes;
      C.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
      D.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
      E.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as
marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand;
      F.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
      G.   Chamber pipes;
      H.   Carburetor pipes;
      I.   Electric pipes;
      J.   Air driven pipes;
      K.   Chillums;
      L.   Bongs;
      M.   Ice pipes or chillers.
48.04   DETERMINING FACTORS.
   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose of
enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be considered in addition
to all other logically relevant factors:
   1.   Statements. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use.
   2.   Prior Convictions. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone
in control of the object under any State or federal law relating to any
controlled substance.
   3.   Proximity to Violation. The proximity of the object, in time and space,
to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of
the Code of Iowa.
   4.   Proximity to Substances. The proximity of the object to controlled
substances.
   5.   Residue. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object.
   6.   Evidence of Intent. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of
an owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom
they know, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a
violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of
Iowa.
   7.   Innocence of an Owner. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not prevent a finding
that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   8.   Instructions. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use.
   9.   Descriptive Materials. Descriptive materials accompanying the object
which explain or depict its use.
   10.   Advertising. National and local advertising concerning its use.
   11.   Displayed. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
   12.   Licensed Distributor or Dealer. Whether the owner, or anyone in
control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the
community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
   13.   Sales Ratios. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales
of the objects to the total sales of the business enterprise.
   14.   Legitimate Uses. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community.
   15.   Expert Testimony. Expert testimony concerning its use.
48.05   POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
48.06   MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY, OR OFFERING FOR SALE.
   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver,
manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia,
intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used, or knowing
that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
 
50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.05 Nuisances Prohibited
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated   50.06 Nuisance Abatement
50.03 Adult Establishments   50.07 Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice
50.04 Other Conditions       50.08 Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure
 
50.01   DEFINITION OF NUISANCE.
   Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to
interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02   NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions that are
deemed to be nuisances in the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
   1.   Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing, or using any building or other
place for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture that, by
occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other
annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property
of individuals or the public.
   2.   Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth, or
noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of
others.
   3.   Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding without
legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor, or collection of
water.
   4.   Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the
water of any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its
natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
   5.   Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by
fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places, or burying grounds.
   6.   Billboards. Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether
erected and constructed on public or private property, that so obstruct and
impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway,
boulevard, or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render
dangerous the use thereof. (See also Section
62.06) 
   7.   Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk,
such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such
articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof
construction. (See also Chapter 51) 
   8.   Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
   9.   Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush, or other
vegetation in the City so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard.
(See also Chapter 52)
   10.   Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch elm disease. (See also
Chapter 151)
   11.   Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within
1,000 feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or
landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take-
off and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or
enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.
   12.   Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of
prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code
of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as
defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or houses
where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, or breaches of the peace are carried
on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
   13.   Noise; Vibrations. All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations.
   14.   Street Obstructions. Obstructions and excavations affecting the
ordinary use by the public of streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds
except under such conditions as are provided by ordinance.
   15.   Obstructing Traffic or Walks. Any use of property abutting on a public
street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large
crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or
sidewalks.
   16.   Sound Equipment. The operation of any sound equipment, machine, or
amplifier amplifying sounds, music, or talking of any kind within the City
whether the same be located upon mobile equipment or permanently located. The
Mayor may issue a permit upon the payment of $1.00 under such reasonable
restrictions as the Mayor may prescribe to permit and limit the use of such
equipment.
   17.   Parking of Garbage Collection Vehicles. The parking of collection
vehicles, whether commercial or private, containing refuse, solid waste, or
garbage as such terms are defined in Chapter 105, in or within 500 feet of a
residential area for a period of more than two hours, except in cases of
mechanical breakdown or other emergency; or in the case of empty collection
vehicles, the parking of same in or within 100 feet of a residential area for a
period of more than two hours, except in cases of mechanical breakdown or other
emergency.
   18.   Continuing Violation. Any violation of this Code of Ordinances, herein
designated as a misdemeanor, in which a continuing offense can only be cured
through abatement is a nuisance.
50.03   ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS.
   1.   As used in this section, “adult establishment” means any business that
provides nude or topless dancing or operates any other adult-oriented business.
   2.   A public safety nuisance exists when it is established by clear and
convincing evidence that an owner, manager, employee, contemporaneous patron,
or guest of an adult establishment commits any of the following acts either on
the premises or in any parking lots or areas, including, but not limited to,
public rights-of-way, adjacent to the premises:
      A.   Unlawfully discharges a firearm or uses an offensive weapon, as
defined in Section 724.1 of the Code of Iowa, regardless of whether it inflicts
injury or death.
      B.   Assaults another person with a dangerous weapon as defined in
Section 702.7 of the Code of Iowa resulting in injury or death.
      C.   Engages in a riot as defined in Section 723.1 of the Code of Iowa on
three or more dates within a 12-month period to which the police respond and
disperse a crowd. The participants need not be the same persons for each
incident.
   3.   When the City Attorney believes a serious threat to the public safety
exists, the City Attorney or any other attorney on behalf of the City Attorney,
may file a suit in equity in the district court without bond seeking abatement
of the public safety nuisance arising from an adult establishment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.12)
50.04   OTHER CONDITIONS.
   The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other conditions that are deemed to be nuisances:
   1.   Junk and Junk Vehicles (See Chapter 51)
   2.   Weeds and Grass (See Chapter 52)
   3.   Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105)
   4.   Trees (See Chapter 151)
50.05   NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance,
public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or
State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.06   NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   Whenever any authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such
officer has the authority to determine on a case-by-case basis whether to
utilize the nuisance abatement procedure described in Section 50.07 of this
chapter or the municipal infraction procedure referred to in Section
50.08.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
50.07   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY WRITTEN NOTICE.
   Any nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in
this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
   1.   Contents of Notice to Property Owner. The notice to abate shall
contain: † 4    
      A.   Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the
nuisance.
      B.   Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
      C.   Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to
abate the nuisance.
      D.   Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.
      E.   Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or
condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within
the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against the
property owner.
   2.   Method of Service. The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or
sent by certified mail to the property owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
   3.   Request for Hearing. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a
hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a
hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time
stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance
exists and it must be abated as ordered. The hearing will be before the Council
at a time and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the Council shall be
conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated
within a reasonable time under the circumstances.
   4.   Abatement in Emergency. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may
perform any action that may be required under this chapter without prior
notice. The City shall assess the costs as provided in Subsection 6 of this
section after notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions of
Subsections 1 and 2, and the hearing as provided in Subsection 3.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
   5.   Abatement by City. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or
condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the
required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred.
The itemized expense account shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall pay such
expenses on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
   6.   Collection of Costs. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total
expense incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to
abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not
been paid within one month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County
Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner
as, general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
   7.   Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement. If the amount expended to
abate the nuisance or condition exceeds $500.00, the City may permit the
assessment to be paid in up to 10 annual installments, to be paid in the same
manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against
benefited property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
   8.   Failure to Abate. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who
shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time
required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of
Ordinances.
 
Notes
  †  EDITOR’S NOTE: A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is
  included in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of
  this administrative abatement procedure, particularly where cost of abatement is
4 more than minimal or where there is doubt as to whether or not a nuisance does in
  fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings, we
  recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with
  abatement and assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in court
  under Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.
50.08   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   In lieu of the abatement procedures set forth in Section
50.07, the requirements of this chapter may be enforced under the procedures
applicable to municipal infractions as set forth in Chapter 3.
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
 
51.01 Definitions                       51.04 Exceptions
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.05 Notice to Abate
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance  
 
51.01   DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
   1.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-
ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery,
and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery, or appliances; iron,
steel, or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass,
tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly
stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.
   2.   “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage with the
County Treasurer or unlicensed and having any of the following characteristics:
      A.   Broken Glass. Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield,
window, headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken glass.
      B.   Broken, Loose, or Missing Part. Any vehicle with a broken, loose, or
missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel, or trunk lid.
      C.   Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects. Any vehicle that has become
the habitat for rats, mice, snakes, or any other vermin or insects.
      D.   Flammable Fuel. Any vehicle that contains gasoline or any other
flammable fuel.
      E.   Inoperable. Any motor vehicle that lacks an engine or two or more
wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle totally
inoperable, or that cannot be moved under its own power or has not been used as
an operating vehicle for a period of 30 days or more.
      F.   Defective or Obsolete Condition. Any other vehicle that, because of
its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to
the public health and safety. Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not
constitute a defense to the finding that the vehicle is a junk vehicle.
   3.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and
includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle,
tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof.
51.02   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on
any private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or junk
vehicle.
51.03   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE.
   It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon private
property, unless excepted by Section
51.04, constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a
nuisance within the meaning of Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk
or junk vehicle is kept upon private property in violation hereof, the owner of
or person occupying the property upon which it is located shall be prima facie
liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(a))
51.04   EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk vehicle
stored within:
   1.   Structure. A garage or other enclosed structure; or
   2.   Salvage Yard. An auto salvage yard or junk yard lawfully operated
within the City.
51.05   NOTICE TO ABATE.
   Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property in
violation of Section 51.03, the City shall within five days initiate abatement
procedures as outlined in Chapter 50.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(a))
CHAPTER 52
WEEDS AND GRASS
 
52.01 Purpose                              52.04 Uniform Height Specifications
52.02 Definitions                          52.05 Noxious Weeds
52.03 Cutting Specifications and Standards 52.06 Notice to Abate
of Practice
 
52.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to beautify and preserve the appearance of
the City by requiring property owners and occupants to maintain grass lawns at
a uniform height within the boundaries of their property and on abutting street
right-of-way in order to prevent unsightly, offensive, or nuisance conditions.
52.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Curb,” “curb line,” or “curbing” means the outer boundaries of a
street at the edge of that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular
traffic.
   2.   “Cut” or “mow” means to mechanically maintain the growth of grass,
weeds, or brush at a uniform height.
   3.   “Owner” means a person owning private property in the City and any
person occupying private property in the City.
   4.   “Parking” means that part of a street in the City not covered by a
sidewalk and lying between the lot line or property line and the curb line; or
on unpaved streets, that part of the street lying between the lot line or
property line and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular
traffic.
   5.   “Mowing season” means the period beginning April 1 and ending October
31.
52.03   CUTTING SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE.
   1.   Every owner shall cut, mow, and maintain all grass, weeds, and brush
upon the owner’s property to a uniform height as defined in Section
52.04(1).
   2.   Every owner shall cut, mow, and maintain grass, weeds, and brush
adjacent to the curb line, including the parking area abutting the owner’s
property, to a uniform height as defined in Section 52.04(2).
52.04   UNIFORM HEIGHT SPECIFICATIONS.
   1.   Grass, weeds, or brush on private property shall be cut, mowed, and
maintained so as not to exceed the following height specifications:
      A.   Developed Residential Areas - not to exceed six inches.
      B.   Undeveloped Residential Areas - not to exceed 12 inches.
      C.   Business and Industrial Areas - not to exceed 12 inches.
      D.   Agricultural Areas - not to exceed 15 inches.
      E.   All Undeveloped Properties Adjacent to a Developed Property - not to
exceed six inches inside the property along the side and rear yards for a
distance of 10 feet measured horizontally into the property from the property
line.
   2.   Grass, weeds, or brush adjacent to the curb line or outer boundary of
any street, which includes the parking area abutting the owner’s property shall
be cut, mowed, and maintained so as not to exceed the following height
specifications:
      A.   Six inches.
   Grass, weeds, vines, and brush, which are allowed to grow in excess of the
above specified limitations are deemed to be violations of this chapter. (See
also Chapter 50)
52.05   NOXIOUS WEEDS.
   1.   Every owner shall cut and control noxious weeds upon the owner’s
property and adjacent to the curb line or outer boundary of any street, which
includes the parking area abutting the owner’s property by cutting noxious
weeds to ground level or use of herbicides to eliminate or eradicate such
weeds.
   2.   Noxious weeds include any weed growth or plant designated as noxious by
the State Department of Natural Resources rules and regulations or by the Code
of Iowa.
52.06   NOTICE TO ABATE.
   Upon discovery of any violations of this chapter, the City may, within three
days, initiate abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50.
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions                  55.10 Owner’s Duty
55.02 Animal Neglect               55.11 Confinement
55.03 Livestock Neglect            55.12 At Large: Impoundment
55.04 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs 55.13 Disposition of Animals
55.05 Livestock                    55.14 Pet Awards Prohibited
55.06 At Large Prohibited          55.15 Tampering With A Rabies Vaccination
                                   Tag
55.07 Damage or Interference       55.16 Tampering With An Electronic Handling
                                   Device
55.08 Annoyance or Disturbance     55.17 Animal Littering
55.09 Rabies Vaccination           55.18 Feeding
 
55.01   DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
   1.   “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any medium,
including (but not limited to) print, radio, television, sign, display, label,
tag, or articulation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   2.   “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
   3.   “Animal shelter” means a facility which is used to house or contain
dogs or cats, or both, and which is owned, operated, or maintained by an
incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention
of cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit organization devoted to the welfare,
protection, and humane treatment of such animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   4.   “At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the
control of a competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, or housed in
a veterinary hospital or kennel.
   5.   “Business” means any enterprise relating to any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
      A.   The sale or offer for sale of goods or services.
      B.   A recruitment for employment or membership in an organization.
      C.   A solicitation to make an investment.
      D.   An amusement or entertainment activity.
   6.   “Commercial establishment” means an animal shelter, boarding kennel,
commercial breeder, commercial kennel, dealer, pet shop, pound, public auction,
or research facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
   7.   “Fair” means any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
      A.   The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State Fair Board
pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event conducted by a
fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products.
      C.   An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or concession
booths.
   8.   “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill” as defined in
Section 99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   9.   “Injury” means an animal’s disfigurement; the impairment of an animal’s
health; or an impairment to the functioning of an animal’s limb or organ, or
the loss of an animal’s limb or organ.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
   10.   “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine,
ovine or porcine species, ostriches, rheas, and emus; farm deer (as defined in
Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa); or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
   11.   “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring an
animal.
   12.   “Pet” means a living dog, cat, or an animal normally maintained in a
small tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not limited to a
rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch, tropical fish,
goldfish, snake, turtle, gecko, or iguana.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   13.   “Pound” means a facility for the prevention of cruelty to animals
operated by the State, a municipal corporation, or other political subdivision
of the State for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized stray, homeless,
abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, or other animals; or a facility operated for
such a purpose under a contract with any municipal corporation or incorporated
society.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   14.   “Research facility” means any school or college of medicine,
veterinary medicine, pharmacy, dentistry, or osteopathic medicine, or hospital,
diagnostic or research laboratories, or other educational or scientific
establishment situated in the State concerned with the investigation of, or
instruction concerning the structure or function of living organisms, the
cause, prevention, control, or cure of diseases or abnormal conditions of human
beings or animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   15.   “Veterinarian” means a veterinarian licensed pursuant to Chapter 169
of the Code of Iowa who practices veterinary medicine in the State.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
55.02   ANIMAL NEGLECT.
   1.   It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of an animal and
confines that animal to fail to provide the animal with any of the following
conditions for the animal’s welfare:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
      A.   Access to food in an amount and quality reasonably sufficient to
satisfy the animal’s basic nutrition level to the extent that the animal’s
health or life is endangered.
      B.   Access to a supply of potable water in an amount reasonably
sufficient to satisfy the animal’s basic hydration level to the extent that the
animal’s health or life is endangered.  Access to snow or ice does not satisfy
this requirement.
      C.   Sanitary conditions free from excessive animal waste or the
overcrowding of animals to the extent that the animal’s health or life is
endangered.
      D.   Ventilated shelter reasonably sufficient to provide adequate
protection from the elements and weather conditions suitable for the age,
species, and physical condition of the animal so as to maintain the animal in a
state of good health to the extent that the animal’s health or life is
endangered. The shelter must protect the animal from wind, rain, snow, or sun
and have adequate bedding to provide reasonable protection against cold and
dampness. A shelter may include a residence, garage, barn, shed, or doghouse.
      E.   Grooming, to the extent it is reasonably necessary to prevent
adverse health effects or suffering.
      F.   Veterinary care deemed necessary by a reasonably prudent person to
relieve an animal’s distress from any of the following:
         (1)   A condition caused by failing to provide for the animal’s
welfare as described in this section.
         (2)   An injury or illness suffered by the animal causing the animal
to suffer prolonged pain and suffering.
   2.   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      A.   A person operating a commercial establishment under a valid
authorization issued or renewed under Section 162.2A of the Code of Iowa, or a
person acting under the direction or supervision of that person, if all of the
following apply:
         (1)   The animal, as described in Subsection 1, was maintained as part
of the commercial establishment’s operation.
         (2)   In providing conditions for the welfare of the animal, as
described in Subsection 1, the person complied with the standard of care
requirements provided in Section 162.10A(1) of the Code of Iowa, including any
applicable rules adopted by the Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship
applying to: (i) a State licensee or registrant operating pursuant to Section
162.10A(2)(a) or (2)(b) of the Code of Iowa; or (ii) a permittee operating
pursuant to Section 162.10A(2)(c) of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   A research facility if the research facility has been issued or
renewed a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture and Land
Stewardship pursuant to Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa, and performs functions
within the scope of accepted practices and disciplines associated with the
research facility.
55.03   LIVESTOCK NEGLECT.
   It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any place
to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary animal
husbandry practices, or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance, or to
injure or destroy livestock by any means that causes pain or suffering in a
manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.04   ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS.
   It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of a cat or dog to
relinquish all rights in and duties to care for the cat or dog. This section
does not apply to any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
   1.   The delivery of a cat or dog to another person who will accept
ownership and custody of the cat or dog.
   2.   The delivery of a cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound or that has
been issued or renewed a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture
and Land Stewardship under Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa.
   3.   A person who relinquishes custody of a cat at a location in which the
person does not hold a legal or equitable interest, if previously the person
had taken custody of the cat at the same location and provided for the cat’s
sterilization by a veterinarian.
55.05   LIVESTOCK.
   It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City, except
physician prescribed therapy animals with specific approval of the Council.
55.06   AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at large within the
corporate limits of the City. A dog shall not be deemed at large if:
   1.   The dog is on the premises of the owner, or a person given charge of
the dog by the owner and is either:
      A.   At all times within the actual physical presence of and immediately
obedient to the commands of the owner or person given charge of the dog by the
owner. At no time shall the dog be more than six feet from such person; or
      B.   Restrained on those premises by an adequate protective fence or
leash, cord, chain, or other similar restraint that does not allow a dog to go
beyond the owner’s real property line.
   2.   The dog is off the premises of the owner and is either on a leash,
cord, or chain or similar restraint not more than six feet in length.
55.07   DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE.
   It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to
pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference
with, the premises.
55.08   ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.
   It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow or permit such dog to cause
serious annoyance or disturbance to any person by frequent and habitual
howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise, or by running after or chasing
persons, bicycles, automobiles, or other vehicles.
55.09   RABIES VACCINATION.
   Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal. It
is unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in said person’s possession,
six months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies.
55.10   OWNER’S DUTY.
   It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat, or other animal that has bitten
or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack to
report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty
of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health the
existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.11   CONFINEMENT.
   If a local board of health receives information that an animal has bitten a
person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall
order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner
fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be
apprehended and impounded by such board, and after 10 days the board may
humanely destroy the animal. If such animal is returned to its owner, the owner
shall pay the cost of impoundment. This section does not apply if a police
service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in the
performance of its duties has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.12   AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT.
   Animals found at large in violation of this chapter shall be seized and
impounded at the impoundment facilities utilized by the City, or at the
discretion of the peace officer, the owner may be served a summons to appear
before a proper court to answer charges made thereunder.
55.13   DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
   When an animal has been apprehended and impounded, written notice shall be
provided to the owner within two days after impoundment, if the owner’s name
and current address can reasonably be determined by accessing a tag or other
device that is on or part of the animal. Impounded animals may be recovered by
the owner upon payment of impounding costs established by the impoundment
facility, and if an unvaccinated dog, by having it immediately vaccinated. If
the owner fails to redeem the animal within seven days from the date that the
notice is mailed, or if the owner cannot be located within seven days, the
animal shall be disposed of in accordance with law or destroyed by euthanasia.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37, 351.41)
55.14   PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717E)
   1.   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or advertise
that a pet may be awarded as any of the following:
      A.   A prize for participating in a game.
      B.   A prize for participating in a fair.
      C.   An inducement or condition for visiting a place of business or
attending an event sponsored by a business.
      D.   An inducement or condition for executing a contract that includes
provisions unrelated to the ownership, care, or disposition of the pet.
   2.   Exceptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
      A.   A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code of Iowa if
the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a pet on the
premises of the pet shop.
      B.   Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers of America;
the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated with outdoor
recreation, hunting, or fishing, including but not limited to the Iowa
Sportsmen’s Federation.
55.15   TAMPERING WITH A RABIES VACCINATION TAG.
   It is unlawful to tamper with a rabies vaccination tag.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.45)
   1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with a rabies vaccination tag
if all of the following apply:
      A.   The person knowingly removes, damages, or destroys a rabies
vaccination tag as described in Section 351.35 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   The rabies vaccination tag is attached to a collar worn by a dog,
including as provided in Sections 351.25 and 351.26 of the Code of Iowa.
   2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
      A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized
to take action by the owner.
      B.   A peace officer.
      C.   A veterinarian.
      D.   An animal shelter or pound.
55.16   TAMPERING WITH AN ELECTRONIC HANDLING DEVICE.
   It is unlawful to tamper with an electronic handling device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.46)
   1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with an electronic handling
device if all of the following apply:
      A.   The person knowingly removes, disables, or destroys an electronic
device designed and used to maintain custody or control of the dog or modify
the dog’s behavior.
      B.   The electronic device is attached to or worn by the dog or attached
to an item worn by the dog, including (but not limited to) a collar, harness,
or vest.
   2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
      A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized
to take action by the owner.
      B.   A peace officer.
      C.   A veterinarian.
      D.   An animal shelter or pound.
55.17   ANIMAL LITTERING.
   It is unlawful for the owner or responsible party to allow the animal to
deposit feces on public or private property without the consent of the property
owner. Animal feces deposited on public or private property shall be
immediately removed and disposed of in a sanitary manner. This section does not
apply to the owner of a service dog when the owner is deemed to be legally
blind or to have other medically and physically limiting disabilities.
55.18   FEEDING.
   No person shall intentionally feed any stray cat or dog within the City. For
purposes of this section, “feed or feeding” means the placing of dog or cat
food, which may result in dogs or cats congregating thereon on a regular basis.
CHAPTER 56
COUNTY DOG LICENSE REQUIRED
 
56.01 Annual License 56.02 Kennel Dogs
 
56.01   ANNUAL LICENSE.
   Every owner of a dog over the age of six months shall procure a dog license
from the County Auditor.
56.02   KENNEL DOGS.
   Kennel dogs which are kept or raised solely for the bona fide purpose of
sale and which are kept under constant restraint are not subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
CHAPTER 57
DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
 
                                          57.06 Seizure, Impoundment, and
57.01 Definitions                         Disposition of Dangerous Animals or
                                          Vicious Dogs
57.02 Keeping of Dangerous Animals Per Se 57.07 Insurance
Prohibited
57.03 Keeping of Dangerous Dogs Regulated 57.08 Penalty
57.04 Keeping of Vicious Dogs Regulated    
57.05 Keeping of Vicious Animals           
Prohibited
 
57.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Animal” means every wild, tame, or domestic member of the animal
kingdom other than the genus and species Homo sapiens.
   2.   “Animal control officer” means the individual or individuals appointed
by the City to enforce this chapter.
   3.   “At large” means off the premises of the owner, unless:
      A.   The animal is on a leash, cord, chain, or similar restraint not more
than six feet in length and under the control of the person; or
      B.   The animal is within a motor vehicle; or
      C.   The animal is housed within a veterinary hospital, licensed kennel,
pet shop, or animal shelter.
   4.   “Dangerous animals per se” means:
      A.   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, mink, and other mustelids (except
ferrets);
      B.   Black widow spiders and scorpions;
      C.   Racoons, opossums, and skunks;
      D.   Wolves and coyotes;
      E.   Bears;
      F.   All apes (including chimpanzees), baboons, and macaques;
      G.   Monkeys, except the squirrel monkey, female spider monkey, and
female woolly monkey;
      H.   Elephants;
      I.   Wild boar;
      J.   Snakes that are naturally venomous or poisonous;
      K.   All cats, except domestic cats (Carnivora of the family Felidae
including, but not limited to, lions, cougars, tigers, jaguars, leopards, lynx,
bobcats, etc.);
   5.   “Dogs” means and includes members of the Canine species, male or
female, whether neutered or not.
   6.   “Dangerous dog” means any dog shall be categorized as a dangerous dog
if it fits into any of the following categories:
      A.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person or a domestic pet or
animal, whether on public or private property.
      B.   Any uncontrolled dog that chases or approaches a person without
provocation in a manner that threatens the safety of humans or domestic pets or
animals.
      C.   Any dog with a demonstrated propensity, tendency, or disposition to
attack, to cause injury to, or to otherwise threaten the safety of humans or
domestic pets or animals. This category shall include a security dog that has
been trained to attack.
      D.   Acts in a highly aggressive manner within a fenced yard or enclosure
and appears, to a reasonable person, able to jump over or escape.
   7.   “Provocation” means that the threat, injury, or damage caused by the
dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was willfully trespassing upon
the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or the person was tormenting,
abusing, or assaulting the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a
crime.
   8.   “Vicious animal” means any animal, including a dog, except for a
dangerous animal per se, as listed above, if it fits into any of the following
categories:
      A.   Any dog or animal that according to the records of a health
department, police department, humane society, or according to any other
records available to the Police Department, has directly inflicted any physical
injury that resulted in broken bones or lacerations requiring sutures on a
human being, without provocation, on public or private property.
      B.   Any dog or animal that has killed a domestic pet or animal without
provocation while off its owner’s property.
      C.   Any dog or animal, while off its owner’s property, without
provocation bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans, domestic pets,
or animals.
   9.   Exceptions. A dog shall not be categorized as dangerous or vicious if
it bites, attacks, or menaces a person, domestic pet, or animal in order to:
      A.   Defend its owner, caretaker, or another person from an attack by a
person or animal.
      B.   Protect itself, its young, or another animal.
      C.   Defend itself against any person or animal that has tormented,
assaulted, or abused it.
      D.   Defends its owner’s or caretaker’s property against trespassers.
57.02   KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PER SE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor any dangerous animal, per se, as a
pet, or act as a custodian for such animal, temporarily or otherwise, or keep
such animal for any purpose or in any capacity within the City.
57.03   KEEPING OF DANGEROUS DOGS REGULATED.
   The owner or caretaker of any dog determined to be dangerous pursuant to the
provisions of this Code of Ordinances shall comply with the following
regulations:
   1.   No person owning, harboring, or having care of a dangerous dog may
permit such dog to go outside of its kennel or pen unless the dog is securely
leashed on a leash no longer than four feet in length.
   2.   No person may permit a dangerous dog to be kept on a chain, rope,
leash, or similar restraining device outside its kennel or pen unless a person
competent to govern the animal is in physical control of the restraining device
and remains in position to control the dog at all times. The dog may not be
leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, and buildings.
   3.   No dangerous dog may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a
house or structure on the premises of the owner or caretaker that would allow
the dog to exit the building on its own volition, except through a door leading
directly to a pen or kennel.
   4.   No dangerous dog may be kept in a house or structure when the windows
are open or when screen windows or doors are the only obstacle preventing the
dog from exiting the structure.
   5.   The owner of a dangerous dog must successfully complete a dog behavior
modification course, at owner’s expense, instructed by a licensed or certified
dog behavior specialist within 60 days after receiving notification declaring
the dog dangerous. The owner shall be required to provide a copy of proof of
successful completion of the course to the Police Chief and the proof shall
include certification or receipt bearing the name of the instructor and the
dates of instruction.
   6.   The owner of a dangerous dog must microchip the dog, at the owner’s
expense, within 60 days after receiving notification declaring the dog
dangerous in addition to licensing the pet in accordance with Chapter 56 in
order to assist in locating the dangerous dog, should it be found at large.
   7.   The owner shall allow the dog to be photographed for identification
purposes.
   8.   The dog shall be spayed or neutered at the owner’s expense.
57.04   KEEPING OF VICIOUS DOGS REGULATED.
   The owner or caretaker of any dog determined to be vicious pursuant to the
provisions of this Code of Ordinances shall comply with the following
regulations:
   1.   No person owning, harboring, or having care of a vicious dog may permit
such dog to go outside of its kennel or pen unless the dog is securely leashed
on a leash, no longer than four feet in length.
   2.   No person may permit a vicious dog to be kept on a chain, rope, leash,
or similar restraining device outside its kennel or pen unless a person
competent to govern the animal is in physical control of the restraining device
and remains in position to control the dog at all times. The dog may not be
leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, and buildings.
   3.   A vicious dog outside the dog’s kennel shall be muzzled in a humane way
by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent the dog from biting persons or other
animals. A vicious dog shall not be required to be muzzled when either shown in
a sanctioned American Kennel Club Show or upon prior written approval by the
Police Chief.
   4.   All vicious dogs shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely
enclosed and locked pen or kennel on the premises of the owner or caretaker,
except when leashed and muzzled. When constructed in an open yard, the pen or
kennel must be childproof from the outside and dog proof from the inside. A
strong metal double fence with adequate space between fences (at least two
feet) must be provided so that a child cannot reach into the dog enclosure. The
pen, kennel, or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top attached to
all sides. A structure used to confine a vicious dog shall be locked with a key
or combination lock when the dog is within the structure. The structure shall
have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of
the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. All structures
erected to house vicious dogs shall comply with all zoning and building
regulations of the City. All structures shall be adequately lighted and
ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
   5.   No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house
or structure on the premises of the owner or caretaker that would allow the dog
to exit the building on its own volition, except through a door leading
directly to a pen or kennel meeting all of the requirements of this subsection.
No vicious dog may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or
when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog
from exiting the structure.
   6.   The owner or caretaker of a vicious dog shall display, in prominent
places on their premises near all entrances to the premises, signs in letters
of no less than two inches high warning that there is a vicious dog on the
property. A similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of the
dog.
   7.   The owner or caretaker of a vicious dog shall immediately notify the
Police Department if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked
another animal, has attacked a human being, has died, has been sold, or has
been given away. If the vicious dog has been sold or given away, the owner or
caretaker shall also provide the Police Department with the name, address, and
telephone number of the new owner of the vicious dog. If the vicious dog is
sold or given away to a person residing outside the City, the owner or
caretaker shall present evidence to the Police Department showing that they
have notified the Police Department or other law enforcement agency of the
dog’s new residence.
   8.   An owner or caretaker of any dog declared vicious found to be in
violation of any section of this Code of Ordinances related to vicious dogs
shall be ordered in writing to safely remove the dog from the City or destroy
the animal within 10 days.
   9.   The owner of a vicious dog must successfully complete a dog behavior
modification course, at owner’s expense, instructed by a licensed or certified
dog behavior specialist within 60 days after receiving notification declaring
the dog vicious. The owner shall be required to provide a copy of proof of
successful completion of the course to the Police Chief and the proof shall
include certification or receipt bearing the name of the instructor and the
dates of instruction.
   10.   The owner of a vicious dog must microchip the dog, at the owner’s
expense, within 60 days after receiving notification declaring the dog vicious
in addition to licensing the pet in accordance with Chapter 56 in order to
assist in locating the vicious dog should it be found at large.
   11.   The owner of a vicious dog shall be denied a permit for the dog to
enter any park designated as a dog park in the City.
   12.   The owner shall allow the dog to be photographed for identification
purposes.
   13.   The dog shall be spayed or neutered at the owner’s expense.
57.05   KEEPING OF VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor for any reason within the City a
vicious animal except in the following circumstances:
   1.   Dogs used while in the line of duty by the Police Department, any other
law enforcement agency or unit of the United States Military Service.
   2.   The keeping of guard dogs; however, guard dogs must be kept within a
structure or fixed enclosure at all times, and any guard dog found at large may
be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the provisions of Section
57.04. Any premises guarded by a guard dog shall be prominently posted with a
sign containing the wording “Guard Dog,” “Vicious Dog,” or words of similar
import, and the owner of such premises shall inform the Police Chief that a
guard dog is on duty at said premises.
57.06   SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT, AND DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS OR VICIOUS
DOGS.
   1.   Upon investigation, an animal control officer may determine whether a
dog fits into any of the categories of dangerous dog or vicious dog. The
officer shall immediately inform the owner or caretaker in writing, by personal
service or by certified mail, of said determination.
   2.   In the event that a dangerous or vicious animal is found at large and
unattended upon public property, park property, public right-of-way, or the
property of someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to persons
or property, such animal may, in the discretion of the animal control officer,
be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The City shall be under no
duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous or vicious animal
found at large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such animal
prior to its destruction.
   3.   Any animal in violation of Section
57.04 may be issued an Order of Removal by the animal control officer. The
order to remove a vicious animal or dog issued by the animal control officer
may be appealed to the Police Chief. In order to appeal such order, written
notice of appeal must be filed with the Clerk within five business days after
receipt of the order contained in the notice to remove the dangerous animal or
vicious dog. Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute a
waiver of right to appeal the order of the animal control officer.
   4.   The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall
be delivered personally or by certified mail to the Clerk. Upon receiving a
notice of appeal, a hearing shall be convened, chaired by the Police Chief, to
receive any testimony or other evidence that is deemed appropriate concerning
the Removal Order.
   5.   When an appeal has been filed, the animal control officer shall make a
reasonable effort to notify any persons who would have had direct involvement
in the situation which led to the Order of Removal, including those persons who
were injured or who are owners or keepers of any animals which were injured by
the animal.
   6.   The appeal shall be heard by a committee appointed by the Police Chief
and consisting of a minimum of three people, including a member of the public,
a dog professional, and an animal control director from another agency. The
hearing of such appeal shall be scheduled within 10 days of the receipt of
notice of appeal. After such hearing, the committee may affirm or reverse the
order of the animal control officer. Such determination shall be contained in a
written decision and shall be filed with the Clerk within three days after the
hearing or any continued session thereof.
   7.   Pending the outcome of the hearing, the dog must be securely confined
in a humane manner either on the premises of the owner or caretaker pursuant to
Section
57.04 or with a licensed veterinarian.
   8.   If the committee affirms the action of the animal control officer, the
committee shall order, in its written decision, that the person owning,
sheltering, harboring, or keeping such dangerous animal or vicious dog remove
such animal from the City or destroy it. The decision and order shall
immediately be served upon the person against whom rendered in the same manner
as the notice of removal. If the original order of the animal control officer
is not appealed and is not complied with within three days of its issuance, the
animal control officer is authorized to seize and impound such dangerous or
vicious animal. An animal so seized shall be impounded for a period of seven
days. If, at the end of the impoundment period, the person against whom the
decision and order of the committee was issued has not petitioned the District
Court for a review of said order, the City shall cause the animal to be
disposed of by sale or destroy such animal in a humane manner. Failure to
comply with an order of the City issued pursuant hereto constitutes a
misdemeanor offense.
57.07   INSURANCE.
   Every person keeping or maintaining a dangerous or vicious dog as provided
in this chapter, or a guard dog as provided in this chapter, shall accompany
any application or display upon request by the animal control officer a
Certificate of Insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in
the State with coverage of at least $150,000.00 combined single limit liability
for bodily injury. Such Certificate of Insurance shall provide that no
cancellation of the insurance will be made unless 10 days’ written notice is
first given to the Clerk. Failure to provide or display such Certificate of
Insurance shall be determined to be in violation of the vicious dog code as
provided in this chapter.
57.08   PENALTY.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter by an owner of an animal may be
enforced as a municipal infraction within the meaning of Section 364.22 of the
Code of Iowa, pursuant to Chapter 3. Enforcement pursuant to this section shall
be undertaken by the enforcement officer upon the advice and consent of the
City Attorney.
CHAPTER 58
NOISE CONTROL
 
58.01 Scope of Regulations         58.04 Included Sounds
58.02 Definitions                  58.05 Excluded Sounds
58.03 Noise Disturbance Prohibited 58.06 Other Laws and Ordinances
 
58.01   SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   This chapter applies to the control of all noise originating within the
limits of the City, except in the following cases:
   1.   A State or federal agency has adopted a different standard or rule than
that prescribed within this chapter which preempts the regulation of noise from
a particular source so as to render this chapter inapplicable; or
   2.   The Council has determined that, by reason of public acceptance of the
activity producing a particular noise or noises, such noise is deemed
acceptable to the residents of the City.
58.02   DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a
different intention, the following terms have the following meanings.
Definitions of technical terms used in this chapter which are not herein
defined shall be obtained from publications of acoustical terminology issued by
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI):
   1.   “Application” means the application discussed in Section
58.06.
   2.   “Emergency” means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving
actual or imminent physical or psychological trauma or property damage which
demands immediate action.
   3.   “Emergency work” means any work performed for the purpose of
alleviating or resolving an emergency.
   4.   “Motorcycle” means any two- or three-wheeled motor vehicle.
   5.   “Motor vehicle” means any motor-powered vehicle designed to carry at
least one passenger or driver and of the type typically licensed for use on the
public highways. (Note: “motor vehicle” includes most motorcycles.)
   6.   “Noise” means any sound which disturbs humans, or which causes or tends
to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
   7.   “Noise disturbance” means those sounds defined as “noise disturbances”
in Section
58.04. Other factors that may be used in determining a noise disturbance
include the duration of the noise and whether the noise is recurrent,
intermittent, or constant.
   8.   “Powered model vehicle” means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne,
or land borne model plane, vessel, or vehicle which is not designed to carry
persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car, or
rocket.
   9.   “Public right-of-way” means the traveled portion of any street or alley
or similar place which is owned or controlled by the City or other governmental
entity.
   10.   “Real property boundary” means an imaginary line along the ground
surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by
one person from that owned by another person, but not including intra-building
real property divisions.
   11.   “Recreational vehicle” means any motor-powered vehicle designed to
carry at least one passenger or driver and equipped for use in racing or other
recreational events or uses off of public right-of-way on public or private
property; except, however, for the purposes of this chapter, any such vehicle
which is licensed for use on the public highways is deemed a “motor vehicle” or
“motorcycle” (if two- or three-wheeled) and not a “recreational vehicle.”
(Examples of recreational vehicles are a snowmobile, a minibike, an all-terrain
vehicle, a stock car, or motorboat.)
   12.   “Residential property” means any property on which is located a
building or structure used wholly or partially for living or sleeping purposes.
   13.   “Sound” means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement,
particle velocity, or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal
forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description
of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration,
intensity, and frequency.
   14.   “Sound equipment” means any radio, record player, tape deck or player,
loud speaker, amplifier, sound track or other device for producing, reproducing
or amplifying sound, except, however, “sound equipment” does not include:
      A.   Sirens and other equipment used to alert persons to the existence of
an emergency,
      B.   Equipment used by law enforcement and other public safety officials
in the performance of their official duties,
      C.   Church carillons, bells, or chimes,
      D.   Mobile radio or telephone signaling devices, and
      E.   Automobile and truck radios, tape decks or players, or other such
standard equipment used and intended for the use and enjoyment of the
occupants, provided that the sound emitted therefrom is not audible for more
than 50 feet from such automobile or truck.
58.03   NOISE DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue or cause to
allow to be made or continued any noise disturbance within the City.
58.04   INCLUDED SOUNDS.
   Except for sounds excluded in Section
58.05, the term “noise disturbance” means any of the following sounds:
   1.   Injurious or Disturbing Sounds Generally. Any sound which endangers or
injures the welfare, safety, or health of a human being, or disturbs a
reasonable human being of normal sensitivities, or causes or tends to cause an
adverse physiological or physical effect on human beings, or devalues or
injures property.
   2.   Selling by “Hawking” or “Barking.” The sound of selling by shout or
outcry when made within the area of the City zoned residential or commercial.
   3.   Loading and Unloading. The sound made by outdoor loading, unloading,
opening, closing, or handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
garbage cans, trash receptacles, or similar objects between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:30 a.m. within any area of the City zoned residential or at the real
property boundary of residential property.
   4.   Engine Repairs and Testing. The sound made by the repairing,
rebuilding, modifying, or testing of a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle
which is received between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. at the real
property boundary of residential property.
   5.   Powered Model Vehicles. The sound made by the operation of a powered
model vehicle which is received between the house of 9:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. at
the real property boundary of residential property.
   6.   Musical Instruments. The sound made by a drum, horn, reed instrument,
string instrument, or other musical instrument or device which is received
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. at the real property boundary of
residential property.
   7.   Off-Road Motorcycle and Recreational Vehicle Noise. The sound made on
private property or on City-owned property, other than a public right-of-way,
by a motorcycle or recreational vehicle and received between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:30 a.m. at the real property boundary of residential property;
provided, however, the sound made by a motorcycle when traveling from private
property to a public right-of-way, or vice versa, in pursuance of normal
ingress or egress for purposeful transportation is not a noise disturbance
unless made so by some provisions of this section other than this Subsection 7.
   8.   Construction Noise. The sound made by tools or equipment in erection,
demolition, excavation, drilling, or other such construction work which is
received between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. at the real property
boundary of residential property.
   9.   Sound Equipment. The sound made by sound equipment operated upon the
public right-of-way or in any building or upon any premises, public or private,
if plainly audible from any public right-of-way within the City between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. or upon any school grounds or in any school
zone during normal school hours.
   10.   Racing. The sound made by a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle on
private property or public right-of-way during any racing event or time trial,
whether organized or unorganized.
   11.   Screeching Tires. The sound made by the intentional screeching or
squealing of the tires of a motor vehicle in areas of the City zoned
residential or commercial.
   12.   Noisy Exhaust System. The sound made by a motor vehicle or a
recreational vehicle whose exhaust system has been modified by the installation
of a muffler cutout or bypass.
   13.   Lawn and Garden Equipment. The sound emitted by motor-powered,
muffler-equipped lawn and garden equipment operated between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:30 a.m.
   14.   Chain Saws. The sound emitted by motor-powered tree trimming equipment
operated between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m.
58.05   EXCLUDED SOUNDS.
   Any other provision of Section
58.04 or other section of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the
term “noise disturbance,” as used in this chapter, does not mean or include the
following sounds:
   1.   Emergencies. The sound emitted in the performance of emergency work or
to alert persons to the existence of an emergency.
   2.   Alarms. The sound emitted by the intentional sounding outdoors of any
fire, burglar, or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar stationary
emergency signaling device for emergency purposes, or for the essential testing
of such device when conducted between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
   3.   Church Bells. The sound emitted by church carillons, bells, or chimes.
   4.   Automobile Radios. The sound emitted by an automobile or truck radio,
tape deck or player or other such standard equipment used and intended for the
use and enjoyment of such vehicle’s occupants while such vehicle is on the
public right-of-way, provided that the sound emitted therefrom is not audible
for more than 50 feet.
   5.   Certain Signaling Devices. The sound emitted by mobile radio or
telephone signaling devices.
   6.   Religious Ceremonies. The sound emitted in conjunction with a religious
celebration.
   7.   Law Enforcement. The sounds made or caused to be made by law
enforcement officials in the performance of their official duties.
   8.   Mosquito Spraying Equipment. The sound made by City-owned or hired
mosquito spraying equipment.
58.06   OTHER LAWS AND ORDINANCES.
   No provisions of this chapter should be construed to legalize or permit
sounds, devices, or activities made unlawful by State or federal statutes or
this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
 
60.01 Title                          60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.02 Definitions                    60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.08 Parades, Block Parties, and Other
                                     Street Closures Regulated
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic         
60.05 Reports of Traffic Accidents    
 
60.01   TITLE.
   Chapters 60 through 70 may be known and cited as the “Altoona Traffic Code”
(and are referred to herein as the “Traffic Code”).
60.02   DEFINITIONS.
   Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law,
such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are hereby adopted
by reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:
   1.   “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway when 50 percent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300
feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(7))
   2.   “MPH” means miles per hour.
   3.   “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or vehicles organized
for marching or moving on the streets in an organized fashion or manner or any
march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the
public as a parade.
   4.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
   5.   “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   6.   “Pedestrian” means a person afoot or a person using a pedestrian
conveyance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(51))
   7.   “Pedestrian conveyance” means any human-powered device by which a
pedestrian may move other than by walking or by which a pedestrian may move
another person, including but not limited to a wheelchair, stroller,
skateboard, scooter, or other similar device. Pedestrian conveyance also
includes an electric personal assistive mobility device and any other device
used to move a person sitting or standing on the device regardless of whether
the device is powered by an electric motor, so long as the electric motor
produces less than 750 watts. Pedestrian conveyance does not include a bicycle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(51)(A))
   8.   “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban, or school district, where 40
percent or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of 300 feet or
more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(63))
   9.   “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway for a distance of 200 feet in either direction from a schoolhouse.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(70))
   10.   “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.
   11.   “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
   12.   “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control sign or signal.
   13.   “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in
the business, school, or residence districts.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(78))
   14.   “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the
purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
   15.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway. Vehicle does
not include:
      A.   Any device moved by human power, including a low-speed electric
bicycle.
      B.   Any device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
      C.   Any personal delivery device operated pursuant to Chapter 321O of
the Code of Iowa.
      D.   Any integral part of a truck tractor or road tractor which is
mounted on the frame of the truck tractor or road tractor immediately behind
the cab and which may be used to transport persons and property, but which
cannot be drawn upon the highway by the truck tractor or another motor vehicle.
      E.   Any steering axle, dolly, auxiliary axle, or other integral part of
another vehicle which in and of itself is incapable of commercially
transporting any person or property but is used primarily to support another
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.1(90))
60.03   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law relating to motor vehicles and
law of the road are enforced by the Police Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
60.04   POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   A peace officer or, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the
Fire Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the
event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 and 321.236(2))
60.05   REPORTS OF TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the
City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of
Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06   PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.
   A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the
driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic
violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with
reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading, or other manifest
of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration
certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such
vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require
exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07   OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
60.08   PARADES, BLOCK PARTIES, AND OTHER STREET CLOSURES REGULATED.
   All street closure requests for parades, block parties, and construction
shall be directed to the appropriate City official designated herein and
approval must be obtained before the street may be closed for any purpose.
   1.   Parades Regulated. No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any
street except as provided herein:
      A.   Permit Required. No parade shall be conducted without first
obtaining a written permit from the Mayor or Police Chief. Such permit shall
state the time and date for the parade to be held and the streets or general
route thereof. Such written permit granted to the person organizing or
sponsoring the parade shall be permission for all participants therein to
parade when such participants have been invited by the permittee to participate
therein. No fee shall be required for such permit.
      B.   Parade Not a Street Obstruction. Any parade for which permit has
been issued as herein required, and the persons lawfully participating therein,
shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets notwithstanding the
provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.
      C.   Control by Peace Officers and Firefighters. Persons participating in
any parade shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in
the performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members of the
Fire Department.
   2.   No person shall conduct, organize, sponsor, or participate in a block
party or other neighborhood or community party (commercial or residential) on
any street except as provided herein.
      A.   Block Party Defined. “Block party” means any organized event for a
residential or commercial neighborhood or community-wide event such as Chamber
of Commerce events and miscellaneous celebrations held on the streets in an
organized fashion.
      B.   Permission Required. No block party shall be conducted without first
obtaining permission from the City Administrator. The person organizing or
sponsoring the block party shall provide information concerning the time and
date for the event and the requested street closures. Any permission granted to
such person includes all participants in the event, provided they have been
invited to participate.
      C.   Block Party Not a Street Obstruction. A block party for which
permission has been granted as herein provided, and the persons lawfully
participating therein, shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets
notwithstanding the provisions of any other Code provision to the contrary.
      D.   Control By Police and Firefighters. Persons participating in a block
party shall at all times be subject to any lawful order of a peace officer or
direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire.
   3.   No person or firm shall block or partially obstruct any public way,
including any City sidewalk, except as provided herein.
      A.   Permission Required. No public way may be blocked without first
obtaining permission from the City Building Official and the City Street
Supervisor. The person or firm requesting closure of the street right-of-way or
City sidewalk shall provide information concerning the time and date of the
event and the requested closure of the specific streets or sidewalks.
   4.   All street closures granted under this section may be rescinded by the
approving authority in the event of an emergency. The approving authority will
notify the following of all street closures: Mayor and Council, City
Administrator, Police Department, Fire Department, Street Department, and City
administrative offices. Notice to these departments shall be given not less
than 24 business hours prior to the starting time of the event.
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
 
61.01 Installation  61.04 Standards
61.02 Crosswalks    61.05 Compliance
61.03 Traffic Lanes
 
61.01   INSTALLATION.
   The Police Department or Public Works Department shall cause to be placed
and maintained traffic control devices when and as required under this Traffic
Code or under State law or emergency or temporary traffic control devices for
the duration of an emergency or temporary condition as traffic conditions may
require to regulate, guide or warn traffic. The Police Chief shall keep a
record of all such traffic control devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.02   CROSSWALKS.
   The Police Chief is hereby authorized, subject to approval of the Council by
resolution, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate traffic control
devices at intersections where, due to traffic conditions, there is particular
danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and at such other places
as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4) and 321.255)
61.03   TRAFFIC LANES.
   The Police Chief is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street
pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent with this
Traffic Code. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4) and 321.255)
61.04   STANDARDS.
   Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.05   COMPLIANCE.
   No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to
the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under
Section 321.231 and 321.231A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
 
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.04 Clinging to Vehicle
62.02 Play Streets Designated  62.05 Quiet Zones
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks    62.06 Obstructing View at Intersections
 
62.01   VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.
   Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of
a peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire, or who
fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory
laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in
violation of this section. These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by
reference and are as follows:
   1.   Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
   2.   Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited; exception.
   3.   Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
   4.   Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
   5.   Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.
   6.   Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.
   7.   Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.
   8.   Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
   9.   Section 321.91 – Limitation on liability; penalty for abandonment.
   10.   Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
   11.   Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
   12.   Section 321.104 – Penal offenses against title law.
   13.   Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates permitted.
   14.   Section 321.174 – Operators licensed; operation of commercial
vehicles.
   15.   Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicle with expired license.
   16.   Section 321.180 – Instruction permits, commercial learner’s permits,
and chauffeur’s instruction permits.
   17.   Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged
fourteen through seventeen.
   18.   Section 321.193 – Restrictions on licenses; penalty.
   19.   Section 321.194 – Special minors’ restricted license.
   20.   Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service order;
penalties.
   21.   Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s
identification card; penalty.
   22.   Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
   23.   Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain tobacco, tobacco products
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes.
   24.   Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license or when
disqualified; penalties.
   25.   Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
   26.   Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
   27.   Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
   28.   Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
   29.   Section 321.223 – Driver’s license inspection for motor vehicle
rental.
   30.   Section 321.224 – Record kept.
   31.   Section 321.232 – Speed detection jamming devices; penalty.
   32.   Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles, highway use.
   33.   Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
   34.   Section 321.235B – Low-speed electric bicycles.
   35.   Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
   36.   Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
   37.   Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
   38.   Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs, or signals;
unlawful possession; traffic signal preemption devices.
   39.   Section 321.262 – Leaving scene of traffic accident prohibited;
vehicle damage only; removal of vehicles.
   40.   Section 321.263 – Information and aid; leaving scene of personal
injury accident.
   41.   Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
   42.   Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
   43.   Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.
   44.   Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
   45.   Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device while
driving; text-messaging.
   46.   Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.
   47.   Section 321.277A – Careless driving.
   48.   Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
   49.   Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.
   50.   Section 321.284 – Open container in motor vehicles, drivers.
   51.   Section 321.284A – Open container in motor vehicles, passengers.
   52.   Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
   53.   Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
   54.   Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
   55.   Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
   56.   Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
   57.   Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.
   58.   Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
   59.   Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
   60.   Section 321.305 – One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands.
   61.   Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
   62.   Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
   63.   Section 321.309 – Towing.
   64.   Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
   65.   Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
   66.   Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
   67.   Section 321.314 – When signal required.
   68.   Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
   69.   Section 321.316 – Stopping.
   70.   Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
   71.   Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.
   72.   Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
   73.   Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
   74.   Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
   75.   Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
   76.   Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
   77.   Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
   78.   Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
   79.   Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
   80.   Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on
highways.
   81.   Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
   82.   Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
   83.   Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.
   84.   Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
   85.   Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad
train or railroad track equipment.
   86.   Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
   87.   Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
   88.   Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
   89.   Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
   90.   Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
   91.   Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
   92.   Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
   93.   Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
   94.   Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by hazardous
material.
   95.   Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
   96.   Section 321.366 – Acts prohibited on fully-controlled access
facilities.
   97.   Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
   98.   Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
   99.   Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
   100.   Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
   101.   Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
   102.   Section 321.372 – Discharging pupils, stopping requirements;
penalties.
   103.   Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
   104.   Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
   105.   Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
   106.   Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
   107.   Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
   108.   Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
   109.   Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles, motorized bicycles, and
all-terrain vehicles.
   110.   Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
   111.   Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
   112.   Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
   113.   Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
   114.   Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
   115.   Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
   116.   Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
   117.   Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
   118.   Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
   119.   Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
   120.   Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
   121.   Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
   122.   Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
   123.   Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
   124.   Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
   125.   Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
   126.   Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
   127.   Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
   128.   Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
   129.   Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
   130.   Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
   131.   Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
   132.   Section 321.422 – Red light in front, rear lights.
   133.   Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
   134.   Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.
   135.   Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
   136.   Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
   137.   Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, air horns, and bells prohibited.
   138.   Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
   139.   Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
   140.   Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
   141.   Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
   142.   Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
   143.   Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
   144.   Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
   145.   Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
   146.   Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
   147.   Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
   148.   Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
   149.   Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety rules.
   150.   Section 321.449A – Rail crew transport drivers.
   151.   Section 321.449B – Texting or using a mobile telephone while
operating a commercial motor vehicle.
   152.   Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation regulations.
   153.   Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
   154.   Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
   155.   Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles.
   156.   Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
   157.   Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
   158.   Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
   159.   Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
   160.   Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
   161.   Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight; exceptions, penalties.
   162.   Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
   163.   Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
62.02   PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED.
   The Police Chief shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof
a play street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the
roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. Whenever authorized signs
are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person
shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of
vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and
then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such
street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03   VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area
except at a driveway.
62.04   CLINGING TO VEHICLE.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all
passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
in-line skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or themselves to any
vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05   QUIET ZONES.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06   OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.
   It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard, or other object to
obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear
view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such
obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be
abated in the manner provided by Chapter 50.
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
 
63.01 General                        63.04 Special Speed Zones
63.02 State Code Speed Limits        63.05 Minimum Speed
63.03 Parks, Cemeteries, and Parking 63.06 Special Speed Limit When Flashing
Lots
 
63.01   GENERAL.
   Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a
careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and
proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and
of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on
any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a
stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02   STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.
   The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the Code of
Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically designated
otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.
   1.   Business District – 20 MPH.
   2.   Residence or School District – 25 MPH.
   3.   Suburban District – 45 MPH.
63.03   PARKS, CEMETERIES, AND PARKING LOTS.
   A speed in excess of 15 MPH in any public park, cemetery, or parking lot,
unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(5))
63.04   SPECIAL SPEED ZONES.
   In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of Transportation, or
whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section 63.02 is greater
or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any
intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street system, the
Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower speed limit
as it deems reasonable and safe at such location. The following special speed
zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
   1.   Special 25 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 25 MPH is unlawful on
any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   1 st Avenue N/S from 8 th Street SE/SW to a location 150 feet south
of 2 nd Street NW.
      B.   1 st Street E from 1 st Avenue to 3 rd Avenue SE.
      C.   2 nd Avenue SE from 1 st Street E to 4 th Street SE.
      D.   2 nd Avenue SW from 3 rd Street SW to 8 th Street SW.
      E.   2 nd Street NW from 5 th Avenue NW to 1 st Avenue N.
      F.   2 nd Street SE from 1 st Avenue S. to 2 nd Avenue SE.
      G.   3 rd Avenue SE from 1 st Street E to 9 th Street SE.
      H.   3 rd Avenue SW from 3 rd Street SW to 8 th Street SW.
      I.   3 rd Street SW/SE from 3 rd Avenue SW to 2 nd Avenue SE.
      J.   4 th Street SW/SE from 5 th Avenue SW to 2 nd Avenue SE.
      K.   5 th Avenue NW/SW from 2 nd Street NW to 13 th Street SW.
      L.   5 th Avenue SW from Driftwood Drive SW to 17 th Avenue SW.
      M.   8 th Avenue SE from 8 th Street Place SE to 8 th Street SE.
      N.   9 th Street NE from 1 st Avenue N. to 2,980 feet east.
      O.   9 th Street NW from 1 st Avenue N. to dead end located 1,100 feet
west.
      P.   11 th Street NW from Shriners Parkway to road end located 430 feet
east.
      Q.   12 th Street NE from 1 st Avenue N to the dead end located 230 feet
east.
      R.   17 th Avenue NW from Adventureland Drive NW to the dead end located
225 feet north.
      S.   17 th Avenue SE from 8 th Street Place SE to 9 th Street SE.
      T.   20 th Avenue NW from Hubbell Avenue to road end located 1,300 feet
north of 25 th Street NW.
      U.   21 st Street NW from 34 th Avenue NW to 20 th Avenue NW.
      V.   23 rd Avenue NW from Adventureland Drive NW to road end located 340
feet north.
      W.   25 th Avenue SW from 8 th Street SW to 10 th Street SW.
      X.   28 th Avenue SW from 8 th Street SW to 10 th Street SW.
      Y.   31 st Avenue SW from 8 th Street SW to road end located 1,260 feet
north.
      Z.   36 th Avenue SW and NW from 8 th Street SW to Hubbell Avenue.
      AA.   Bass Pro Drive NW from Prairie Crossing NW to Adventureland Drive
NW.
      BB.   Birch Lane from 8 th Street SW to 36 th Avenue SW.
      CC.   Center Place SW from 8 th Street SW to 5 th Avenue SW.
      DD.   Northridge Circle NE from Adventureland Drive NE to road end
located 1,130 feet north.
      EE.   Prairie Crossing NW from Hubbell Avenue to Bass Pro Drive NW.
      FF.   Prairie Fire NW from Prairie Crossing NW to 34 th Avenue NW.
      GG.   Prairie Meadows Drive from 8 th Street SW to Adventureland Drive
NW.
      HH.   Shriners Parkway from Adventureland Drive NW to 11 th Street NW.
      II.   Tallgrass Parkway NW from Hubbell Avenue to Adventureland Drive NW.
      JJ.   Venbury Drive SW from 8 th Street SW to 13 th Street SW.
   2.   Special 30 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 30 MPH is unlawful on
any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   11 th Avenue NE from Adventureland Drive NE to the southern extent
of the road.
      B.   21 st Street NW from 34 th Avenue NW to 20 th Avenue NW.
   3.   Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 35 MPH is unlawful on
any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   1 st Avenue S from 8 th Street SE/SW to 250 feet south of 36 th
Street SE/SW.
      B.   8 th Street SE from 14 th Avenue SE to Venbury Drive SW.
      C.   9 th Street NE from 14 th Avenue NE (also known as County NE 80 th
Street) to 2,300 feet west of 14 th Avenue NE.
      D.   14 th Avenue SE from 1,280 feet north of 8 th Street SE to Lake
Shore Drive SE.
      E.   17 th Avenue (also known as NE 64 th Street) from the north limits
of the street to the south City limits.
      F.   20 th Avenue NW from 25 th Street NW to Hubbell Avenue.
      G.   34 th Avenue SW/NW (also known as NE 56 th Street) from the south
City limits to 1,000 feet south of 21 st Street NW.
      H.   36 th Street SW/SE from 6 th Avenue SW to 580 feet east of 1 st
Avenue S.
      I.   Adventureland Drive from east City limits to west City limits.
      J.   Edwin W Skinner Parkway from 1 st Avenue South to the east City
limits.
      K.   Ziegler Drive NW from Hubbell Avenue to the south end of the road.
   4.   Special 40 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 40 MPH is unlawful on
any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   1 st Avenue North from 11 th Street NW to a location 150 feet south
of 2 nd Street NW.
   5.   Special 45 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 45 MPH is unlawful on
any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   1 st Avenue N from 11 th Street NW to Interstate 80.
      B.   1 st Avenue S from 250 feet south of 36 th Street SE/SW to the south
City limits.
      C.   8 th Street SE from 14 th Avenue SE to the east City limits.
      D.   8 th Street SW from the west City limits to Venbury Drive SW.
      E.   14 th Avenue SE from Lake Shore Drive SE to the south City limits.
      F.   25 th Street NW (also known as County NE 62 nd Avenue) from the west
City limits to the east City limits.
      G.   34 th Avenue NW from 1,000 feet south of 21 st Street NW to 25 th
Street NW (also known as County NE 62 nd Avenue).
      H.   50 th Avenue NW (also known as NE 46 th Street) from 25 th Street NW
to the south end of the street.
   6.   Special 50 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 50 MPH is unlawful on
any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   14 th Avenue (also known as NE 80 th Street) from 1,280 feet north
of 8 th Street SE to the north City limits.
      B.   36 th Street SE from 580 feet east of 1 st Avenue S. to 14 th Avenue
SE (also known as NE 80 th Street).
      C.   NE Hubbell Avenue from the west City limits to 1,100 feet north of
Adventureland Drive NW.
   7.   Special 55 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 55 MPH is unlawful on
any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   NE Hubbell Avenue from the northern I-80 exit ramp to the north City
limits.
      B.   NE Hubbell Avenue from the west City limits to 1100 feet north of
Adventureland Drive NW.
      C.   1 st Avenue South from 1,030 feet south of 36 th Street to the south
City limits.
      D.   36 th Street SE from 580 feet east of 1 st Avenue S to 14 th Avenue
SE (also known as NE 80 th Street).
      E.   14 th Avenue (also known as NE 80 th Street) from 1,280 feet north
of 8 th Street SE to the north City limits.
63.05   MINIMUM SPEED.
   A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede
or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
63.06   SPECIAL SPEED LIMIT WHEN FLASHING.
   On the following through streets or on streets or portions thereof
designated in the following subsections, any speed in excess of the speed limit
specifically provided is unlawful when official signs have been erected giving
notice of the authorized speed, and when stop or yield signs have been erected
at the entrances thereto. The maximum speed limits permitted in the following
subsections are not applicable in established school districts at such
locations and times as approved by the Council and when the Traffic and
Transportation Director has caused variable display school speed limit signs
and beacons to be erected and illuminated.
   1.   A special 25 MPH speed limit when flashing on 17 th Avenue SW from 900
feet north of 3 rd Street SW to 400 feet south of 4 th Street SW both north and
southbound.
   2.   A special 25 MPH speed limit when flashing on 1 st Avenue S from 100
feet north to 100 feet south of the Clay Elementary property for both
northbound and southbound traffic.
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
 
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.03 Continuous Turning Lanes
64.02 U-Turns
 
64.01   TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
   1.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   2.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right
half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection
to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
   3.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street
shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way
street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street
being entered upon leaving the intersection.
The Police Chief may cause markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or
adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions
require, that a different course from that specified above be traveled by
vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons, or signs are so
placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other
than as directed and required by such markers, buttons, or signs.
64.02   U-TURNS.
   It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection;
however, U-turns are prohibited within the Business District at the following
designated intersections and at intersections where there are automatic traffic
signals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(9))
- NONE -
64.03   CONTINUOUS TURNING LANES.
   No person shall use a continuous turning lane as a passing lane. A
continuous turning lane shall only be used for vehicles to turn left or right.
The following locations are designated as continuous turning lanes:
   1.   1 st Avenue S from 36 th Street SW to 8 th Street SW.
   2.   34 th Avenue SW from 600 34 th Avenue SW to Edwin W Skinner Parkway.
   3.   From 900 8 th Street SW to the 800 block of 8 th Street SE.
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
 
65.01 Through Streets              65.07 Stop For Pedestrians in School Zone
                                   Crosswalks
65.02 Stop Required                65.08 Stop When Traffic is Obstructed
65.03 Three-Way Stop Intersections 65.09 Pedestrians’ Right-of-Way
65.04 Four-Way Stop Intersections  65.10 Official Traffic Controls
65.05 Yield Required               65.11 Parks Stop Required
65.06 Roundabout Yield Required     
 
65.01   THROUGH STREETS.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop, unless a yield is permitted by this
chapter, before entering an intersection with the following designated through
streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
   1.   25 th Street NW from the west City limits to the east City limits.
   2.   21 st Street NW from 34 th Avenue NW to 20 th Avenue NW.
   3.   Adventureland Drive from Bass Pro Drive NW to the east City limits.
   4.   9 th Street NE from 1 st Avenue N to east City limits.
   5.   4 th Street SW from 25 th Avenue SW to 7 th Avenue SW.
   6.   1 st Street East from 1 st Avenue to 14 th Avenue.
   7.   8 th Street SW from the west City limits to the east City limits.
   8.   15 th Street SE from 1 st Avenue South to 10 th Avenue SE.
   9.   17 th Street SW from 5 th Avenue SW to 10 th Avenue SE.
   10.   17 th  Street SW from 14 th Avenue SE to the east City limits.
   11.   Edwin W Skinner Parkway from 34 th Avenue SW to 26 th Avenue SW.
   12.   Edwin W Skinner Parkway from 8 th Avenue SW to the east City limits.
   13.   Edwin W Skinner Parkway SW/SE from the west City limits to 1 st Ave S.
   14.   Edwin W Skinner Parkway from 1 st Ave S to the east City limits.
   15.   36 th  Street from the west City limits to the east City limits.
   16.   41 st Street SW from 6 th Avenue SW to 1 st Avenue South.
   17.   34 th Avenue from the north City limits to south City limits.
   18.   28 th Avenue SW from 8 th Street SW to Edwin W Skinner Parkway.
   19.   17 th Avenue NW from Adventureland Drive to the south City limits.
   20.   12 th Avenue from Adventureland Drive NW to 4 th Street SW.
   21.   Venbury Drive SW from 8 th Street SW to 5 th Avenue SW.
   22.   5 th Avenue SW from the south City limits to Adventureland Drive NW.
   23.   1 st Avenue from the north City limits to the south City limits.
   24.   3 rd Avenue SE from 1 st Street E to 28 th Street SE.
   25.   7 th Avenue SE from 1 st Street SE to 15 th Street SE.
   26.   8 th Avenue SE from 1 st Street E to 8 th Street SE.
   27.   14 th Avenue from the north City limits to the south City limits.
65.02   STOP REQUIRED.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
   1.   2 nd Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 2 nd Avenue SW shall stop at 6 th Street SW.
   2.   2 nd Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 2 nd Avenue SE shall stop at 2 nd Street SE.
   3.   4 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling north on 4 th Avenue SE shall stop at 9 th Street SE.
   4.   5 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling west on 5 th Street SW shall stop at 3 rd Avenue SW.
   5.   Timberline Lane. Vehicles traveling west on Timberline Lane shall stop
at Scenic View Boulevard.
   6.   8 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 8 th Avenue SE shall stop at 13 th Street SE.
   7.   6 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 6 th Avenue SE shall stop at 13 th Street SE.
   8.   6 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 6 th Avenue SE shall stop at 15 th Street SE.
   9.   4 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 4 th Avenue SE shall stop at 13 th Street SE.
   10.   Bentwood Court. Vehicles traveling on Bentwood Court shall stop at 13
th Street SW.
   11.   9 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling west on 9 th Street SW shall stop at Scenic View
Boulevard.
   12.   Alderwood Drive. Vehicles traveling north on Alderwood Drive shall
stop at 13 th Street SW.
   13.   Alderwood Court. Vehicles traveling south on Alderwood Court shall
stop at 13 th Street SW.
   14.   Sandalwood Court. Vehicles traveling south on Sandalwood Court shall
stop at 13 th Street SW.
   15.   3 rd Avenue NW.
   Vehicles traveling on 3 rd Avenue NW shall stop at 15 th Street NW.
   16.   6 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 6 th Street SW shall stop at 18 th Court SW.
   17.   8 th Street Court SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 8 th Street Court SW shall stop at Scenic View
Boulevard.
   18.   12 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 12 th Street SE shall stop at 8 th Avenue SE.
   19.   5 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 5 th Avenue SE shall stop at 13 th Street SE.
   20.   15 th  Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 15 th Street SE shall stop at 1 st Avenue N.
   21.   Greenbreeze Circle. Vehicles traveling on Greenbreeze Circle shall
stop at 9 th Avenue NW.
   22.   11 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 11 th Avenue SE shall stop at 9 th Street SE.
   23.   2 nd Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 2 nd Avenue SE shall stop at 3 rd Street SE.
   24.   2 nd Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 2 nd Avenue SW shall stop at 13 th Street SW.
   25.   3 rd Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 3 rd Avenue SW shall stop at 13 th Street SW.
   26.   3 rd Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 3 rd Avenue SE shall stop at Edwin W Skinner Parkway
SE.
   27.   15 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 15 th Street SE shall stop at 3 rd Avenue SE.
   28.   17 th Street SW and SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 17 th Street SW and SE shall stop at 1 st Avenue
South.
   29.   3 rd Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 3 rd Avenue SE shall stop at 17 th Street SE.
   30.   10 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 10 th Street SW shall stop at 25 th Avenue SW.
   31.   30 th Street SW and SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 30 th Street SW and SE shall stop at 1 st Avenue
South.
   32.   Everwood Court SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Everwood Court SW shall stop at 19 th Street SW.
   33.   6 th Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 6 th Avenue SW shall stop at 19 th Street SW.
   34.   Plumwood Court SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Plumwood Court SW shall stop at 3 rd Avenue SW.
   35.   Oakwood Court SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Oakwood Court SW shall stop at Ashwood Drive SW.
   36.   Rosewood Drive SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Rosewood Drive SW shall stop at Maplewood Court SW.
   37.   Bentwood Court SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Bentwood Court SW shall stop at Bentwood Court SW.
   38.   Cedarwood Court SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Cedarwood Court SW shall stop at 2 nd Avenue SW.
   39.   19 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 19 th Street SW shall stop at 3 rd Avenue SW.
   40.   2 nd Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 2 nd Avenue SE shall stop at 21 st Street SE.
   41.   Country Cove Lane. Vehicles traveling on Country Cove Lane shall stop
at 21 st Street SE.
   42.   4 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 4 th Avenue SE shall stop at 21 st Street SE.
   43.   33 rd Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 33 rd Street SW shall stop at 3 rd Avenue SW.
   44.   3 rd Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 3 rd Avenue SW shall stop at 35 th Street SW.
   45.   Eagle Creek Boulevard SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Eagle Creek Boulevard SW shall stop at 25 th Avenue
SW.
   46.   19 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 19 th Street SW shall stop at 30 th Avenue SW.
   47.   11 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 11 th Street SW shall stop at 26 th Avenue SW.
   48.   12 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 12 th Street SW shall stop at 26 th Avenue SW.
   49.   13 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 13 th Street SW shall stop at 26 th Avenue SW.
   50.   15 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 15 th Street SW shall stop at 26 th Avenue SW.
   51.   26 th Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 26 th Avenue SW shall stop at 14 th Street SW.
   52.   26 th Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 26 th Avenue SW shall stop at 10 th Street SW.
   53.   25 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 25 th Street SE shall stop at 6 th Avenue SE.
   54.   26 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 26 th Street SE shall stop at 6 th Avenue SE.
   55.   27 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 27 th Street SE shall stop at 6 th Avenue SE.
   56.   27 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 27 th Street SE shall stop at 8 th Avenue SE.
   57.   4 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 4 th Avenue SE shall stop at 26 th Street SE.
   58.   9 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 9 th Avenue SE shall stop at 13 th Street SE.
   59.   9 th Avenue Place SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 9 th Avenue Place SE shall stop at 13 th Street SE.
   60.   9 th Avenue Place SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 9 th Avenue Place SE shall stop at 10 th Street SE.
   61.   10 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 10 th Street SE shall stop at 10 th Avenue SE.
   62.   13 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 13 th Street SE shall stop at 10 th Avenue SE.
   63.   14 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 14 th Street SE shall stop at 10 th Avenue SE.
   64.   10 th Avenue Place SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 10 th Avenue Place SE shall stop at 10 th Avenue SE.
   65.   10 th Avenue Place SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 10 th Avenue Place SE shall stop at 14 th Street SE.
   66.   Falcon Drive SE.
   Vehicles traveling on Falcon Drive SE shall stop at 14 th Street SE.
   67.   11 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 11 th Avenue SE shall stop at 14 th Street SE.
   68.   Lakeshore Circle SE.
   Vehicles traveling on Lakeshore Circle SE shall stop at Lakeshore Drive SE.
   69.   Stonegate Court SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Stonegate Court SW shall stop at 6 th Avenue SW.
   70.   6 th Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 6 th Avenue SW shall stop at 21 st Street SW.
   71.   Weatherstone Court SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Weatherstone Court SW shall stop at 21 st Street SW.
   72.   3 rd  Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 3 rd Avenue SW shall stop at 21 st Street SW.
   73.   Dooley Court SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Dooley Court SW shall stop at 3 rd Avenue SW.
   74.   11 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 11 th Street SE shall stop at 15 th Avenue SE.
   75.   11 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 11 th Street SE shall stop at Tuscany Drive.
   76.   15 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 15 th Avenue SE shall stop at 12 th Street SE.
   77.   Tuscany Drive. Vehicles traveling on Tuscany Drive shall stop at 12 th
Street SE.
   78.   20 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 20 th Avenue SE shall stop at Tuscany Drive.
   79.   17 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 17 th Street SE shall stop at 14 th Avenue SE.
   80.   2 nd Avenue NW.
   Vehicles traveling on 2 nd Avenue NW shall stop at 11 th Street NW.
   81.   4 th Avenue NW.
   Vehicles traveling on 4 th Avenue NW shall stop at 10 th Street NW.
   82.   16 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 16 th Street SW shall stop at 26 th Avenue SW.
   83.   26 th Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 26 th Avenue SW shall stop at 17 th Street SW.
   84.   31 st  Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 31 st Street SW shall stop at 3 rd Avenue SW.
   85.   32 nd Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 32 nd Street SW shall stop at 3 rd Avenue SW.
   86.   28 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 28 th Street SE shall stop at 6 th Avenue SE.
   87.   4 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 4 th Avenue SE shall stop at 28 th Street SE.
   88.   8 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 8 th Avenue SE shall stop at 28 th Street SE.
   89.   Hearthstone Court SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Hearthstone Court SW shall stop at 21 st Street SW.
   90.   35 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 35 th Street SE shall stop at 4 th Avenue SE.
   91.   34 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 34 th Street SE shall stop at 4 th Avenue SE.
   92.   Sunstone Court SE.
   Vehicles traveling on Sunstone Court SE shall stop at 35 th Street SE.
   93.   Lost Creek Lane SE.
   Vehicles traveling on Lost Creek Lane SE shall stop at 35 th Street SE.
   94.   Bass Pro Drive NW.
   Vehicles traveling north on Bass Pro Drive NW shall stop at Adventureland
Drive NW.
   95.   5 th Avenue SW.
   Vehicles travelling on 5 th Avenue SW shall stop at 6 th Street SW.
   96.   2 nd Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 2 nd Avenue SW shall stop at 4 th Street SW.
   97.   2 nd Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 2 nd Avenue SW shall stop at 5 th Street SW.
   98.   2 nd Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 2 nd Avenue SW shall stop at 7 th Street SW.
   99.   15 th Avenue NW.
   Vehicles traveling on 15 th Avenue NW shall stop at 4 th Street NW.
   100.   2 nd Street NW.
   Vehicles traveling on 2 nd Street NW shall stop at 15 th Avenue NW.
   101.   Bennett’s Way NW.
   Vehicles traveling on Bennett’s Way NW shall stop at 2 nd Street NW.
   102.   Bennett’s Way NW.
   Vehicles traveling on Bennett’s Way NW shall stop at 15 th Avenue NW.
   103.   19 th Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 19 th Avenue SW shall stop at 5 th Street SW.
   104.   4 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 4 th Street SW shall stop at 17 th Avenue SW.
   105.   Twin Creek Circle SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Twin Creek Circle SW shall stop at 14 th Street SW.
   106.   Landon Court SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Landon Court SW shall stop at 25 th Avenue SW.
   107.   Highland Circle SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Highland Circle SW shall stop at 25 th Avenue SW.
   108.   21 st Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 21 st Street SW shall stop at 26 th Avenue SW.
   109.   Pilgrim Drive SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Pilgrim Drive SW shall stop at 22 nd Street SW.
   110.   Pilgrim Drive SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Pilgrim Drive SW shall stop at 26 th Avenue SW.
   111.   Prairie Court NW.
   Vehicles traveling on Prairie Court NW shall stop at 14 th Avenue NW.
   112.   Meadow Court. Vehicles traveling on Meadow Court shall stop at 10 th
Avenue NW.
   113.   Meadow Lane. Vehicles traveling on Meadow Lane shall stop at 10 th
Avenue NW.
   114.   Sunburst Lane. Vehicles traveling on Sunburst Lane shall stop at 10
th Avenue NW.
   115.   Breezewood Circle. Vehicles traveling on Breezewood Circle shall stop
at 10 th Avenue NW.
   116.   10 th Avenue NE.
   Vehicles traveling on 10 th Avenue NE shall stop at 2 nd Street NE.
   117.   1 st Street East. Vehicles traveling on 1 st Street East shall stop
at 14 th Avenue (also known as NE 80 th Street).
   118.   15 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 15 th Avenue SE shall stop at 6 th Street SE.
   119.   16 th Avenue Court SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 16 th Avenue Court SE shall stop at 6 th Street SE.
   120.   Boulder Creek Court SE.
   Vehicles traveling on Boulder Creek Court SE shall stop at 17 th Avenue SE.
   121.   3 rd Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 3 rd Avenue SE shall stop at 8 th Street SE.
   122.   14 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 14 th Avenue SE shall stop at 8 th Street SE.
   123.   Red Hawk Way SE.
   Vehicles traveling on Red Hawk Way SE shall stop at 10 th Avenue SE.
   124.   Wren Drive. Vehicles traveling on Wren Drive shall stop at 10 th
Avenue SE.
   125.   12 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 12 th Street SE shall stop at 20 th Avenue SE.
   126.   Indigo Drive SE.
   Vehicles traveling on Indigo Drive SE shall stop at Tuscany Drive SE.
   127.   18 th Street Court SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 18 th Street Court SE shall stop at 15 th Avenue SE.
   128.   19 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 19 th Street SE shall stop at 15 th Avenue SE.
   129.   20 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 20 th Avenue SE shall stop at 17 th Street SE.
   130.   Lake Shore Circle SE.
   Vehicles traveling on Lake Shore Circle SE shall stop at Lake Shore Drive
SE.
   131.   16 th Circle SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 16 th Circle SE shall stop at 20 th Avenue SE.
   132.   Tuscany Drive SE.
   Vehicles traveling on Tuscany Drive SE shall stop at 20 th Avenue SE.
   133.   17 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 17 th Street SE shall stop at 14 th Avenue SE.
   134.   18 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 18 th Street SE shall stop at 8 th Avenue SE.
   135.   18 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 18 th Street SE shall stop at Sunset Drive SE.
   136.   Sunset Drive SE.
   Vehicles traveling on Sunset Drive SE shall stop at 8 th Avenue SE.
   137.   Edwin W Skinner Parkway SE.
   Vehicles traveling on Edwin W Skinner Parkway SE shall stop at 14 th Avenue
SE (also known as NE 80 th Street).
   138.   10 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 10 th Avenue SE shall stop at Edwin W Skinner Parkway
SE.
   139.   25 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 25 th Street SE shall stop at 10 th Avenue SE.
   140.   30 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 30 th Street SE shall stop at 14 th Avenue SE.
   141.   36 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 36 th Street SE shall stop at 14 th Avenue SE (also
known as NE 80 th Street).
   142.   32 nd Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 32 nd Street SE shall stop at Lakeview Drive SE.
   143.   13 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 13 th Avenue SE shall stop at 33 rd Street SE.
   144.   Lakeview Drive SE.
   Vehicles traveling on Lakeview Drive SE shall stop at 33 rd Street SE.
   145.   31 st Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 31 st Street SE shall stop at 2 nd Avenue SE.
   146.   31 st Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 31 st Street SE shall stop at 4 th Avenue SE.
   147.   32 nd Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 32 nd Street SE shall stop at 2 nd Avenue SE.
   148.   32 nd Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 32 nd Street SE shall stop at 4 th Avenue SE.
   149.   33 rd Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 33 rd Street SE shall stop at 4 th Avenue SE.
   150.   Caroline Court SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Caroline Court SW shall stop at Kendall Drive SW.
   151.   Kendall Drive SW.
   Vehicles traveling on Kendall Drive SW shall stop at 8 th Avenue SW.
   152.   27 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 27 th Street SW shall stop at 66 th Avenue SW.
   153.   29 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 29 th Street SW shall stop at 3 rd Avenue SW.
   154.   32 nd Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 32 nd Street SW shall stop at 6 th Avenue SW.
   155.   9 th Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 9 th Avenue SW shall stop at 32 nd Street SW.
   156.   33 rd Court SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 33 rd Court SW shall stop at 9 th Avenue SW.
   157.   9 th Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 9 th Avenue SW shall stop at 35 th Street SW.
   158.   10 th Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 10 th Avenue SW shall stop at 35 th Street SW.
   159.   12 th Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 12 th Avenue SW shall stop at 35 th Street SW.
   160.   36 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 36 th Street SW shall stop at 1 st Avenue S.
   161.   41 st Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 41 st Street SW shall stop at 1 st Avenue S (also
known as NE 70 th Street).
   162.   5 th Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 5 th Avenue SW shall stop at 42 nd Street SW.
   163.   4 th Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 4 th Avenue SW shall stop at 42 nd Street SW.
   164.   21 st Street NW.
   Vehicles traveling on 21 st Street NW shall stop at 34 th Avenue NW.
   165.   21 st Street NW.
   Vehicles traveling on 21 st Street NW shall stop at 20 th Avenue NW.
   166.   Prairie Fire NW.
   Vehicles traveling west on Prairie Fire NW shall stop at Prairie Fire NW.
65.03   THREE-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following
designated three-way stop intersections:
   1.   1 st Street NW and 10 th Avenue NW.
   2.   3 rd Street SW and 5 th Avenue SW.
   3.   11 th Street SE and 7 th Avenue SE.
   4.   14 th Street SW and 28 th Avenue SW.
65.04   FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following
designated four-way stop intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
   1.   25 th Street NW and 34 th Avenue NW.
   2.   5 th Street NW and 5 th Avenue NW.
   3.   1 st Street NW and 12 th Avenue NW.
   4.   1 st Street East and 8 th Avenue.
   5.   3 rd Street SE and 7 th Avenue SE.
   6.   4 th Street SW and 3 rd Avenue SW.
   7.   5 th Street SE and 8 th Avenue SE.
   8.   6 th Street SW and 3 rd Avenue SW.
   9.   10 th Avenue SE and Falcon Drive SE.
   10.   13 th Street SW and 5 th Avenue SW.
   11.   13 th Street SE and 7 th Avenue SE.
   12.   14 th Street SW and 25 th Avenue SE.
   13.   17 th Street SW (Venbury Drive) and 5 th Avenue SW.
   14.   35 th Street SW and 6 th Avenue SW.
   15.   14 th Avenue NE and 9 th Street NE.
   16.   2 nd Avenue SW and 7 th Street SW.
   17.   10 th Avenue SE and 15 th Street SE and Lake Shore Drive SE.
65.05   YIELD REQUIRED.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
   1.   4 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 4 th Avenue SE shall yield at 3 rd Street SE.
   2.   4 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 4 th Avenue SE shall yield at 2 nd Street SE.
   3.   4 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling south on 4 th Avenue shall yield at 4 th Street SE.
   4.   2 nd Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling south on 2 nd Avenue SE shall yield at 4 th Street SE.
   5.   2 nd Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling north on 2 nd Avenue SE shall yield at 7 th Street SE.
   6.   3 rd Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 3 rd Avenue SE shall yield at 15 th Street SE.
   7.   4 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling south on 4 th Avenue SE shall yield at 15 th Street SE.
   8.   11 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling east on 11 th Street SE shall yield at 4 th Avenue SE.
   9.   3 rd Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling east on 3 rd Street SW shall yield at 10 th Avenue SW.
   10.   11 th Avenue NW.
   Vehicles traveling south on 11 th Avenue NW shall yield at 1 st Street NW.
   11.   2 nd Street NW.
   Vehicles traveling east on 2 nd Street NW shall yield at 10 th  Avenue NW.
   12.   2 nd Street NW.
   Vehicles traveling west on 2 nd Street NW shall yield at 11 th Avenue NW.
   13.   Rosa Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Rosa Drive shall yield at 13 th
Avenue NW.
   14.   Rosa Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Rosa Drive shall yield at 1 st
Street NW.
   15.   7 th Street NW.
   Vehicles traveling west on 7 th Street NW shall yield at 14 th Avenue NW.
   16.   6 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling on 6 th Street SW shall yield at 25 th Avenue SW.
   17.   6 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling east on 6 th Street SW shall yield at 22 nd Avenue SW.
   18.   13 th Avenue NW.
   Vehicles traveling north on 13 th Avenue NW shall yield at 4 th Street NW.
   19.   14 th Avenue NW.
   Vehicles traveling south on 14 th Avenue NW shall yield at 4 th Street NW.
   20.   Village Circle. Vehicles traveling north on Village Circle shall yield
at 4 th Street NW.
   21.   10 th Street SE.
   Vehicles traveling east on 10 th Street SE shall yield at 4 th Avenue SE.
   22.   7 th Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling west on 7 th Street SW shall yield at 3 rd Avenue SW.
   23.   2 nd Avenue SW.
   Vehicles traveling north on 2 nd Avenue SW shall yield at 3 rd Street SW.
   24.   3 rd Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling east on 3 rd Street SW shall yield at 15 th Avenue SW.
   25.   Guenever Court. Vehicles traveling west on Guenever Court shall yield
at 25 th Avenue SW.
   26.   Camelot Court. Vehicles traveling east on Camelot Court shall yield at
22 nd Avenue SW.
   27.   5 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 5 th Avenue SE shall yield at 6 th Street Place SE.
   28.   6 th Avenue SE.
   Vehicles traveling on 6 th Avenue SE shall yield at 7 th Street Place SE.
   29.   Trails End. Vehicles traveling east on Trails End shall yield at 22 nd
Avenue SW.
   30.   3 rd Street NW.
   Vehicles traveling east on 3 rd Street NW shall yield at 10 th Avenue NW.
   31.   3 rd Street NW.
   Vehicles traveling west on 3 rd Street NW shall yield at 11 th Avenue NW.
   32.   4 th Street NW.
   Vehicles traveling east on 4 th Street NW shall yield at 10 th Avenue NW.
   33.   11 th Avenue NW.
   Vehicles traveling north on 11 th Avenue NW shall yield at 4 th Street NW.
   34.   5 th Street NW.
   Vehicles traveling east on 5 th Street NW shall yield at 10 th Avenue NW.
   35.   6 th Street NW.
   Vehicles traveling east on 6 th Street NW shall yield at 10 th Avenue NW.
   36.   7 th Street NW.
   Vehicles traveling east on 7 th Street NW shall yield at 10 th Avenue NW.
   37.   Lynn Court. Vehicles traveling southeast on Lynn Court shall yield at
10 th Avenue SW.
   38.   Village Court. Vehicles traveling north on Village Court shall yield
at 14 th Avenue NW.
   39.   6 th Street Place SW.
   Vehicles traveling west on 6 th Street Place SW shall yield at 15 th Avenue
SW.
   40.   3 rd Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling west on 3 rd Street SW shall yield at 25 th Avenue SW.
   41.   3 rd Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling east on 3 rd Street SW shall yield at 22 nd Avenue SW.
   42.   11 th Avenue NW.
   Vehicles traveling south on 11 th Avenue NW shall yield at 7 th Street NW.
   43.   2 nd Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling east on 2 nd Street SW shall yield at 22 nd Avenue SW.
   44.   10 th Street NW.
   Vehicles traveling west on 10 th Street NW shall yield at 9 th Avenue NW.
   45.   3 rd Street SW.
   Vehicles traveling east on 3 rd Street SW shall yield at 19 th Avenue SW.
   46.   Waterbury Circle. Vehicles traveling north on Waterbury Circle shall
yield at Timberline Lane.
65.06   ROUNDABOUT YIELD REQUIRED.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in accordance with yield signs in the
following roundabouts:
   1.   25th Street NW and 20th Avenue NW.
   2.   Adventureland Drive and 34th Avenue NW.
   3.   Prairie Fire NW and Tallgrass Parkway NW.
   4.   Prairie Fire NW and Prairie Crossing NW.
   5.   9th Street and 1st Avenue N.
65.07   STOP FOR PEDESTRIANS IN SCHOOL ZONE CROSSWALKS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall stop and yield for pedestrians in school zone
crosswalks where authorized signs are posted.
65.08   STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.
   Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
65.09   PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver
of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need
be, to so yield to a pedestrian or a person riding a bicycle crossing the
roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
65.10   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROLS.
   Every driver shall observe and comply with the directions provided by
official traffic control signals at the following intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
   1.   Interstate 80 Eastbound exit ramp and 1 st Avenue North.
   2.   Adventureland Drive and 1 st Ave North.
   3.   1 st Avenue South and 8 th Street SW.
   4.   1 st Avenue South and Skinner Parkway SW.
   5.   Pedestrian crossing flashing lights at 1 st Street East and 1 st Avenue
S.
   6.   Pedestrian crossing flashing lights at 6 th Street SW and 1 st Avenue
S.
   7.   7 th Avenue SE and 8 th Street SE.
   8.   5 th Avenue SW and 8 th Street SW.
   9.   Venbury Drive SW and 8 th Street SW.
   10.   17 th Avenue SW and 8 th Street SW.
   11.   Scenic View Boulevard (23 rd Avenue SW) and 8 th Street SW.
   12.   Prairie Meadows Drive and 8 th Street SW.
   13.   34 th Avenue SW and 8 th Street SW.
   14.   36 th Avenue SW and 8 th Street SW.
   15.   Highway 65 northbound exit ramp and 8 th Street SW.
   16.   Highway 65 southbound entrance ramp and 8 th Street SW.
   17.   Highway 65 Southbound exit ramp and Hubbell Avenue NE.
   18.   Highway 65 northbound entrance ramp and Hubbell Avenue NE.
   19.   36 th Avenue SW and Hubbell Avenue NE.
   20.   Tallgrass Parkway NW and Hubbell Avenue NE.
   21.   34 th Avenue NW and Hubbell Avenue NE.
   22.   Adventureland Drive NW and Hubbell Avenue NE.
   23.   Interstate 80 eastbound exit ramp and Hubbell Avenue NE.
   24.   Interstate 80 Westbound exit ramp and Hubbell Avenue NE.
   25.   Ziegler Drive NW and Hubbell Avenue NE.
   26.   Prairie Meadows Drive and Adventureland Drive NW.
65.11   PARKS STOP REQUIRED.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop at the exits of all City parks.
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
 
66.01 Temporary Embargo                  66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.05 Truck Routes
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets    
 
66.01   TEMPORARY EMBARGO.
   If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of
deterioration, rain, snow, or other climatic conditions that certain streets
will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an
amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so
designated by such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 and 472)
66.02   PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.
   The City Engineer may, upon application and good cause being shown, issue a
special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a
vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the
maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named
in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the
City is responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 and 321E.2)
66.03   LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS.
   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at
any time upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 and 475)
- NONE -
66.04   LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES.
   Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity less than
the maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street serving the
bridge, the City Engineer may cause to be posted and maintained signs on said
bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers
of such maximum load limits. No person shall drive upon said bridge any vehicle
weighing, loaded or unloaded, in excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
66.05   TRUCK ROUTES.
   Truck route regulations are established as follows:
   1.   Truck Routes Designated. Every motor vehicle weighing 10 tons or more,
when loaded or empty, having no fixed terminal within the City or making no
scheduled or definite stops within the City for the purpose of loading or
unloading shall travel over or upon the following streets within the City and
none other:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
      A.   1 st  Avenue N from Interstate 80 to Adventureland Drive.
      B.   1 st Avenue S from 8 th Street to the south City limits.
      C.   8 th Street SE and SW within the City limits.
      D.   25 th Street NW within the City limits.
      E.   34 th Avenue NW from the north City limits to Hubbell Avenue NE.
      F.   Adventureland Drive NE from 1 st Avenue N to its eastern terminus.
      G.   Adventureland Drive NW from Hubbell Avenue NE to Tallgrass Parkway
NW.
      H.   Hubbell Avenue NE within the City limits.
      I.   Interstate 80 within the City limits.
      J.   US 65 within the City limits.
   2.   Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any motor vehicle weighing 10 tons or more,
when loaded or empty, having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite
stop within the City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over
or upon the designated routes set out in this section to the nearest point of
its scheduled or definite stop and shall proceed thereto, load or unload, and
return by the most direct route to its point of departure from said designated
route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
   3.   Employer’s Responsibility. The owner or any other person employing or
otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly
permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to
this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
   4.   Exceptions. The restrictions imposed by Section
66.05(1) hereof do not apply to the following:
      A.   Emergency Vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any
street within the City.
      B.   Public Utilities. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the
City, or any contractor or material men, while engaged in the repair,
maintenance, or construction of streets, public improvement, or street
utilities in the City.
      C.   Buses. The operation of any school bus or public bus upon any street
in the City.
      D.   Detoured Trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially
established detour in any case where such trucks could lawfully operate upon
the street for which such detour is established.
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
 
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking       67.04 Use of Sidewalks
 
67.01   WALKING IN STREET.
   Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a street, walk on
the left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02   HITCHHIKING.
   No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03   PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.
   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
67.04   USE OF SIDEWALKS.
   Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along
and upon an adjacent street.
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
68.01   ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.
   Upon the following streets and alleys, vehicular traffic, other than
permitted cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated direction when
appropriate signs are in place.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(4))
   1.   2 nd Street SE shall be eastbound only from 1 st Avenue to 3 rd Avenue.
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
69.01 Park Adjacent to Curb             69.09 Truck Parking Limited
69.02 Parking on One-Way Streets        69.10 Parking Limited to 15 Minutes
69.03 Angle Parking                     69.11 Snow Removal
69.04 Manner of Angle Parking           69.12 Snow Routes
69.05 Parking for Certain Purposes      69.13 No Parking on North Side of
Illegal                                 Streets
69.06 Parking Prohibited                69.14 No Parking on East Side of
                                        Streets
69.07 Persons with Disabilities Parking 69.15 Fire Lanes
69.08 No Parking Zones                   
 
69.01   PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement
and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or
edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking
and vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.02   PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way
street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction
of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within
18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in
the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03   ANGLE PARKING.
   Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
   1.   2 nd Street SE, on both sides, from 1 st Avenue South to 2 nd Avenue
SE.
   2.   Center Place, on both sides, from 5 th Avenue SW to 8 th Street SW.
   3.   3 rd Avenue SW, on the west side, from 6 th Street SW and 130 feet
north.
   4.   6 th Street SW, on the north side, from 3 rd Avenue SW to 5 th Avenue
SW.
69.04   MANNER OF ANGLE PARKING.
   Upon those streets or portions of streets that have been signed or marked
for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an
angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as
indicated by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle or the load
thereon, when said vehicle is parked within a diagonal parking district, shall
extend into the roadway more than a distance of 16 feet when measured at right
angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.05   PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than 48 hours,
unless otherwise limited under the provisions of this chapter, or for any of
the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
   1.   Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
   2.   Repairing. For lubricating, repairing, or for commercial washing of
such vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
   3.   Advertising. Displaying advertising.
   4.   Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a
duly established marketplace or when so authorized or licensed under this Code
of Ordinances.
69.06   PARKING PROHIBITED.
   No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
   1.   Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(5))
   2.   Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
   3.   Mailboxes. Within 20 feet on either side of a mailbox that is so placed
and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
   4.   Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(1))
   5.   Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(2))
   6.   Intersection. Within an intersection or within 10 feet of an
intersection of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(3))
   7.   Fire Hydrant. Within five feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(4))
   8.   Stop Sign or Signal. Within 10 feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(6))
   9.   Railroad Crossing. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red
light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(8))
   10.   Fire Station. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within 75 feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(9))
   11.   Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(10))
   12.   Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(11))
   13.   Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when
standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or
when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be
painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(13))
   14.   Churches, Nursing Homes, and Other Buildings. A space of 50 feet is
hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium,
hotel having more than 25 sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab
stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people
are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor
vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or
discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is
necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
   15.   Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person
shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. The provisions of this
subsection do not apply to a vehicle parked in any alley that is 18 feet wide
or less, provided that said vehicle is parked to deliver goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
   16.   Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or
private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(15))
   17.   In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that any
part of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the
markings designating such space.
69.07   PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.
   The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of
persons with disabilities parking spaces:
   1.   Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be
established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa
and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish
any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining
Council approval.
   2.   Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking
space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of
a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code
of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4(2))
      A.   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit.
      B.   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or
being transported in accordance with Section 321L.2(1)(b) of the Code of Iowa.
      C.   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section
321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.
   3.   Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a
wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
      A.   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must
comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A(1) of the Code of Iowa when
utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
      B.   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone that is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A(1) of the Code of Iowa.
69.08   NO PARKING ZONES.
   No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of the following
specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace
officer or traffic control signal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
   1.   6 th Street SW, on the south side, from the intersection of 6 th Street
SW and 3 rd Avenue SW for a distance of 380 feet west, between the hours of 7:
00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. from August 15 to June 15 of each year.
   2.   8 th Avenue SE, on the west side, from 1 st Street East to 8 th Street
SE.
   3.   8 th Street SW and 8 th Street SE, on both sides, within the City
limits.
   4.   1 st Avenue, on both sides, from the north City limits to the south
City limits.
   5.   Adventureland Drive NW and Adventureland Drive NE, on both sides,
within the City limits.
   6.   17 th Avenue SW and 17 th Avenue NW, on both sides, within the City
limits.
   7.   4 th Street SW, on the south side, commencing at the entrance to Lions
Park, westbound for a distance of 250 feet.
   8.   4 th Street SW, on the south side, commencing at the entrance to Lions
Park, eastbound for a distance of 200 feet.
   9.   4 th Street SW, on both sides, from 7 th Avenue SW to 9 th Avenue SW.
   10.   3 rd Street SW, on both sides, from 7 th Avenue SW east on 3 rd Street
SW 160 feet.
   11.   On the inside of the circle formed by the following streets: 5 th
Avenue SE south from 5 th Street SE to 8 th Street Place SE, 8 th Street Place
SE from 5 th Avenue SE east to 6 th Avenue SE, 6 th Avenue SE north to 5 th
Street SE, 5 th Street SE west to 5 th Avenue SE.
   12.   On the inside of the circle of 7 th Avenue Court NE from 100-140 7 th
Avenue Court NE.
   13.   On the inside of the circle formed by the following streets: 7 th
Street NW east from 5 th Avenue NW to 4 th Avenue NW, 4 th Avenue NW south to 6
th Street NW, 6 th Street NW west to 5 th Avenue NW, 5 th Avenue NW north to 7
th Street NW.
   14.   On the inside of the half circle formed by Rosa Drive from the 1,300
to 1,400 block of said named Rosa Drive.
   15.   On the inside of the circle formed by the following streets: 3 rd
Street NW west from 5 th Avenue NW to 7 th Avenue NW, 7 th Avenue NW north from
3 rd Street NW to 4 th Street NW, 4 th Street NW east from 7 th Avenue NW to 5
th Avenue NW.
   16.   Timberline Road, on the north side, within City limits.
   17.   Brookview Drive, on the east side, and also on the north side and west
side of the turnaround area at the northern end of Brookview Drive.
   18.   31 st  Avenue SW on the east side.
   19.   Scenic View on the east side.
   20.   4 th Street SW from 17 th Avenue SW to a point approximately 260 feet
west between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. from August 15 to June 15 each
year.
   21.   36 th Avenue SW and NW, on both sides, from 8 th Street to Hubbell
Avenue.
   22.   Birch Lane (frontage road) on both sides.
   23.   8 th Street Court SW, on the south side, from Scenic View Boulevard to
a point 40 feet east.
   24.   2 nd Street NW, on the south side, from 5 th Avenue NW to a point 95
feet east.
   25.   4 th Street SW, on the south side, from 3 rd Avenue SW to a point 120
feet west.
   26.   31 st Avenue SW, on the west side, from 8 th Street SW to the northern
end of the street.
   27.   3 rd Street SW, on the south side, from 17 th Avenue SW to a point 80
feet east.
   28.   13 th Street SE, on the south side, 1 st Avenue S to a point 150 feet
east.
   29.   9 th Street SE, on the south side, from 7 th Avenue SE to a point 75
feet west.
   30.   4 th Street NW, on the south side, from 17 th Avenue NW east to the
east side of the 14 th Avenue NW intersection.
   31.   1 st Avenue, on the east side of the off-street parking area, between
2 nd Street NW and 7 th Street NW between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
   32.   Falcon Drive SE from 250 feet north and south of the intersection of
the centerlines of Falcon Drive SE and 8 th Street SE.
   33.   9 th Street From 125 feet west of the intersection of the centerlines
of 1 st Avenue N and 9 th Street to 14 th Avenue NE.
69.09   TRUCK PARKING LIMITED.
   The parking of truck or trailers or any combination thereof, weighing four
tons or more, loaded or unloaded, is prohibited on or in the streets of the
City and in the alleys of the City except for the purpose of loading and
unloading.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
69.10   PARKING LIMITED TO 15 MINUTES.
   It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than 15
minutes between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on each weekday except
Saturday, and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Saturday upon
the following designated streets:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
   1.   3 rd Avenue SW from the intersection of 6 th Street and 3 rd Avenue SW
for a distance of 130 feet north.
69.11   SNOW REMOVAL.
   The snow removal parking ban is in effect from October though May or anytime
snow or ice removal efforts are required. When the weather forecast predicts
weather conditions that will require enforcement of the parking ban, a notice
will be published on the City’s or Police Department’s Facebook and Twitter
pages. When this section is in effect, no person, except physicians or other
persons on emergency calls, shall park or leave unattended any vehicle on any
public streets within the City limits. This section shall not be construed as
suspending parking limitations or restrictions imposed by any other sections of
this chapter.
69.12   SNOW ROUTES.
   The Council may designate certain streets in the City as snow routes. When
conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface of a designated snow
route, it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to impede or block traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(12))
69.13   NO PARKING ON NORTH SIDE OF STREETS.
   Parking of vehicles on the north side of all streets in the City running in
an east to west direction is hereby prohibited, except on the following:
   1.   2 nd Street SE from 1 st Avenue S to 2 nd Avenue S.
   2.   4 th Street NW from 17 th Avenue NW to 14 th Avenue NW.
   3.   Center Place between 8 th Street SW and 5 th Avenue SW.
   4.   6 th Street SW between 5 th Avenue SW and 3 rd Avenue SE.
   5.   28 th Avenue SW at Oak Hill Park.
69.14   NO PARKING ON EAST SIDE OF STREETS.
   Parking of vehicles in the street on the east side of all streets in the
City running in a north to south direction is hereby prohibited, except 8 th
Avenue SE from 1 st Street E to 8 th Street SE.
69.15   FIRE LANES.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except authorized emergency
vehicles, in a designated fire lane established pursuant to Chapter 161.
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
 
70.01 Arrest or Citation            70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle
                                    Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations          70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal
                                    Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.06 Impounding Vehicles
 
70.01   ARREST OR CITATION.
   Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
   1.   Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person
before a local magistrate; or
   2.   Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate
a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner
of Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-
approved computerized device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 and 321.485)
70.02   SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.
   For violations of the Traffic Code that are designated by Section 805.8A of
the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of
those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 and 805.8A)
70.03   PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE.
   Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of
Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the
office of the Clerk. The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount of
$15.00 for all violations except as otherwise provided herein. If such fine is
not paid within 30 days, it shall be increased by $5.00. For violations of the
following parking restrictions the simple notice of a fine shall be:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1)(a) and 321L.4(2))
   1.   Snow route † 5  and snow removal parking - $25.00.
   2.   Fire lane parking- $50.00.
 
Notes
  †  EDITOR’S NOTE: A snow route parking violation occurs when the driver of a
5 vehicle impedes or blocks traffic on a designated snow route. (See Section
  69.12.)
70.04   PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED.
   When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code,
and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein
provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
70.05   PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
   In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation
occurred shall be raised by proof that:
   1.   Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information
was parked in violation of the Traffic Code; and
   2.   Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question.
70.06   IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
   1.   A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed,
a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot, or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
      A.   Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
      B.   Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is
so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
      C.   Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban
on parking during snow removal operations.
      D.   Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for
a continuous period in violation of any limited parking time. If the owner can
be located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
   2.   Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or
driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and
storage.
CHAPTER 75
ATVS, UTVS, AND SNOWMOBILES
 
75.01 Purpose                    75.06 Negligence
75.02 Definitions                75.07 Accident Reports
75.03 General Regulations        75.08 Hours of Operation
75.04 Operation of Snowmobiles   75.09 Thaw Ban
75.05 Operation of ATVs and UTVs  
 
75.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles, off-road utility vehicles, and snowmobiles within the City.
75.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized vehicle, with not less
than three and not more than six non-highway tires, that is limited in engine
displacement to less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to
less than 1,200 pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled
by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
   2.   “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat
or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering
control and that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain.
“Off-road motorcycle” includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a
certificate of title and registered for highway use under Chapter 321 of the
Code of Iowa, but which contains design features that enable operation over
natural terrain. An operator of an off-road motorcycle is also subject to the
provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
   3.   “Off-road utility vehicle” or “UTV” means a motorized vehicle, with not
less than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized tracks,
that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled
by the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for control. “Off-road
utility vehicle” or “UTV” includes the following vehicles:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
      A.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 1” includes vehicles with a total
dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
      B.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 2” includes vehicles, other than
Type 1 vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less and a width of
65 inches or less.
      C.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 3” includes vehicles with a total
dry weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches, or
both.
An operator of an UTV is also subject to the provisions of this chapter
governing the operation of ATVs.
   4.   “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs less than 1,000
pounds, that uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a
width of 48 inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis, or tread, and
is designed for travel on snow or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-
terrain vehicle that has been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type
tracks, or treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
75.03   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle, or off-road utility
vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a
snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of
the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource
Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their registration,
equipment and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G and Ch. 321I)
75.04   OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.
   The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as
to where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:
   1.   Streets. Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets that have not
been plowed during the snow season and on such other streets as may be
designated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9(4)(a))
   2.   Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only
under the following circumstances:
      A.   Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an
emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the
roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9(4)(c))
      B.   Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a
prohibited street provided all of the following occur:
         (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to
the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a
quick and safe crossing;
         (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
street;
         (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic that
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
         (4)   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9(2))
   3.   Railroad Right-of-Way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a
railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any
other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13(1)(h))
   4.   Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails
except where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9(4)(f))
   5.   Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any
park, playground, or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City. A snowmobile shall not be operated on any City land
without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.
   6.   Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the
sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for
purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is
authorized by this chapter.
75.05   OPERATION OF ATVS AND UTVS.
   The operators of ATVs and UTVs shall comply with the following restrictions
as to where ATVs and UTVs may be operated within the City:
   1.   Streets. ATVs and UTVs may be operated on roadways or highways in
accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa. A City may regulate the
operation of registered ATVs and UTVs and may designate streets under the
jurisdiction of the City within its corporate limits, and two-lane primary and
secondary road extensions in the City, which may be used for the operation of
such vehicles. In designating such streets, the City may authorize ATVs and
UTVs to stop at service stations or convenience stores along a designated
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10(1 and 3))
   2.   Trails. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except
where designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10(4))
   3.   Railroad Right-of-Way. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way. An ATV or UTV may be driven directly across a
railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any
other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14(1)(h))
   4.   Parks and Other City Land. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated in any
park, playground, or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City.
   5.   Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated upon the
public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and
the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”
   6.   Direct Crossing. An ATV or UTV may make a direct crossing of a highway
that is not part of the interstate road system provided all of the following
occur:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10(5))
      A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing.
      B.   The ATV or UTV is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way of the highway.
      C.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
      D.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or highway.
      E.   The crossing is made from a street, roadway, or highway on which the
ATV or UTV is authorized to operate to a street, roadway, or highway on which
such vehicle is authorized to operate.
75.06   NEGLIGENCE.
   The owner and operator of an ATV, UTV, or snowmobile are liable for any
injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV, UTV, or
snowmobile. The owner of an ATV, UTV, or snowmobile shall be liable for any
such injury or damage only if the owner was the operator of the ATV, UTV, or
snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the
owner’s consent to operate the ATV, UTV, or snowmobile at the time the injury
or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 and 321I.19)
75.07   ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   Whenever an ATV, UTV, or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in
injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500.00 or more,
either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify
a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with
State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 and 321I.11)
75.08   HOURS OF OPERATION.  
   No ATV, UTV, or snowmobile shall be operated in the City between the hours
of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. except for emergency situations or for loading and
unloading from a transport trailer.
75.09   THAW BAN.
   Snowmobiles shall not be operated during a publicized thaw ban in areas
posted to prohibit such operation.
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
76.01 Definitions                         76.11 Place of Riding
76.02 Alteration of Serial Frame Number   76.12 Bicycle Lanes
76.03 Sirens and Whistles Prohibited      76.13 Emerging from Alley or Driveway
76.04 Lamps and Reflectors                76.14 Operation on Sidewalk
76.05 Stopping                            76.15 Clinging to Other Vehicles
76.06 Applicability of Motor Vehicle Laws 76.16 Following Emergency Vehicles
76.07 Obedience to Signals                76.17 Parking
76.08 Improper Riding                     76.18 Reckless Operation
76.09 Carrying Packages                   76.19 Violations
76.10 Control With Hands on Handlebars     
 
76.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Bicycle” means either of the following:
      A.   A device having up to four wheels and having at least one saddle or
seat for the use of a rider which is propelled by human power.
      B.   A device having up to four wheels with fully operable pedals and an
electric motor of one horsepower or less.
   2.   “Multi-use trail” means a way or place, the use of which is controlled
by the City as an owner of real property, designated by the multi-use
recreational trail maps, as approved by resolution by the Council, and no
multi-use trail shall be considered as a street or highway.
76.02   ALTERATION OF SERIAL FRAME NUMBER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove,
destroy, mutilate, or alter the manufacturer’s serial frame number of any
bicycle.
76.03   SIRENS AND WHISTLES PROHIBITED.
   A bicycle shall not be equipped with and a person shall not use upon a
bicycle any siren or whistle. This section shall not apply to bicycles ridden
by peace officers in the line of duty.
76.04   LAMPS AND REFLECTORS.
   1.   Every bicycle ridden at any time from sunset to sunrise and at such
other times when conditions such as fog, snow, sleet, or rain provide
insufficient lighting to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the
highway at a distance of 300 feet ahead shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of at least 300 feet to
the front.
   2.   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a
red light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear; except that a red
reflector may be used in lieu of a rear light.
   3.   Equivalent equipment such as headlamps and red light attachments to the
arm or leg may be used in lieu of a lamp on the front and a red light on the
rear of the bicycle.
   4.   A peace officer riding a police bicycle is not required to use either
front or rear lamps if duty so requires.
76.05   STOPPING.
   Every bicycle used upon the City streets, sidewalks, highways, park roads,
or multi-use trails shall be able to come to a complete stop within a safe
distance.
76.06   APPLICABILITY OF MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS.
   Every person operating a bicycle upon the City streets, highways, park
roads, or multi-use trails shall be subject to this chapter and other City
traffic ordinances and the state statutes applicable to the drivers of motor
vehicles, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to
those provisions of ordinances and statutes which by their nature can have no
application or those provisions for which specific exceptions have been set
forth regarding police bicycles.
76.07   OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.
   Every person operating a bicycle shall obey the directions of official
traffic signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to other vehicles,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer, and shall obey direction signs
relative to turns permitted, unless such person dismounts from the bicycle,
when they shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.
76.08   IMPROPER RIDING.
   1.   A person propelling a bicycle on any street, sidewalk, highway, park
road, or multi-use recreational trail, shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached to the bicycle and shall not use
a bicycle to carry more persons at one time than the number of persons for
which the bicycle is designed and equipped.
   2.   This section does not apply to the use of a bicycle in a parade or
special event authorized by the City.
76.09   CARRYING PACKAGES.
   No person operating a bicycle upon a street, sidewalk, highway, park road,
or multi-use trail shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents
the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
76.10   CONTROL WITH HANDS ON HANDLEBARS.
   The operator of a bicycle upon a street, sidewalk, highway, park road, or
multi-use trail shall keep the bicycle under control at all times and at all
times during operation shall have one or both hands upon the handlebars and the
feet engaged with the braking device if the braking device is designed to be
actuated by the feet.
76.11   PLACE OF RIDING.
   1.   Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway at a speed less than the
normal speed of traffic moving in the same direction shall ride as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway except under any of
the following situations:
      A.   When overtaking and passing another bicycle vehicle proceeding in
the same direction.
      B.   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private
road or driveway.
      C.   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions (including, but not
limited to, fixed or moving objects, vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, animals,
surface hazards, or substandard width lanes) that make it unsafe to continue
along the right-hand curb or edge. For purposes of this section, a “substandard
width lane” is a lane that is too narrow for a bicycle and a vehicle to travel
safely side by side within the lane.
      D.   A facility that would allow bicycle traffic on the left side of the
roadway.
   2.   Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway which carries traffic in
one direction only and has two or more marked traffic lanes, may ride as near
the left-hand curb or edge of such roadway as practicable.
   3.   When so riding upon any multi-use trail with other cyclists, there
shall not be more than two abreast.
   4.   This section does not apply to the use of a bicycle in a parade or
special event authorized by the City.
76.12   BICYCLE LANES.
   1.   Whenever a bicycle lane has been established on a roadway, any person
operating a bicycle upon the roadway at a speed less than the normal speed of
traffic moving in the same direction may ride within the bicycle lane, except
that such person may move out of the lane under any of the following
situations:
      A.   When overtaking and passing another bicycle, vehicle, or pedestrian
within the lane or about to enter the lane if such overtaking and passing
cannot be done safely within the lane.
      B.   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private
road or driveway.
      C.   When reasonably necessary to leave the bicycle lane to avoid debris
or other hazardous conditions.
      D.   When the bicycle lane does not include a marked shared lane.
   2.   No person operating a bicycle shall leave a bicycle lane until the
movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after giving an
appropriate signal.
   3.   No person shall drive a motor vehicle in a bicycle lane established on
a roadway except as follows:
      A.   To park where parking is permitted.
      B.   To enter or leave the roadway.
      C.   To prepare for a turn within a distance of 200 feet from the
intersection.
76.13   EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on
the sidewalk or sidewalk area and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
76.14   OPERATION ON SIDEWALK.
   Bicycles may be operated upon the public sidewalks in a careful and prudent
manner except where signs are erected prohibiting riding on the sidewalk. Every
person lawfully operating a bicycle upon a public sidewalk, shall yield the
right-of-way when approaching a pedestrian and shall give an audible signal
before overtaking and passing.
76.15   CLINGING TO OTHER VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle on a street, sidewalk, highway, park road,
or multi-use trail shall attach the bicycle or themselves to any moving vehicle
by tow rope, hand grip, or otherwise, and shall not tow or be towed by another
bicycle or vehicle.
76.16   FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   No person riding a bicycle shall follow closer than 500 feet of an emergency
vehicle as defined by Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa, which has emergency
lights or siren activated, and shall not stop, park, or leave a bicycle within
500 feet of an emergency vehicle stopped in response to an emergency.
76.17   PARKING.
   No person shall leave a bicycle lying on its side on any sidewalk, or shall
park a bicycle on a sidewalk in any other position, so that there is not an
adequate path for pedestrian traffic. Local authorities may, by ordinance or
resolution, prohibit bicycle parking in designated areas of the public highway,
provided that appropriate signs are erected.
76.18   RECKLESS OPERATION.
   No person shall operate a bicycle with willful or wanton disregard for the
safety of persons or property.
76.19   VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is subject to a fine of
$30.00 for the first offense, $40.00 for a second offense, and $50.00 for a
third offense, or may, in lieu of the scheduled fine, allow the person’s
bicycle to be impounded by the City for not less than five days for the first
offense, 10 days for a second offense, and 30 days for a third offense.
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
 
80.01 Definitions                       80.05 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of   80.06 Disposal of Totally Inoperable
Abandoned Vehicles                      Vehicles
80.03 Notice by Mail                    80.07 Proceeds from Sales
80.04 Reclamation of Abandoned Vehicles 80.08 Duties of Demolisher
 
80.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89(1) and Sec. 321.90)
   1.   “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
      A.   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than 24 hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more wheels or
other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
      B.   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more
than 24 hours.
      C.   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private
property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property
for more than 24 hours.
      D.   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police
authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of 10 days. However, a police
authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the 10-day period by
commencing the notification process.
      E.   Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority
to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
      F.   A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the
Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment
fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out
the impoundment order.
   2.   “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of
Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap, or
scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
   3.   “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or establishment,
motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
   4.   “Police authority” means the Iowa State Patrol or any law enforcement
agency of a county or city.
80.02   AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request
of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic,
shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take
into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The police authority
may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a private
entity, equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving,
storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles. A property owner or other person
in control of private property may employ a private entity that is a garage
keeper to dispose of an abandoned vehicle, and the private entity may take into
custody the abandoned vehicle without a police authority’s initiative. If a
police authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the
police authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses
of the registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known
claimant to the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89(2))
80.03   NOTICE BY MAIL.
   1.   A police authority or private entity that takes into custody an
abandoned vehicle shall send notice by certified mail that the vehicle has been
taken into custody, no more than 20 days after taking custody of the vehicle.
Notice shall be sent to the last known address of record of the last known
registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known
claimant to the vehicle.
   2.   Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. The notice shall include all
of the following:
      A.   A description of the year, make, model and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle.
      B.   The location of the facility where the vehicle is being held.
      C.   Information for the persons receiving the notice of their right to
reclaim the vehicle and personal property contained therein within 10 days
after the effective date of the notice. Persons may reclaim the vehicle or
personal property upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges
resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of
the notice required pursuant to this section.
      D.   A statement that failure of the owner, lienholders, or claimants to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the
time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders, and claimants
of all right, title, claim, and interest in the vehicle or personal property.
      E.   A statement that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property
is deemed consent for the police authority or private entity to sell the
vehicle at a public auction or dispose of the vehicle to a demolisher and to
dispose of the personal property by sale or destruction.
   3.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity
without a police authority’s initiative, the notice shall state that the
private entity may claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90
(1), of the Code of Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the vehicle.
   4.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a police authority
or by a private entity hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that
any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who
disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police
authority or private entity, or of the assessment of fees and charges provided
by this section, may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority
to contest those matters.
   5.   If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise
their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the 10-day
reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders, or claimants shall no longer have
any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal
property.
   6.   A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right,
title, claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders, or claimants after the
expiration of the 10-day reclaiming period.
   7.   If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the
identities and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders,
notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area
where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of
notice under Subsection 2 of this section. The published notice may contain
multiple listings of abandoned vehicles, but shall be published within the same
time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed
notice in Subsection 2 of this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89(3))
80.04   RECLAMATION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   Prior to driving an abandoned vehicle away from the premises, a person who
received (or who is reclaiming the vehicle on behalf of a person who received)
notice under Section
80.03 shall present to the police authority or private entity, as applicable,
the person’s valid driver’s license and proof of financial liability coverage
as provided in Section 321.20B of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89(3)(a))
80.05   DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the
police authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether or
not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall
dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89(4))
80.06   DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found
any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle
whose title certificate is faulty, lost, or destroyed, may dispose of such
motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without
notification procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more
wheels or other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
The police authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The
applicant shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate
and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of
title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90(2)(e))
80.07   PROCEEDS FROM SALES.
   Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the
expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification
required, in accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner
of the motor vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days, and then shall be
deposited in the State Road Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails
to realize the amount necessary to meet costs the police authority shall apply
for reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89(4))
80.08   DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.
   Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor
vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise demolish
such motor vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or
demolish a vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate
issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90(3)(a))
CHAPTER 81
RAILROAD REGULATIONS
 
81.01 Definitions         81.03 Crossing Maintenance
81.02 Obstructing Streets 81.04 Speed
 
81.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation, or other
association that owns, operates, drives, or controls a railroad train.
   2.   “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
81.02   OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
   Operators shall not operate any train in such a manner as to prevent
vehicular use of any highway, street, or alley for a period of time in excess
of 10 minutes except:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)
   1.   Comply with Signals. When necessary to comply with signals affecting
the safety of the movement of trains.
   2.   Avoid Striking. When necessary to avoid striking any object or person
on the track.
   3.   Disabled. When the train is disabled.
   4.   Safety Regulations. When necessary to comply with governmental safety
regulations including, but not limited to, speed ordinances and speed
regulations.
   5.   In Motion. When the train is in motion except while engaged in
switching operations.
   6.   No Traffic. When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the
crossing.
An employee is not guilty of a violation of this section if the employee’s
action was necessary to comply with the direct order or instructions of a
railroad corporation or its supervisors. Guilt is then with the railroad
corporation.
81.03   CROSSING MAINTENANCE.
   Operators shall construct and maintain good, sufficient, and safe crossings
over any street traversed by their rails.
(Bourett vs. Chicago and N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 (1943))
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)
81.04   SPEED.
   It is unlawful to operate any railroad train through any street crossing
within the platted areas of the City at a speed greater than reasonable under
existing conditions.
(Girl vs. United States R. Admin., 194 Iowa 1382, 189 N.W. 834, (1923))
CHAPTER 89
WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION
 
89.01 Purpose                       89.04 Protection for Publicy-Owned Deep
                                    Wells
89.02 Definitions                   89.05 Applicability of Provisions
89.03 Protection for Publicly-Owned 89.06 Existing Structures and Facilities
Shallow Wells
 
89.01   PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the public water supply of the
City by regulating the locations and types of construction of certain
structures or facilities which may be potential sources of contamination of the
publicly-owned water supply wells. (Ord. 944, 3-4-91).
89.02   DEFINITIONS.
The definitions of words used herein shall be those found in textbooks of Civil
Engineering, except a shallow well is a well located and constructed in such a
manner that there is not a continuous layer of low permeability soil or rock
(or equivalent retarding mechanism acceptable to the department) at least 5
feet thick, the top of which is located at least 25 feet below the normal
ground surface and above the aquifer from which water is to be drawn. (Ord.
944, 3-4-91; and. Ord. 2406, 3-2-2020).
89.03   PROTECTION FOR PUBLICLY-OWNED SHALLOW WELLS.
No structure or facility shall be located within the distances as outlined in
the Iowa Administrative Code 567 Chapter 43, from a publicly-owned shallow well
within the City. (Ord. 2406, 3-2-2020).
89.04   PROTECTION FOR PUBLICLY-OWNED DEEP WELLS.
No structure or facility shall be located within the distances as outlined in
the Iowa Administrative Code 567 Chapter 43, from a publicly-owned deep well
within the City (Ord. 2406, 3-2-2020).
89.05   APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all publicly-owned wells existing
within the City, except former publicly-owned wells which have been abandoned
and from which the pumping equipment has been removed. (Ord. 944, 3-4-91).
89.06   EXISTING STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES.
The use of structures and facilities existing on the effective date hereof may
be continued even though such use may not conform with the regulations of this
chapter. Such structure shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or
substituted subsequent to the effective date hereof. † (Ord. 944, 3-4-91)
(Chapter 89 – Ord. 11-17-2025_#01_(680) – Nov. 25 Supp.)
 
Notes
�EDITOR’S NOTE:  Chapter 89 was adopted by Ordinance No. 11-17-2025 #01 (680)
  on November 17, 2025.
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 Definitions                   90.11 Installation of Water Service Pipe
90.02 Superintendent’s Duties     90.12 Responsibility for Water Service Pipe
90.03 Mandatory Connections         90.13 Failure to Maintain
90.04 Abandoned Connections         90.14 Curb Stop
90.05 Permit                        90.15 Interior Valve
90.06 Fee for Permit                90.16 Inspection and Approval
90.07 Compliance with Plumbing Code 90.17 Completion by the City
90.08 Plumber Required              90.18 Shutting Off Water Supply
90.09 Excavations                   90.19 Operation of Curb Stop and Hydrants
90.10 Tapping Mains                 90.20 Cross Connection Control
 
90.01   DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this Code of
Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:
   1.   “Combined service account” means a customer service account for the
provision of two or more utility services.
   2.   “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water service
from the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties
the duties, responsibilities, liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed
shall be joint and several.
   3.   “Superintendent” means the Utility Director of the City or any duly
authorized assistant, agent, or representative.
   4.   “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or community
use.
   5.   “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the building
served.
   6.   “Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for
securing, collecting, storing, pumping, treating, and distributing water.
90.02   SUPERINTENDENT’S DUTIES.
   The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of water service pipes
and their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining
to water services in the City in accordance with this chapter. This chapter
shall apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to
new ones. The Superintendent shall make such rules, not in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation of the
water system, subject to the approval of the Council. In the event of an
emergency the Superintendent may make temporary rules for the protection of the
system until due consideration by the Council may be had.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
90.03   MANDATORY CONNECTIONS.
   All residences and business establishments within the City limits intended
or used for human habitation, occupancy, or use shall be connected to the
public water system, if it is reasonably available and if the building is not
furnished with pure and wholesome water from some other source.
90.04   ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.
   When an existing water service is abandoned or a service is renewed with a
new tap in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains shall be turned
off at the corporation stop and made absolutely watertight.
90.05   PERMIT.
   Before any person makes a connection with the public water system, a written
permit must be obtained from the City. The application for the permit shall
include a legal description of the property, the name of the property owner,
the name and address of the person who will do the work, and the general uses
of the water. If the proposed work meets all the requirements of this chapter
and if all fees required under this chapter have been paid, the permit shall be
issued. Work under any permit must be completed within 60 days after the permit
is issued, except that when such time period is inequitable or unfair due to
conditions beyond the control of the person making the application, an
extension of time within which to complete the work may be granted. The permit
may be revoked at any time for any violation of these chapters.
90.06   FEE FOR PERMIT.
   1.   Application Fee. Before any permit is issued the person who makes the
application shall pay $100.00 plus meter costs to the Clerk to cover the cost
of issuing the permit and supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work.
   2.   System Development Fee. A system development fee shall be required for
all new water service connections within the corporate limits of the City. Said
fee has the financial objective of providing for water system expansion for new
development without undue impact on existing users and user rates. This fee
shall be in addition to all other applicable service charges for each separate
domestic water service connection, separate domestic irrigation water service
connection, or commercial irrigation water service connection and shall be
based on standard meter size as follows:
WATER METER PRICING
Brand Size and Type Length GPM Customer Meter MXU Water System    Total Cost
                               Cost               Development Fee
WATER METER PRICING
                                                       Water
Brand  Size and Length  GPM         Customer   MXU     System      Total Cost
       Type                         Meter Cost         Development
                                                       Fee
Omni   ¾” SR        2 to 30     $130.00    $120.00 $900.00     $1,150.00
Omni   1” SR         3 to 50     $230.00    $120.00 $900.00     $1,250.00
Master 1 – ½�10”   4 to 200    $1,450.00  $120.00 $2,160.00   $3,730.00
                (250mm)
Master 2”     10”   4 to 200    $1,450.00  $120.00 $2,880.00   $4,450.00
                (250mm)
Master 3”     12”   5 to 350    $2,100.00  $120.00 $5,790.00   $8,010.00
                (305mm)
Master 4”     14”   15 to 700   $3,600.00  $120.00 $9,000.00   $12,720.00
                (356mm)
Master 6”     18”   20 to 1,150 $6,100.00  $120.00 Contact     Contact
                (457mm)                                Utilities   Utilities
Note: Pricing of master meters includes meter communication module. All
master meters are stainless steel.
 
   The fee shall not be required for replacement of existing connections of
equal size. Payment shall be due and payable prior to issuance of a building or
plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
90.07   COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE.
   The installation of any water service pipe and any connection with the water
system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether
regulatory, procedural, or enforcement provisions, of the Altoona Plumbing
Code.
90.08   PLUMBER REQUIRED.
   All installations of water service pipes and connections to the water system
shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
90.09   EXCAVATIONS.
   All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required in making a connection
shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the Altoona Plumbing
Code and the provisions of Chapter 135.
90.10   TAPPING MAINS.
   All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the direct supervision
of the Superintendent in accordance with the latest published versions of the
Urban Design Standards for Public Improvements and the Urban Standard
Specifications for Public Improvements and the following:
   1.   Independent Services. No more than one house, building, or premises
shall be supplied from one tap unless special written permission is obtained
from the Superintendent and unless provision is made so that each house,
building, or premises may be shut off independently of the other.
   2.   Location Record. An accurate and dimensional sketch showing the exact
location of the tap shall be filed with the Superintendent in such form as the
Superintendent shall require.
90.11   INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE.
   Water service pipes from the main to the meter setting shall be minimum 1
inch in size. Type shall be in compliance with currently adopted City of
Altoona or State of Iowa plumbing codes. Pipe must be laid sufficiently waving,
and to a minimum depth of five feet below final grade, as to prevent rupture
from settlement or freezing.
90.12   RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the water service pipe from the main to the building served
shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss
or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or
maintenance of said water service pipe.
90.13   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
   When any portion of the water service pipe which is the responsibility of
the property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance and the owner fails
to correct such nuisance, the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to
the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(a) and (h))
90.14   CURB STOP.
   There shall be installed a main shut-off valve on the water service pipe at
a point one foot outside the outer sidewalk line or six feet from the property
line with a suitable lock of a pattern approved by the Superintendent. The
shut-off valve shall be covered with a heavy metal cover having the letter “W”
marked thereon, visible and even with the pavement or ground.
90.15   INTERIOR VALVE.
   There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service pipe inside the
building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible
and so located that the water can be shut off conveniently. Where one service
pipe supplies more than one customer within the building, there shall be
separate valves for each such customer so that service may be shut off for one
without interfering with service to the others.
90.16   INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
   All water service pipes and their connections to the water system must be
inspected and approved in writing by the Superintendent before they are
covered, and the Superintendent shall keep a record of such approvals. If the
Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or property owner must
proceed immediately to correct the work. Every person who uses or intends to
use the municipal water system shall permit the Superintendent to enter the
premises to inspect or make necessary alterations or repairs at all reasonable
hours and on proof of authority.
90.17   COMPLETION BY THE CITY.
   Should any excavation be left open or only partly refilled for 24 hours
after the water service pipe is installed and connected with the water system,
or should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the right to finish
or correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs to the property
owner or the plumber. If the plumber is assessed, the plumber must pay the
costs before receiving another permit. If the property owner is assessed, such
assessment may be collected with and in the same manner as general property
taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(a) and (h))
90.18   SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY.
   The Superintendent may shut off the supply of water to any customer because
of any violation of the regulations contained in these Water Service System
chapters that is not being contested in good faith. The supply shall not be
turned on again until all violations have been corrected and the Superintendent
has ordered the water to be turned on.
90.19   OPERATION OF CURB STOP AND HYDRANTS.
   It is unlawful for any person except the Superintendent to turn water on at
the curb stop, and no person, unless specifically authorized by the City, shall
open or attempt to draw water from any fire hydrant for any purpose whatsoever.
90.20   CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL.
   No person or corporation shall connect any equipment or mechanism to a water
supply line or use any water treating chemical or substance which could cause
pollution of the water supply unless an approved backflow prevention device is
installed, as per plumbing code. Backflow devices shall be tested annually by a
state certified individual with the results to be submitted to the Water
Department no later than June 1 of each year. If a person or corporation does
not submit the results to the Water Department, the Superintendent shall shut
off the water supply pursuant to Section 90.18.
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS
 
91.01 Purpose                           91.07 Right of Entry
91.02 Water Use Metered                 91.08 Meter Installation Fee
91.03 Fire Sprinkler Systems; Exception 91.09 Irrigation Meters
91.04 Location of Meters                91.10 Conduit Required
91.05 Meter Setting                     91.11 Hydrant Meter Use and Pay
                                        Schedule
91.06 Meter Repairs                      
 
91.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water and
facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among
customers.
91.02   WATER USE METERED.
   All water furnished customers shall be measured through meters purchased by
the customer from the City and installed by the City. The meter shall be
installed by substantial completion of the building served and prior to any
seeding or sodding. If violated subject to confiscation of equipment for usage
of water or fine.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84(1))
91.03   FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS; EXCEPTION.
   Fire sprinkler systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection
without meters under the direct supervision of the Superintendent. No other
open, unmetered connection shall be incorporated in the system, and there shall
be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which
must be sealed open.
91.04   LOCATION OF METERS.
   1.   The water meter shall have full accessibility with a clear space of
three feet in all directions.
   2.   Meter setting shall be located no more than eight feet from the nearest
floor drain in the same room.
   3.   Each meter shall have a ball valve on the street side as well as the
house side of the meter.
   4.   No accessories or equipment other than the equipment listed herein,
shall be installed within 12 inches of either side of the water meter.
   5.   Meter Radio Unit (MXU). All buildings serviced by the City shall be
equipped with a Meter Radio Unit (MXU) supplied by the City and installed by
the City.
      A.   Water meter ECR register to Meter Radio Unit (MXU) three conductor,
18-gauge wire provided by the City, half an inch EMT conduit terminating within
one foot of the MXU and flush with the outermost exterior wall immediately
behind the touchpad. Each end of said conduit shall be fitted with a male
connector and nylon housing to protect the wire.
      B.   Meter Radio Unit (MXU) to remote meter touchpad, three conductor 18-
gauge wire, provided by the City.
   6.   These requirements apply only to new meters installed after the
adoption of the ordinance codified in this section.
91.05   METER SETTING.
   The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and fittings for
proper setting of the meter including an approved valve on both sides of the
meter within close proximity of the meter. Meter pits may be used only upon
approval of the Superintendent and shall be of a design and construction
approved by the Superintendent.
91.06   METER REPAIRS.
   Whenever a residential water meter is found to be out of order, the
Superintendent shall have it repaired, and the property owner shall be liable
for the cost of repairs if due to misuse or freezing. Commercial meters shall
be maintained at the expense of the owner. The cost of repairing a remote meter
device, except repairs due to ordinary wear and tear, shall be paid to the
Water Department by the customer or the owner of the property served.
91.07   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Superintendent shall be permitted to enter the premises of any customer
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. weekdays to remove or change a
meter.
91.08   METER INSTALLATION FEE.
   There shall be a fee charged to the property owner for each new meter and
installation. The fee shall be the cost of such meter to the City, rounded to
the nearest dollar.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84(2)(a))
91.09   IRRIGATION METERS.
   A “prime meter” measures water consumed and disposed through the public
water and sanitary sewer system respectively. “Irrigation meters” may
additionally be installed to measure water which is not disposed through the
public sanitary sewer treatment system. The water used for “irrigation meters”
would include water for swimming pools, yards, gardens, or other uses where
sanitary sewer service charges are not applicable. Irrigation meters shall be
installed not more than four feet from the prime meter and shall be installed
parallel to the prime meter. Sewer charges shall not apply to water amounts
measured by irrigation meters. The water rate to be charged for irrigation
meters shall be at the same rate as provided in Section 92.02, and there shall
not be any base rate charged. Shut-off valves are required ahead and after the
irrigation meter and must be within one foot of the meter. A back flow
preventer (approved by the City) to protect against contamination of the water
system must be installed after the irrigation meter. The irrigation meter must
be installed with the arrow on the meter being in the direction of the flow of
water to the outside. Underground irrigation systems are allowed in City right-
of-way with the understanding that any repair of the irrigation system caused
by maintenance of utilities will be at the homeowner’s expense.
91.10   CONDUIT REQUIRED.
   1.   Electrical conduit shall be installed in all buildings in accordance
with specifications provided by the Water Department of each meter.
91.11   HYDRANT METER USE AND PAY SCHEDULE.
 
TYPE                                                      RATE
Monthly hydrant permit fee (non-refundable, per assembly) $100.00/month
1-inch hydrant meter assembly deposit (per assembly)      $350.00
3-inch hydrant meter assembly deposit (per assembly)      $1,000.00
Water usage                                               100% of City rate
 
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES
 
92.01 Service Charges           92.07 Lien Exemption
92.02 Rates For Service         92.08 Lien Notice
92.03 Rates Outside the City    92.09 Customer Deposits
92.04 Billing for Water Service 92.10 Temporary Vacancy
92.05 Service Discontinued      92.11 Meters Not Registering
92.06 Lien for Nonpayment        
 
92.01   SERVICE CHARGES.
   Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the City based upon
use of water as determined by meters provided for in Chapter 91. Each location,
building, premises, or connection shall be considered a separate and distinct
customer whether owned or controlled by the same person or not.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.02   RATES FOR SERVICE.
   Water service shall be furnished at the following monthly rates within the
City:
   1.   As of January 1, 2025, $8.09 per 1000 gallons and a base rate of $5.50
for residential and $16.50 for commercial per month;
   2.   As of January 1, 2026, $8.94 per 1000 gallons and a base rate of $5.50
for residential and $16.50 for commercial per month.
   3.   As of January 1, 2027, $9.88 per 1000 gallons and a base rate of $5.50
for residential and $16.50 for commercial per month.
   4.   As of January 1, 2028, $10.91 per 1000 gallons and a base rate of $5.50
for residential and $16.50 for commercial per month.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.03   RATES OUTSIDE THE CITY.
   Water service shall be provided to any customer located outside the
corporate limits of the City which the City has agreed to serve at rates 200
percent of the rates provided in Section 92.02. No such customer, however, will
be served unless the customer shall have signed a service contract agreeing to
be bound by the ordinances, rules, and regulations applying to water service
established by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 and 384.84)
92.04   BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE.
   Water service shall be billed as part of a combined service account, payable
in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Bills Issued. The Clerk shall prepare and issue bills for combined
service accounts.
   2.   Bills Payable. Bills for combined service accounts shall be due and
payable at the office of the Clerk by 4:30 p.m. end of business day on the
third of each month. If the third falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday
when City Hall is closed, the bill will be due by 3:00 p.m. the next regular
business day when City Hall is open.
   3.   Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be considered
delinquent. A one-time late payment penalty of 10 percent of the amount due
shall be added to each delinquent bill.
92.05   SERVICE DISCONTINUED.
   Water service to delinquent customers shall be discontinued or disconnected
in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Notice. Each delinquent customer shall be notified that service will be
discontinued or disconnected if payment of the combined service account,
including late payment charges, is not received by the date specified in the
notice of delinquency. Such notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to the
customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred and shall inform
the customer of the nature of the delinquency and afford the customer the
opportunity for a hearing prior to the discontinuance or disconnection. If
payment of the combined service account is not received within 23 days after
the rendition of the bill therefore, a $35.00 charge will be assessed for the
notice. If payment is not received within 48 hours after such notice, service
will be discontinued and shall not be restored until full payment of the
account is received, including red tag and restoration fee. Payment must be
made at City Hall Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:00 am and 4:30
pm. Service will not be restored after hours or on weekends unless deemed a
health emergency.
   2.   Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or
landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the
notice of delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord. If the
customer is a tenant and requests a change of name for service under the
account, such request shall be sent to the owner or landlord of the property if
the owner or landlord has made a written request for notice of any change of
name for service under the account to the rental property.
   3.   Hearing. If a hearing is requested by noon of the day preceding the
shut off, the City Administrator shall conduct an informal hearing and shall
make a determination as to whether the discontinuance or disconnection is
justified.
   4.   Fees. A fee of $25.00 shall be charged during normal working hours.
(Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.). $75.00 shall be assessed after
normal working hours and on weekends. Before service is restored to a
delinquent customer, any fees assessed for repairs, delinquency, or nonpayment
shall be paid prior to reconnections.
92.06   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises. Water
service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon
the property or premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.07   LIEN EXEMPTION.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Water Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to
charges for water service to a residential or commercial rental property where
water service is separately metered and the rates or charges for the water
service are paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives
written notice to the City that the property is residential or commercial
rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The
City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of 90 days of such
services to be paid to the City. When the tenant moves from the rental
property, the City shall refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in
full. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs
related to any of the services.
   2.   Other Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall also not apply
to the charges for any of the services of sewer systems, stormwater drainage
systems, sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal for
a residential rental property where the charge is paid directly to the City by
the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the property
is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or
charges for such service. The City may require a deposit not exceeding the
usual cost of 90 days of such services to be paid to the City. When the tenant
moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if all
service charges are paid in full. The lien exemption does not apply to
delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.
   3.   Written Notice. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name of
the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the residential or
commercial rental property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the
occupancy begins. Upon receipt, the City shall acknowledge the notice and
deposit. A change in tenant for a residential rental property shall require a
new written notice to be given to the City within 30 business days of the
change in tenant. A change in tenant for a commercial rental property shall
require a new written notice to be given to the City within 10 business days of
the change in tenant. A change in the ownership of the residential rental
property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the City
within 30 business days of the completion of the change of ownership. A change
in the ownership of the commercial rental property shall require written notice
of such change to be given to the City within 10 business days of the
completion of the change of ownership.
   4.   Mobile Homes, Modular Homes, and Manufactured Homes. A lien for
nonpayment of utility services described in Subsections 1 and 2 of this section
shall not be placed upon a premises that is a mobile home, modular home, or
manufactured home if the mobile home, modular home, or manufactured home is
owned by a tenant of and located in a mobile home park or manufactured home
community and the mobile home park or manufactured home community owner or
manager is the account holder, unless the lease agreement specifies that the
tenant is responsible for payment of a portion of the rates or charges billed
to the account holder.
92.08   LIEN NOTICE.  
   A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to the
County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is
given to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. If
the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property or
premises has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given
to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons
by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to certification of the lien to
the County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.09   CUSTOMER DEPOSITS.
   There shall be required from every new customer or prospective customer that
makes application for a new or different water service from the City a $100.00
deposit and new customer social security number intended to guarantee the
payment of bills for service. A $200.00 deposit is required if a new customer
does not provide their social security number. The deposit shall be paid in
full to the City before the service will be turned on or put into the tenant’s
name. When a customer moves, they shall receive the deposit back within 30 days
after the date of the final meter reading or the account of such customer shall
be credited with the amount of the deposit within 30 days on any bills due and
owing. A customer who has paid their deposit and has not received a red tag
over a 12-month period then shall receive the deposit refund as a credit on
their water bill.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.10   TEMPORARY VACANCY.
   A property owner may request water service be temporarily discontinued and
shut off at the curb stop when the property is expected to be vacant for an
extended period of time. There shall be a $15.00 fee collected for restoring
service.
92.11   METERS NOT REGISTERING.
   If a meter fails to register the quantity of water, the quantity shall be
determined and the charge made, based upon the average quantity registered
during such preceding period of time, prior to the date of failure to register,
as the Superintendent shall decide.
CHAPTER 93
PRIVATE WELLS
 
93.01 When Permitted      93.03 Renewals
93.02 Private Well Permit 93.04 Health and Safety Standards
 
93.01   WHEN PERMITTED.
   Except as provided below, private wells and water systems shall not be
maintained by any individual or property owner within the City. Private wells
and water systems shall be allowed only as set out in the following
subsections:
   1.   If no part of a tract of land upon which a private well or water system
is proposed is within 400 feet of a City water main.
   2.   If the property owner or individual applying for a private well permit
can show that denying the permit and not allowing the private well or water
system will cause the individual or property owner undue hardship. Undue
hardship in this case shall mean that the particular tract of land is so
topographically situated that connection to the City water main system would be
unfeasible and that the particular conditions causing the unfeasibility of the
connection were in no way caused or contributed to by the property owner or
permit applicant. The Council shall rule on all questions of undue hardship and
their decision shall be final.
93.02   PRIVATE WELL PERMIT.
   All individuals or property owners who desire to construct or maintain a
private well or water system shall first secure from the Clerk a private well
permit. The contents of the permit application and the fee therefore shall be
set by the Council from time to time by resolution.
93.03   RENEWALS.
   Individuals and property owners using and maintaining private wells or water
systems within the City limits must have an annual private well permit.
Provided, however, should the private well or water system not be used for a
six-month period of time, or if the private well or water system does not meet
the health and safety regulations set forth below, then at the expiration of
the current private well permit for the premises, said permit shall not be
renewed unless all provisions of this chapter are complied with.
93.04   HEALTH AND SAFETY STANDARDS.
   All private wells and water systems for which permits are granted shall meet
the minimum health and safety standards as set forth by the appropriate County
and State health officials. In addition, all permit holders shall grant to the
appropriate County or State health official the right to inspect and test the
private well and water system maintained upon the permit holder’s property.
Should the private well or water system so inspected not meet minimum County or
State health or safety standards for a continuous period of six months, the
private well permit shall be revoked and the individual or property owner shall
be required to make connection to the City’s water system under the terms of
this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 94
WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
 
94.01 Water Shortages         94.08 Water Appeal Board
94.02 Conditions              94.09 Appeal and Adjustment of the Base
                              Allocation
94.03 Water Watch             94.10 Premium Rate for Imprudent Consumption
94.04 Water Warning - Tier I  94.11 Adjustment of Premium Rate Charges
94.05 Water Warning - Tier II 94.12 Penalties
94.06 Water Emergency         94.13 Municipal Infraction
94.07 Base Allocation         94.14 Reduction in Flow of Water to Any Person
 
94.01   WATER SHORTAGES.
   From time to time, the City’s water supply or capacity to treat water may
become significantly constrained so that customary and usual demands cannot be
met. Under these conditions, the Council may find, and declare by resolution, a
public Water Watch, Water Warning, or Water Emergency, during which time the
following measures and provisions shall be in effect to produce an orderly and
equitable reduction in water consumption until, by resolution, the Council
finds and declares the constraint conditions to be ended.
94.02   CONDITIONS.
   1.   Water Watch. A Water Watch may be declared when a water shortage or
equipment failure poses a potential threat to the ability of the water system
to meet the needs of its customers currently or in the foreseeable future.
Indicators of the need to impose a Water Watch include: system operating at 75
percent of pumping capacity; moderate decrease in the pumping water level of
wells or moderate decrease in recovery rate of water level in wells.
   2.   Water Warning. A Tier I or Tier II Water Warning may be declared when a
water shortage or equipment failure poses a serious threat to the ability of
the water system to meet the needs of its customers currently or in the
foreseeable future. Indicators of the need to impose a Tier I Water Warning
include: system operating at 85 percent of pumping capacity; significant
decrease in the pumping water level of wells or significant decrease in
recovery rate of water level in wells. Indicators of the need to impose a Tier
II Water Warning include severe system emergencies such as a chemical spill or
major system failure.
   3.   Water Emergency. A Water Emergency may be declared when a water
shortage or equipment failure poses a severe and immediate threat to the
ability of the water system to meet the needs of its customers. Indicators of
the need to impose a Water Emergency include: system operating at 95 percent of
pumping capacity; serious decrease in the pumping water level of wells or
serious decrease in recovery rate of water level in wells.
94.03   WATER WATCH.
   Under a Water Watch, all customers of the water utility are encouraged to
limit or curtail all nonessential uses of water in order to conserve water
resources during the time or shortage or equipment failure. Customers may be
encouraged to comply with the following voluntary standards:
   1.   No watering of lawns, shrubs, or gardens between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m.
   2.   No water should be used to fill private swimming pools, children’s
wading pools, reflecting pools, or any other outdoor pool or pond.
   3.   No water should be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways,
sidewalks, or building exteriors.
   4.   No water should be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and
industrial equipment, machinery, and interior spaces.
   5.   Water should be served at restaurants only upon the request of the
customer.
94.04   WATER WARNING - TIER I.
   Under a Tier I Water Warning, no person shall use potable processed water of
the municipal water service in any manner contrary to the following:
   1.   Outdoor watering or irrigation of lawns is prohibited.
   2.   Outdoor watering of any kind is prohibited between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. daily.
   3.   Watering or irrigation of flower and vegetable gardens, trees and
shrubs less than 4 years old, and new seeding or sod is permitted once per week
with an application not to exceed one inch.
   4.   Car washing is prohibited except in commercial establishments that
provide that service.
   5.   No water shall be used to fill private swimming pools, children’s
wading pools, reflecting pools, or any other outdoor pool or pond.
   6.   No water shall be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways,
sidewalks, or building exteriors.
   7.   No water shall be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and
industrial equipment, machinery, and interior spaces.
   8.   Water shall be served at restaurants only upon the request of the
customer.
   9.   Use of water-consuming comfort air conditioning equipment which
consumes in excess of 5 percent of the water circulating in such equipment is
prohibited.
   10.   Tankload water sales may be curtailed or eliminated.
Water reclaimed or recycled after some primary use, such as water that has been
used for washing or cooling, may be used without restriction. Additionally,
water derived from other sources than the City water utility, such as water
condensed from the atmosphere by air conditioners or collected from rain or
snow, may be used without restriction.
94.05   WATER WARNING - TIER II.
   Under a Tier II Water Warning, no person shall use potable processed water
of the municipal water system in any manner contrary to the following:
   1.   All outside water use, except for domestic, sanitation, and fire, is
prohibited.
   2.   All commercial and industrial use of water not essential in providing
products or services is prohibited.
   3.   Irrigation of agricultural crops is prohibited.
   4.   Recreational and leisure water use, including lawn and golf course
watering and other incidental or recreational use, is prohibited.
   5.   Water use not necessary for the preservation of life or the general
welfare of the community is prohibited.
94.06   WATER EMERGENCY.
   Under a Water Emergency, Tier I Water Warning use restrictions will be in
effect and, in addition, each customer will be afforded a monthly allocation of
water.
94.07   BASE ALLOCATION.
   The base allocation of water for residential use shall be 3,000 gallons per
household per billing period. For commercial, industrial, or institutional use,
the base allocation shall be established by resolution as a percentage of the
average water used during the previous winter (November through April).
94.08   WATER APPEAL BOARD.
   1.   A Water Appeal Board shall be appointed during any Water Warning or
Water Emergency. The Water Appeal Board shall consist of the Mayor, the
Superintendent of the water system, and the City Administrator. The Water
Appeal Board shall hear appeals of any action taken pursuant to a Water Warning
or Water Emergency; except that, if a customer is charged with a municipal
infraction relating to this chapter, that proceeding shall be conducted
pursuant to Section 364.22 of the Code of Iowa.
   2.   The decision of the Water Appeal Board may be appealed by the applicant
to the Council. The Clerk shall notify the applicant by ordinary mail, and
shall give public notice in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa, of
the date, time, and place for the regular or special meeting of the Council at
which the hearing on the appeal shall occur. The hearing shall be scheduled for
a date not less that four or more than 20 days after the filing of the appeal.
The rules of evidence and procedure, and the standard of proof to be applied,
shall be the same as provided by Chapter 17A of the Code of Iowa. The applicant
may be represented by counsel at the applicant’s expense. The enforcement
officer may be represented by the City Attorney or by an attorney designated by
the Council at City expense.
   3.   The decision of the Council shall be rendered in writing and may be
appealed to the Iowa District Court.
94.09   APPEAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF THE BASE ALLOCATION.
   Any person may file an appeal with the Water Appeal Board within seven days
of implementation of the Water Warning or Water Emergency to adjust the base
allocation amount. The Water Appeal Board may grant an adjustment to the
appellant based upon the following criteria:
   1.   For single-family residential use, the base allocation may be increased
by 1,000 gallons per person per billing period for all individuals residing at
the appellant’s residence for a period of more than 30 days.
   2.   For commercial, industrial, institutional, or other residential uses,
the base allocation may be increased based on factors appropriate to the
individual customer, such as usage, production, service, and occupancy data
provided by the customer.
94.10   PREMIUM RATE FOR IMPRUDENT CONSUMPTION.
   In addition to the water rates duly exacted by the Council, all persons
shall pay a premium rate of $20.00 per 1,000 gallons of water consumed in
excess of the base allocation.
94.11   ADJUSTMENT OF PREMIUM RATE CHARGES.
   Any person may file for adjustment of the premium rate charges for imprudent
water consumption with the Water Appeal Board. The Water Appeal Board may grant
an adjustment of the premium rate charges in accordance with the following
criteria:
   1.   Adjustments may be granted for overconsumption due to mechanical
failures such as broken or leaky pipes or fixtures but not for overconsumption
due to human carelessness.
   2.   The applicant shall furnish proof that the mechanical failure was
repaired promptly. This should be in the form of a licensed plumber’s invoice
or statement or a materials receipt.
   3.   The adjustment shall be granted only for the billing period prior to
the correction of the failure.
   4.   For those accounts granted an adjustment of the premium rate charges,
the minimum adjusted rate shall be 40 percent of the actual bill which shall
include the premium rate charges and sales tax.
94.12   PENALTIES.
   The following penalties shall apply for violations of Water Warning uses
restrictions imposed under this chapter.
   1.   First Violation. For a first violation, the utility shall issue a
written notice of violation to the water user violating the water use
restrictions imposed during a Water Warning or Water Emergency.
   2.   Second Violation. For a second violation within a 12-month period, a
one-month surcharge shall be imposed in an amount equal to 50 percent of the
previous month’s water bill.
   3.   Subsequent Violations. For any subsequent violations within a 12-month
period, a one-month surcharge shall be imposed in an amount equal to 50 percent
of the previous month’s water bill and, in addition, the utility shall
interrupt water service to that customer at the premises at which the violation
occurred. Service shall not be restored until the customer has paid the
reconnection fee and has provided reasonable assurance that future violations
of Water Warning or Water Emergency use restrictions will not occur.
Any customer charged with a violation of the Water Warning or Water Emergency
use restrictions may request a hearing before the Water Appeal Board. The Water
Appeal Board may conclude that a violation did not occur or that the
circumstances under which the violation occurred warrant a complete or partial
mitigation of the penalty.
94.13   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
   A second or subsequent violation of the Water Warning or Water Emergency use
restrictions by any person within a 12-month period constitutes a municipal
infraction. Any person who, in making application to the Water Appeal Board for
adjustment of the base allocation or premium charges, intentionally provides
false or incorrect statements or information commits a municipal infraction.
94.14   REDUCTION IN FLOW OF WATER TO ANY PERSON.
   The Superintendent is authorized, after giving notice and opportunity for
hearing before the Water Appeal Board, to reduce the flow of water to any
person determined to be using water in any manner not in accordance with this
chapter during a Water Warning or Water Emergency.
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
95.01 Purpose                         95.10 Entry Authorized
95.02 Definitions                     95.11 Indemnification
95.03 Objectionable Wastes            95.12 Use of Easements
95.04 Untreated Discharge             95.13 Notice of Violation
95.05 Septic Tanks                    95.14 Misdemeanor
95.06 Connection Required             95.15 Liability for Damage
95.07 Property Owner’s Responsibilit95.16 Nuisance
95.08 Private Disposal Required       95.17 Chapters Take Precedence
95.09 Damage Prohibited                
 
95.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to
Sanitary Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment
and disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
95.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Authorized City representative” means the City Administrator or any
designated representative.
   2.   “Basic user charge” means a charge levied on each user for
administrative costs and debt retirement.
   3.   “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in
milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   4.   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, or other
approved point of discharge, beginning two feet outside the building wall.
   5.   “Building sewer” means the extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
   6.   “Combined sewer” means a sewer which is designed and intended to
receive wastewater, storm, surface, and groundwater drainage.
   7.   “DNR” means the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
   8.   “Easement” means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others.
   9.   “Effluent criteria” are defined in any applicable “NPDES Permit.”
   10.   “EPA” means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
   11.   “Federal Act” or “Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
(33 U.S.C. 1251 et. seq.) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972 (Pub. L. 92-500 and Pub. L. 93-243), and any other
amendments to said public laws.
   12.   “Federal grant” means the U.S. government participation in the
financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II -
Grants for Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing
regulations.
   13.   “Floatable oil” means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such
that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat
if it is properly pretreated, and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
   14.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage,
and sale of produce.
   15.   “Industrial wastes” means any liquid, solid, or gaseous substance
discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial manufacturing,
commercial, or business establishment or process or from the development,
recovery, or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
   16.   “Major contributing industry” means an industrial user of the publicly
owned treatment works that:
      A.   Has a flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average workday; or
      B.   Has a flow greater than five percent of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste; or more of the average dry weather
hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or
      C.   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under Section 307(a) of the Federal Act; or
      D.   Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
   17.   “Milligrams per liter” means a unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water.
It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it
is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
   18.   “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
   19.   “NH 3 ” or “NH 3 N” (Denoting Ammonia) means that portion of nitrogen
in the form of protein or intermediate decomposition products which is
determined by standard laboratory procedures for analysis of ammonia nitrogen,
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   20.   “NPDES Permit” means any permit or equivalent document or requirements
issued by the administrator, or where appropriate, by the director after
enactment of the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972, to
regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal
Act.
   21.   “pH” means the logarithms (Base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-
ion concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in “Standard
Methods.”
   22.   “Population equivalent” means a term used to evaluate the impact of
industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population
equivalent is 100 gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds (200 mg/l)
of BOD, 0.20 pounds (240 mg/l) of suspended solids, and 0.03 pounds (40 mg/l)
of ammonia-nitrogen (NH 3 N), and 1.25 pounds (1,500 mg/l) sulfate.
   23.   “Ppm” means parts per million by weight.
   24.   “Pretreatment” means the treatment of wastewater from sources before
introduction into the wastewater treatment works.
   25.   “Properly shredded garbage” means the wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any
dimension.
   26.   “Public sewer” means a sewer provided by or subject to the
jurisdiction of the City. It also includes sewers within or outside the
corporate boundary that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into
the City sanitary sewers, even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with City funds.
   27.   “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which conveys sewage or industrial
wastes, or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface, and
groundwaters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   28.   “Sewage” is used interchangeably with “wastewater.”
   29.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other
waste liquids, including storm, surface, and groundwater drainage.
   30.   “Sewer connection charge” means the amount to be paid prior to making
or altering a new connection to a public sewer by a user.
   31.   “Sewerage” means the system of sewers and appurtenances for the
collection, transportation, and pumping of sewage.
   32.   “Significant noncompliance” means:
      A.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a
six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same
pollutant parameter by any amount;
      B.   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH);
      C.   Any other discharge violation that the City believes has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through
(including endangering the health of City personnel or the general public);
      D.   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the City’s exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      E.   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
      F.   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance schedules;
      G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
      H.   Any other violation(s) which the City determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
   33.   “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste,
which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the
average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   34.   “Standard methods” means the examination and analytical procedures set
forth in the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
   35.   “Storm sewer” means a sewer which carries storm, surface, and
groundwater drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.
   36.   “Stormwater runoff” means that portion of the precipitation that is
drained into the sewers.
   37.   “State Act” means the, Chapter 445B of the Code of Iowa, et. seq.
   38.   “State grant” means the State participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Code of Iowa.
   39.   “Surcharge” means the assessment in addition to the user charge and
basic user charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established.
   40.   “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of,
or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are
removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of
suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in
Standard Methods.
   41.   “Unpolluted water” means water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   42.   “User charge” means a charge levied on users of treatment works for
the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement.
   43.   “Wastewater” means the spent water of a community. From this
standpoint, of course, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that
may be present.
   44.   “Wastewater facilities” means the structures, equipment, and processes
required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
transport effluent to a watercourse.
   45.   “Wastewater treatment works” means an arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes
used as synonymous with “waste treatment plant” or “wastewater treatment plant”
or “pollution control plant.”
   46.   “Water quality standards” are defined in the Iowa Administrative Code,
Chapter 16.
   47.   “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
95.03   OBJECTIONABLE WASTES.
   It is unlawful for any person to place or deposit or permit to be deposited
in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City, or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement,
garbage, or other objectionable waste.
95.04   UNTREATED DISCHARGE.
   It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any
area under its jurisdiction, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of these
chapters.
95.05   SEPTIC TANKS.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
95.06   CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located,
or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the City, are
hereby required to install, at each such owner’s expense, suitable toilet
facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer, in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer
chapters, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided
that said public sewer is within 400 feet of the property line.
95.07   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building sewer from the public sewer main to the building,
including interior piping, shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
95.08   PRIVATE DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available in accordance with Section
95.06, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system approved by the County Department of Health. When a public sanitary
sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to said sewer
within 60 days.
95.09   DAMAGE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a
part of the sewerage system and wastewater treatment works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
95.10   ENTRY AUTHORIZED.  
   The authorized City representative and other duly authorized employees of
the City, the State Department of Natural Resources, and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters. The authorized City representative or other persons
noted above shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including
metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, paper, or other industries beyond that
point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers
or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
95.11   INDEMNIFICATION.
   While performing the necessary work on private property referred to in
Section 95.10 hereof, the authorized City representative or duly authorized
employees of the City, the State Department of Natural Resources, and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to
the premises established by the owner or occupant which are not in conflict
with their regulatory duties and the owner or occupant shall be held harmless
for injury or death to City employees or other persons noted above and the
City, State Department of Natural Resources, and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency shall indemnify the owner or occupant against loss or damage
to its property by City employees or other persons noted above and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the owner or occupant and growing out of any gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner
or occupant to maintain safe conditions.
95.12   USE OF EASEMENTS.
   The authorized City representative and other duly authorized employees of
the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage
system and wastewater treatment works lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with
the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved.
95.13   NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person found to be violating any provision of these chapters shall be
served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations. The City may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a
result of any violation of any provision.
95.14   MISDEMEANOR.
   Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided for in
Section 95.13 is guilty of a simple misdemeanor, and each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
95.15   LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of these chapters shall become
liable to the City, including any expense, loss, or damage accrued by the City
by reason of such violation.
95.16   NUISANCE.
   Whoever is convicted of violating the provisions contained in these Sanitary
Sewer chapters, when the same has not been repealed by statute, shall be guilty
of a simple misdemeanor and the continued violation shall be deemed a nuisance
which may be abated in the same manner as another nuisance deferred by the City
ordinance and the costs recovered.
95.17   CHAPTERS TAKE PRECEDENCE.  
   The provisions contained in these Sanitary Sewer chapters shall take
precedence over any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts which are
inconsistent with the requirements of Section 204(b)(1)(A) of the Act and 40
CFR 35.2140 of the May 12, 1983, Federal Register.
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
 
96.01 Permit Required          96.08 Construction Standards
96.02 Unlawful Disposal        96.09 Lift Required
96.03 Classes of Permit        96.10 Runoff or Groundwater Prohibited
96.04 Connection Prohibited    96.11 Connection Specifications
96.05 Costs                    96.12 Inspection Required
96.06 Separate Connections     96.13 Excavations
96.07 Existing Building Sewers 96.14 Backwater Valves
 
96.01   PERMIT REQUIRED.  
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the authorized City representative.
96.02   UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL.
   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those
discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the
Federal Act and more stringent State and local standards.
96.03   CLASSES OF PERMIT.
   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits.
   1.   For residential and commercial service, and
   2.   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
In either case, the owner or agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the authorized City representative. A sewer connection charge or
inspection fee as established by the City for a building sewer permit shall be
paid to the City at the time the application is filed. An industry, as a
condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its
wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type of activity.
96.04   CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall
only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations, and wastewater treatment
facilities have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
96.05   COSTS.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building sewer, from the main to the building served, shall
be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
96.06   SEPARATE CONNECTIONS.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer.
96.07   EXISTING BUILDING SEWERS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the authorized City representative
to meet all requirements of this chapter.
96.08   CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the Building Code and Altoona Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the City. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification
thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications
of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control
Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Chapter 12 – Iowa Standards for Sewer
Systems, shall apply.
96.09   LIFT REQUIRED.
   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an appropriate means in
accordance with the Altoona Plumbing Code and discharged to the building sewer.
96.10   RUNOFF OR GROUNDWATER PROHIBITED.
   No persons shall make connection of roof downspouts, sump pumps, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
96.11   CONNECTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to
the requirements of the Building Code and Altoona Plumbing Code, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 and Chapter 12, Iowa
Standards for Sewer Systems. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the authorized City representative before installation.
96.12   INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the authorized City
representative when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
authorized representative.
96.13   EXCAVATIONS.
   All excavation for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City.
96.14   BACKWATER VALVES.
   Backwater valves shall be installed in accordance with the Altoona Plumbing
Code whenever the Superintendent determines that such valves are needed in the
building drainage system.
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
97.01 Prohibited Discharge              97.13 Notice of Violation
97.02 Stormwater; Cooling Water         97.14 Consent Order
97.03 Prohibited Wastes                 97.15 Show Cause Hearing
97.04 Restricted Wastes                 97.16 Cease and Desist Orders
97.05 Powers of the City                97.17 Suspension of Wastewater
                                        Discharge Permit
97.06 Interceptors                      97.18 Injunctive Relief
97.07 Maintenance of Pretreatment or    97.19 Other Remedies for Violations
Flow Devices
97.08 Control Manholes Required         97.20 Emergency Suspension
97.09 Measurement and Tests Required    97.21 Termination of Discharge
97.10 Method of Testing and Measurement 97.22 Civil Penalties
97.11 Special Agreements                97.23 Criminal Prosecution
97.12 Increased Industrial Loads        97.24 Remedies Nonexclusive
 
97.01   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including interior and
exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted
industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
97.02   STORMWATER; COOLING WATER.
   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet
approved by the authorized City representative. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the authorized City
representative to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
97.03   PROHIBITED WASTES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   1.   Flammables. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
   2.   Toxic or Poisonous Waste. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interactions with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant.
   3.   Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five
point zero or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewerage system and
wastewater treatment works.
   4.   Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities
or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewerage system and wastewater
treatment works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage,
whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing’s, entrails and paper dishes,
cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
97.04   RESTRICTED WASTES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion
of the authorized City representative, that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the authorized City representative will give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities
in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the wastewater treatment works, degree of
treatability of wastes in the wastewater treatment works, and maximum limits
established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
   1.   High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150ºF (65ºC).
   2.   Oily or Toxic Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous materials; or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/
l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32ºF and 150ºF (0ºC to 65ºC).
   3.   Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval
of the authorized City representative.
   4.   Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
   5.   Plant Design Limit. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium,
copper, zinc, or similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting
an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the
limits established by the authorized City representative for such materials.
   6.   Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste
or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may
be established by the authorized City representative as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of State, federal,
or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving
waters.
   7.   Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-
life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the authorized City
representative in compliance with applicable State or federal regulations.
   8.   pH.
   Any waters or wastes having a pH less than five point five or greater than
nine point five, or wastewater having any other corrosive properties (i.e. H 2
S) capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel
of the wastewater facilities.
   9.   Mercury. Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.005 mg/l as
Hg at any time except as permitted by the authorized City representative in
compliance with applicable State or federal regulations.
   10.   Cyanide. Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as
permitted by the authorized City representative in compliance with applicable
State and federal regulations.
   11.   Materials which exert or cause:
      A.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
      B.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
      C.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
      D.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
   12.   Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances which are
not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater
treatment works effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
   13.   Excessive Load. Any waters or wastes having: (i) a five-day BOD
greater than 300 parts per million by weight, or (ii) containing more than 350
parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or (iii) having an average
daily flow greater than two percent of the average sewage flow of the City, or
(iv) having wastewater concentrations greater than normal as determined by
sampling and testing of a user’s wastewater discharge, shall be subject to the
review of the authorized City representative. Where necessary, in the opinion
of the authorized City representative, the owner shall provide, at said owner’s
expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (1) reduce the
biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by weight, or (2) reduce the
suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or (3) control the
quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans,
specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the
authorized City representative and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
97.05   POWERS OF THE CITY.
   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to
the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section
97.01,
97.03, and
97.04 of this chapter or which are in violation of the standards for
pretreatment provided in Chapter 1, EPA Rules and Regulations, Subchapter D,
Water Programs Part 128 - Pretreatment Standards, Federal Register Volume 38,
No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and any amendments thereto, and which in
the judgment of the authorized City representative, may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage system and wastewater treatment works, processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the authorized City representative may:
   1.   Rejection. Reject the wastes;
   2.   Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
   3.   Controlled Discharge. Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge;
   4.   Added Cost. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of Section
97.11; or
   5.   Prohibit. Order the condition to be abated as a public nuisance through
the procedures set forth for such action.
   If the authorized City representative permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the authorized City
representative and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances, and laws.
97.06   INTERCEPTORS.
   All commercial, restaurant, and others involved in food preparation shall
have grease, oil, and sand interceptors. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors
shall be provided for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters
or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the authorized City representative, and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Owners shall maintain records of
maintenance and cleaning of grease, oil, and sand interceptors. These records
shall be presented to the authorized City representatives upon request.
97.07   MAINTENANCE OF PRETREATMENT OR FLOW DEVICES.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at their expense.
97.08   CONTROL MANHOLES REQUIRED.
   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the authorized City representative, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the authorized City representative. The manhole shall be installed by the
owner, at the owner’s expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be
safe and accessible at all times.
97.09   MEASUREMENT AND TESTS REQUIRED.
   The owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of waters and
wastes to illustrate compliance with these chapters and any special conditions
for discharge established by the City or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type, and frequency of laboratory
analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the City, but
not less than once per year, the industry must supply a complete analysis of
the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the
federal, State, and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the
results of such measurements and laboratory analyses to the City at such times
and in such manner as prescribed by the City. The owner shall bear the expense
of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the City. At such
times as deemed necessary, the City reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analyses by an outside laboratory service.
97.10   METHOD OF TESTING AND MEASUREMENT.
   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods and shall be determined
at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be
carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewerage system and wastewater treatment works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular
analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of
a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from periodic
grab samples).
97.11   SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement in this chapter shall be construed as preventing a special
agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City
for treatment, subject to payment therefore, in accordance with any resolution
establishing special rates and charges by the Council, provided such payments
are in accordance with federal and State guidelines for user charge system.
97.12   INCREASED INDUSTRIAL LOADS.
   Any industry desiring to introduce wastes into the sewer system, which is
not doing so as of the effective date of the ordinance codified by these
Sanitary Sewer chapters, or any industry desiring to expand in a manner which
will increase its discharge of waste or will change the nature of the waste
discharged into the sewer system shall submit to the authorized City
representative a report of the amount and character of waste proposed to be
discharged into the sewer; said report shall be submitted at least 60 days
prior to the first day of discharge into the sewers.
97.13   NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   When the Community Service Director finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Community Service Director may serve upon the user a written
notice of violation. Within 48 hours of receipt of this notice, an explanation
of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Community
Service Director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Community
Service Director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
97.14   CONSENT ORDER.
   The Community Service Director is hereby empowered to enter into consent
orders, including more frequent testing as determined by the Community Service
Director, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the user responsible for the noncompliance. Such
orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order.
97.15   SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   The Community Service Director may order any user which has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, to appear before the Community Service Director and show cause why
a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on
the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user
show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice
of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least five business days prior to the hearing.
Such notice may be served on the authorized representative of the user. A show
cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
97.16   CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.
   1.   When the Community Service Director finds that a user is in significant
non-compliance and has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user’s past violations are
likely to recur, the Community Service Director may issue an order to the user
directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
      A.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
      B.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventative actions as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease-and-desist
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
   2.   The term “significant non-compliance” is defined as follows:
      A.   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily
maximum limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (one point four for BOD,
TSS, oil and grease, and one point two for all other pollutants except pH);
      B.   Any other discharge violation that the City believes has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through
(including endangering the health of City personnel or the general public);
      C.   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the City’s exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such as discharge;
      D.   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a
compliance milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
      E.   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring report, and report on compliance with compliance
schedules;
      F.   Failure to accurately report non-compliance;
      G.   Any other violation(s) which the City determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
97.17   SUSPENSION OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT.
   The Community Service Director may suspend a wastewater discharge permit for
good cause including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   1.   Misrepresentation or failure to accurately report all relevant facts of
wastewater discharge;
   2.   Failure of the user to provide prior notification to the Community
Service Director of significantly changed conditions that would negatively
impact the operation of the City wastewater treatment facility;
   3.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
   4.   Refusing to allow the Community Service Director timely access to the
facility premises and records;
   5.   Failure to meet effluent limitations and who is in significant non-
compliance;
   6.   Failure to report a significant upset, failure, or bypass of user’s
pretreatment facilities that would negatively impact the operation of the City
wastewater treatment facility;
   7.   Failure to pay fines, fees, or sewer user charges;
   8.   Failure to follow enforcement orders or meet compliance schedules;
   9.   Failure to correct a condition that impedes or alters the POTW’s
ability to monitor the user’s discharge or has the potential to cause
interference or pass through;
   10.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
   11.   Failure to complete a wastewater survey;
   12.   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility;
   13.   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of
the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter; or
   14.   Failure to cease discharging a waste with physical or chemical
characteristics which potentially cause interference or pass through.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operation or
transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a
particular user are void upon issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to
that user.
97.18   INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   When the Community Service Director finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provisions of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Community Service Director may request the Iowa District Court
for issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which
restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge
permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of
the user. The Community Service Director may also seek such other action as is
appropriate for legal or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user
to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall
not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a
user.
97.19   OTHER REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   1.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable to the City for any damage, loss, cost, or expense occasioned by reason
of such violation.
   2.   For a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, after
informal notice, the Community Service Director may:
      A.   Take necessary measures to correct and abate such violation, and the
Community Service Director is authorized to enter on private property to do so;
      B.   Order the service to the premises involved discontinued and
authorize the disconnection of any tapping or connection made to the wastewater
system of the City. In the event a violation of the provisions of this chapter
creates an immediate hazard to the wastewater facilities or to the operation
thereof, or to the health and safety of any person or to the preservation and
protection of any property, the Community Service Director is authorized and
directed to perform all necessary acts, without prior notice or hearing, to
correct and abate such violations and may enter on private property to do so.
   3.   The cost of any corrective measures required under the provisions of
this section shall be a lien on the property served by the wastewater
facilities in connection with which such violation has occurred and shall be
levied and collected by the Council as ordinary taxes.
   4.   In addition to any other remedies provided for in this chapter, the
City may bring suit to collect any sums due it, including user charges and cost
recovery charges, from the person or persons incurring the liability for the
payment of such charges.
97.20   EMERGENCY SUSPENSION.
   The Community Service Director may immediately suspend a user’s discharge
after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or
cause imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons.
The Community Service Director may also immediately suspend a user’s discharge,
after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the
operation of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW), or which presents, or
may present, an endangerment to the environment.
   1.   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Community Service
Director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance
of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize significant damage that would
negatively impact the operation of the City wastewater treatment facility, its
receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Community Service
Director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Community Service Director that the
period of endangerment has passed, unless termination proceedings are initiated
against the user.
   2.   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and measures taken to prevent
any future occurrence, to the Community Service Director prior to the date of
any show cause or termination hearing. Nothing in this section shall be
interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this
section.
97.21   TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.
   In addition to the provisions in Section
97.14, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:
   1.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
   2.   Failure to report significant changes in operation or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
   3.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
   4.   Violation of the pretreatment standards.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be
offered an opportunity to show cause why the proposed action should not be
taken. Exercise of this option by the Community Service Director shall not be a
bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
97.22   CIVIL PENALTIES.
   Any user who violates any provisions of this chapter or any order or permit
issued hereunder, shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than
$1,000.00 for each violation plus actual damages incurred by the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works (POTW) per violation per day for as long as the violation
continues. Each day in which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense. In addition to the above-described penalty and damages, the
Community Service Director may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs,
and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses.
97.23   CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
   1.   Any user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
chapter or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall be in violation of this
Code of Ordinances, and each day in which any such violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
   2.   Any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other document
files or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or wastewater
discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate, any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall
be in violation of this Code of Ordinances, and each day in which any such
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
97.24   REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The Community
Service Director may take any, all, or any combination of the actions against a
noncompliant user. However, the Community Service Director may take further
action against any user when circumstances warrant. Further, the Community
Service Director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against
any noncompliant user.
CHAPTER 98
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES
98.01 Basis for Charges                           98.10 Rate
98.02 Connection Charge                           98.11 Payment of Bills
98.03 Surcharge Factor                            98.12 Lien for Nonpayment
98.04 Connection Fee                              98.13 Foreclosure of Lien
98.05 Connection Fee for Single-Family Equivalent 98.14 Revenues
98.06 Single-Family Equivalent                    98.15 Accounts
98.07 Annual Review                               98.16 Access to Records
98.08 Measurement of Flow                         98.17 Periodic Review
98.09 Charges Herein to Take Precedence           98.18 Notification
 
98.01   BASIS FOR CHARGES.
   The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the
wastewater facilities of the City shall consist of a basic user charge for
operation and maintenance plus replacement and local capital financing charge
and a surcharge, if applicable. The user charge shall be based on water usage
as recorded by water meters or sewage meters for wastes having the following
normal domestic wastewater concentrations: (i) average day, 20ºC biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD) of 200 mg/l; (ii) a suspended solids (SS) content of 240
mg/l; (iii) an ammonia-nitrogen (NH 3 N) content of 40 mg/l; (iv) an oil and
grease content of 100 mg/l; and (v) a sulfate content of 1,500 mg/l. It shall
consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement and shall be
computed as follows:
   1.   Estimate wastewater characteristics by volume, pounds of SS, pounds of
BOD, pounds of NH 3 N and pounds of oil and grease to be treated, and customer
bills to be sent.
   2.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain
the wastewater facilities including a replacement fund for the year, for all
works categories.
   3.   Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories by
volume, SS, BOD, ammonia-nitrogen (NH 3 N), oil and grease, and customer.
   4.   Develop unit rates for volume, BOD, SS, and NH 3 N, and oil and grease
by dividing estimated costs in the Subsection 3 by estimated wastewater
characteristics in Subsection 1.
   5.   Compute costs per 1,000 gallons for normal domestic wastewater.
   6.   Compute surcharge factor for multiplying time costs per 1,000 gallons
for BOD, SS, NH 3 N, and oil and grease in excess of normal domestic
wastewater. A surcharge will also be assessed for heavy metals or toxics that
exceed acceptable limits. The charge will be determined according to the toxic
or heavy metals involved.
98.02   CONNECTION CHARGE.
   A sewer connect charge shall be assessed for each new, replaced, or altered
building sewer that is connected to the public sanitary sewer system. The
connection fee shall be charged to all making new connections, reconnections,
or alterations to the public sewer system for new development or redevelopment.
This does not apply to repairs, alterations, or reconnections that do not
change use, location, or volume discharged to the public sanitary sewer system.
98.03   SURCHARGE FACTOR.
   A surcharge factor shall be levied for the following customers whose
wastewaters exceed normal domestic wastewater:
 
CUSTOMER TYPE                                                  SURCHARGE FACTOR
Laundry, including industrial laundries, commercial laundries, 1.2
and laundromat
Car washes                                                     1.3
Restaurants, including quick serve and sit-down types          1.6
Bakeries                                                       1.4
Data center                                                    1.2
 
98.04   CONNECTION FEE.
   The connection fee shall be a minimum of the number of units times the
Single-Family Equivalent (SFE) times $300.00, or according to a formula
developed by the City based on a proportions charge such as cost per acre, cost
per lot, or flow requirement.
98.05   CONNECTION FEE FOR SINGLE-FAMILY EQUIVALENT.
   The connection fee for each Single-Family Equivalent connection will be
$300.00.
98.06   SINGLE-FAMILY EQUIVALENT.
   The Single-Family Equivalent for each type of use shall be as follows:
USE SINGLE-FAMILY EQUIVALENT (SFE)
USE                                SINGLE-FAMILY EQUIVALENT (SFE)
Single-family                      1 per unit
Duplex                             1.4 per duplex
Apartment                          0.36 per unit
Townhouse or Condo                 0.47 per unit
School or Daycare                  0.06 per student
Motel                              0.17 per room
Nursing home                       0.25 per bed
Restaurant, diner, or cafeteria    0.004 per SF
Fast food restaurant               0.0035 per SF
Coffee house, bar, or other FSE    0.003 per SF
Retail, office, or church          0.0007 per SF
Retail with FSE                    0.001 per SF
Strip mall                         0.0007 per SF
Strip mall with grease interceptor 0.003 per SF
Data center or factory             0.00014 per SF
Warehouse                          0.0001 per SF
Carwash                            0.011 per SF
For any proposed use not listed in the above table the Single-Family Equivalent
(SFE) shall be determined by the City Engineer from documented water usage for
similar uses divided by 350 gallons per day per each Single-Family Equivalent.
98.07   ANNUAL REVIEW.
   The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed annually by
the City. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to
reflect a change in debt service and other local capital financing costs or a
change in operation and maintenance costs including replacement costs.
98.08   MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and local capital
financing charges shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest
even increment of 1,000 gallons.
   1.   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of said person’s water from sources other than the Municipal
Water Department, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers,
the person shall install and maintain, at said person’s expense, water meters
of a type approved by the authorized City representative for the purposes of
determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources.
   2.   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by
the authorized City representative if these volumes cannot otherwise be
determined from the metered water consumption records.
   3.   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned, and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled,
without the consent of the authorized City representative.
98.09   CHARGES HEREIN TO TAKE PRECEDENCE.
   The wastewater service charges established herein shall take precedence over
any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts between the City and users
which are inconsistent with the requirements of Section 204(b)(1)(a) of the
Federal Act and the corresponding regulations.
98.10   RATE.
   The wastewater service charge for all customers will be $10.98 per 1,000
gallons, and a service base rate of $5.50.
98.11   PAYMENT OF BILLS.
   All sewer service charges are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section 92.04. Sewer service may be discontinued or disconnected in accordance
with the provisions contained in Section 92.05 if the combined service account
becomes delinquent, and the provisions continued in Section 92.08 relating to
lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent account.
98.12   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   Except as provided for in Section
92.07, the owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall
be jointly and severally liable for sewer service charges to the premises.
Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien
upon the property or premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
98.13   FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for nonpayment
of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges,
after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens.
Such foreclosure shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of the City. The City
is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in any court
having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill
has remained unpaid.
98.14   REVENUES.
   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage system
and wastewater treatment works shall be deposited in the wastewater account of
the wastewater fund. All such revenues and moneys shall be held by the Clerk
separate and apart from private funds and separate and apart from all other
funds of the City and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall
be delivered to the Clerk not more than 10 days after receipt of the same, or
at such more frequent intervals as may, from time to time, be directed by the
Council. The Clerk shall receive all revenues from the sewerage system and
wastewater treatment works and all other funds and moneys incident to the
operation of such system as the same may be delivered to the Clerk and deposit
the same in the account of the fund designated as the “Sanitation Fund of the
City.” The Clerk shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner
provided by statute of the Iowa Administrative Code.
98.15   ACCOUNTS.
   The Clerk shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper
books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be
made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system and wastewater
treatment works, and at regular annual intervals shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system. In addition to the customary operating
statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and
operating expenses of the wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost,
to indicate that the wastewater service charges do in fact meet these
regulations. In addition to the proper system of accounts established for the
transactions relating to the sewerage system and wastewater treatment works a
Sewer Replacement Fund shall be established specifically for direct costs
related to replacement of capital equipment. The City shall deposit into the
Sewer Replacement Fund on an annual basis a minimum of $62,500.00, or an amount
to be calculated by the staff and approved by the Council.
98.16   ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The State Department of Natural Resources shall have access to any books,
documents, papers, and records of the City which are applicable to the City
system of user charges for the purposes of making audit, examination, excerpts,
and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the Special
and General Conditions to any federal or State grant.
98.17   PERIODIC REVIEW.
   The wastewater service charge shall be reviewed periodically (at least every
two years) and adjusted as appropriate to ensure that said charges generate
sufficient funds for operation, maintenance, and replacement of the sewerage
system and wastewater treatment works and local capital financing requirements.
98.18   NOTIFICATION.
   The City shall notify each user at least annually of the rate being charged
for operation and maintenance, including replacement, of the sewerage system
and wastewater treatment works.
CHAPTER 99
BENEFITED SEWER DISTRICTS
 
99.01 Purpose                       99.06 South Side Sanitary Sewer
                                    Connection Fee District
99.02 Intent                        99.07 North I-80 Sanitary Sewer
                                    Connection Fee District
99.03 Procedure                     99.08 Mud Creek Sanitary Sewer Connection
                                    Fee District #1
99.04 West Side Sanitary Sewer      99.09 Muchikinock Creek Sanitary Sewer
Connection Fee District             Connection Fee District #1
99.05 Southeast Side Sanitary Sewer  
Connection Fee District
 
99.01   PURPOSE.
   The City has determined the necessity of establishing a policy and a
procedure to be utilized to recover the cost of design and construction of
major sanitary sewer facilities in those instances in which a significant
number of the properties to be benefited by such facilities are not
sufficiently developed to permit the recovery of those costs through the
special assessment process as provided in Chapter 384, Division IV of the Code
of Iowa. The City hereby declares its intent to utilize connection fees, as
herein provided, to recover the costs for design and construction of such major
sanitary sewer facilities from property owners who connect to such facilities
subsequent to their construction.
99.02   INTENT.
   It is the intent of this chapter to set forth the method of recovery of
proportional cost shares from those property owners who connect their
properties to major sanitary sewer facilities subsequent to their construction,
so that in the event that all property, other than street and road right-of-
way, which lies within the benefited district is connected to the major
sanitary sewer facilities during their expected useful life, then those
properties shall bear, in the aggregate, up to 100 percent of the cost for
design and construction of such facilities, including legal, administrative,
and interest expenses associated therewith.
99.03   PROCEDURE.
   1.   In the event the Council determines the necessity for construction of a
major sanitary sewer facility, and determines that the utilization of a
connection fee is the most equitable manner in which to recover the City’s
costs associated therewith, the Council shall cause a “Notice of Public Hearing
on the Proposed Adoption of an Ordinance to Establish a Benefited District and
a Connection Fee Schedule” to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City as hereafter provided. In addition to indicating
the date, time, and place of the public hearing, the notice shall:
      A.   Indicate the nature and extent of the major sanitary sewer facility
or facilities under consideration for construction, as well as the estimated
cost or costs for the design and construction of same;
      B.   Identify by general description the proposed benefited district to
be served by the major sanitary sewer facility or facilities; and
      C.   Set forth the proposed yearly schedule of connection fees to be paid
by property owners within the benefited district who connect to said
facilities, expressed in dollars per acre of land area served.
   The notice shall also state that the proposed connection fee ordinance is on
file, along with a service area map of the area to be served, and both are
available for public inspection in the office of the Clerk. The notice shall be
published not more than 45 days and not less than 20 days prior to the
scheduled date of the public hearing, and shall be mailed to each property
owner within the benefited district as shown by the records of the County
Auditor.
   2.   At the public hearing, the owners of property within the proposed
benefited district shall be heard and may offer comments or objections as to:
      A.   The necessity for the project;
      B.   The calculation of the area benefited by the proposed major sanitary
sewer facilities;
      C.   The estimated cost of the proposed facilities;
      D.   The proposed per acre connection fee; and
      E.   The graduated yearly connection fee schedule.
   3.   Upon concluding the hearing, the Council shall rule upon the objections
presented during the hearing and may consider the adoption of the proposed
connection fee ordinance. Upon consideration of the proposed connection fee
ordinance, the Council may:
      A.   Adopt the ordinance as proposed;
      B.   Delete elements or portions of the proposed major sanitary sewer
facilities from the proposed project and the properties served thereby from the
benefited district proposed; or
      C.   Amend the ordinance to revise the connection fee schedule.
   4.   The connection fee ordinance may provide, at the Council’s discretion,
that single-family residences within the benefited district, in existence or
under construction upon the effective date of the ordinance, and located within
the corporate limits of the City, are eligible for connection to the major
sanitary sewer facility. In that event, the ordinance shall include the
following provisions:
      A.   That the owners of residences on parcels of less than one acre in
size located within the City may connect such residences to the major sanitary
sewer facility upon approval of their application for connection, payment of
the connection fee for the parcel, and construction, at the owner’s expense, of
appropriate connection structures, as determined necessary by the Public Works
Director.
      B.   That the owners of residences on parcels in excess of one acre in
size located within the City may connect such residences to the major sanitary
sewer facility upon approval of their application for connection, subdivision
of said parcel into a residence parcel and an outlot, payment of the connection
fee for the residence parcel, and construction, at the owner’s expense, of
appropriate connection structures, as determined necessary by the Public Works
Director.
      C.   The connection fee ordinance may also provide, at the Council’s
discretion, that sanitary sewer service can be provided to recreational and
park facilities in the same manner and under the same procedures set forth in
this section for single-family residences within the benefited district.
   All other property located within the corporate limits of the City and
within a benefited district shall be eligible for connection to the major
sanitary sewer facility upon approval of an application for connection by the
owner thereof, as hereafter provided, and payment of the connection fee for
such property, provided such property has been appropriately subdivided for
development, and, where applicable, all sanitary sewer improvements necessary
to serve said property have been constructed, at the owner’s expense, and
accepted by the City.
   5.   After adoption, publication, and recording by the Clerk of a connection
fee ordinance for a benefited district, all owners of those properties within
the benefited district whose properties are eligible for connection, and who
propose to connect such properties directly or indirectly to the major sanitary
sewer facility, shall make application to the City for such connection. The
submittal of construction plans to the City for sanitary sewer improvements on
property being subdivided for development shall constitute an application to
the City for purposes of this chapter. The sewer connection fee shall be due
and payable at the time application is made to the City for connection to the
major sanitary sewer facility. No connection shall be made to a major sanitary
sewer facility until such application has been approved and until the required
connection fee has been paid. The sewer connection fee shall be paid before the
City will approve the final plat of property subject to the sewer connection
fee.
   6.   The sewer connection fee shall be in an amount equal to the maximum
acre area of contiguous property, or fraction thereof, within the benefited
district under common ownership which can be lawfully served through such
proposed connection, multiplied by the per acre connection fee established in
the connection fee ordinance for that benefited district. The connection fee
ordinance may provide for a graduated connection fee, with annual interest
adjustments, such that property owners who connect in later years pay interest
on the connection fee for their property. The rate of interest applicable to
the connection fee established in each benefited district shall not exceed the
rate of interest applicable to special assessments pursuant to Chapter 74A and
Section 384.60(3) of the Code of Iowa in effect on the date that the connection
fee was established for that district by enactment of a connection fee
ordinance.
   7.   The sewer connection fee required by this chapter shall be due and
payable to the Clerk and is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fees
for connection required under the plumbing code or other provisions of this
Code of Ordinances.
   8.   In the event any property owner connects their property within a
benefited district to a major sanitary sewer facility without having made
application therefor or without having received approval thereof or without
having paid the required connection fee established by a connection fee
ordinance, the City shall be entitled to disconnect such private sewer
connection until such time as the property owner has made and received approval
of their application, or has paid the required connection fee.
99.04   WEST SIDE SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT.
   1.   The West Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District is hereby
established, consisting of a tract of land in Sections 10, 14, 15, 22, 23, 24,
25, and 26, Township 79 North, Range 23 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian,
Polk County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
   THAT PART OF:
   THE SOUTH 1/2 OF SECTION 10 LYING EAST OF RELOCATED PRIMARY ROAD NO. U.S. 65
AND SOUTH OF INTERSTATE 80 AND
   THAT PART OF INTERSTATE 80 RIGHT-OF-WAY IN SAID SECTION 10 LYING SOUTH OF A
LINE BEING 175 FEET NORMALLY DISTANT FROM THE CENTERLINE OF SAID INTERSTATE 80,
SAID PARCEL BEING ACQUIRED BY WARRANTY DEED RECORDED IN BOOK 3643, PAGE 143.
AND
   THAT PART OF SECTION 15 LYING EAST OF SAID U.S. 65 AND
   LOTS 1 THROUGH 13, WAYSIDE ACRES, BEING AN OFFICIAL PLAT, AND THE ROAD
RIGHT-OF-WAY ADJOINING EAST AND SOUTH OF SAID LOTS 1 THROUGH 13 ALL IN SECTION
14 AND
   THAT PART OF SECTION 22 LYING EAST OF SAID U.S. 65 AND
   THE SOUTH 1/2 LYING EAST OF SAID U.S. 65, THE SOUTH 1/2 OF THE NORTHEAST 1/
4, THE SOUTH 1/2 OF THE NORTHWEST 1/4 AND THE NORTHWEST 1/4 OF THE NORTHWEST 1/
4 ALL IN SECTION 23 AND
   THE WEST 21.22 ACRES EXCEPT THE NORTH 20 RODS, LOT 1, THE OFFICIAL PLAT OF
THE NORTHWEST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 23 AND
   THAT PART OF THE NORTHEAST 1/4 OF THE NORTHEAST 1/4 LYING SOUTHEASTERLY OF
THE NORTHWESTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF THE FORMER CHICAGO, ROCK ISLAND AND
PACIFIC RAILROAD IN SAID SECTION 23 AND
   THE SOUTHWEST 1/4 OF SECTION 24 AND
   THE NORTHWEST 1/4 AND THE NORTH 1/2 OF THE SOUTHWEST 1/4 OF SECTION 25
   ALL BEING IN TOWNSHIP 79 NORTH, RANGE 23 WEST OF THE 5TH P.M., CITY OF
ALTOONA, POLK COUNTY, IOWA AND
   THAT PART OF SECTION 26, TOWNSHIP 79 NORTH, RANGE 23 WEST OF THE 5TH P.M.,
CITY OF ALTOONA, POLK COUNTY, IOWA AND MORE PARTICULARITY DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS:
   BEGINNING AT THE CENTER OF SAID SECTION 24; THENCE SOUTH ALONG THE EAST LINE
OF SAID SOUTHWEST 1/4 OF SECTION 24 TO THE NORTH 1/4 CORNER OF SAID SECTION 25;
THENCE SOUTH ALONG THE EAST LINE OF THE WEST 1/2 OF SAID SECTION 25 TO THE
SOUTHEAST CORNER OF SAID NORTH 1/2 OF THE SOUTHWEST 1/4 OF SECTION 25; THENCE
WEST ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID NORTH 1/2 OF THE SOUTHWEST 1/4 TO THE
SOUTHEAST CORNER OF THE NORTH 1/2 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 26;
THENCE WEST ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID NORTH 1/2 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 TO A
POINT BEING 357.4 FEET WEST OF THE WEST LINE OF SAID SOUTHEAST 1/4; THENCE
NORTH ALONG A LINE PARALLEL WITH AND 357.4 FEET WEST OF SAID WEST LINE TO A
POINT ON THE NORTH LINE OF SAID SOUTHEAST 1/4; THENCE WEST ALONG SAID NORTH
LINE TO A POINT ON THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF SAID RELOCATED PRIMARY
ROAD NO. U.S. 65, SAID POINT BEING 190 FEET EASTERLY OF AND NORMALLY DISTANT TO
THE CENTERLINE OF SAID U.S. 65; THENCE NORTHWESTERLY ALONG SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-
OF-WAY AND ALONG A CURVE TO A POINT ON THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF THE
HEARTLAND RAIL CORPORATION, SAID POINT BEING 190 FEET EASTERLY OF AND NORMALLY
DISTANT TO SAID CENTERLINE; THENCE CONTINUING NORTHWESTERLY TO A POINT ON THE
WESTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF SAID HEARTLAND RAIL CORPORATION, SAID POINT BEING
140 FEET EASTERLY OF AND NORMALLY DISTANT TO SAID CENTERLINE; THENCE CONTINUING
NORTHWESTERLY ALONG A LINE 140 FEET EASTERLY OF AND NORMALLY DISTANT TO SAID
CENTERLINE TO A POINT ON THE SOUTH LINE OF THE SOUTHWEST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION
23, SAID POINT BEING ON SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY OF U.S. 65; THENCE
CONTINUING NORTHWESTERLY ALONG SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE TO A POINT ON
THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID SECTION 15; THENCE NORTH TO A POINT ON THE NORTHERLY
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF NE 46TH AVENUE; THENCE WEST ALONG SAID NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE TO A POINT ON SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF U.S. 65; THENCE
NORTHWESTERLY ALONG SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE; THENCE NORTHEASTERLY
CONTINUING ALONG SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE AND ALONG A CURVE TO A POINT
ON THE SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF INTERSTATE 80; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG SAID
SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE TO A POINT ON THE EASTERLY LINE OF SAID SECTION 10;
THENCE SOUTH ALONG SAID EASTERLY LINE TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF SAID SECTION
15; THENCE SOUTH ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID SECTION 15 TO THE INTERSECTION OF
SAID EAST LINE WITH THE WESTERLY EXTENSION OF THE NORTH LINE OF SAID LOT 1,
WAYSIDE ACRES, BEING AN OFFICIAL PLAT; THENCE EAST ALONG SAID WESTERLY
EXTENSION AND ALONG SAID NORTH LINE TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF SAID LOT 1;
THENCE SOUTH ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID LOTS 1 THROUGH 13 AND THE SOUTHERLY
EXTENSION OF SAID EAST LINE TO A POINT ON THE NORTH LINE OF SAID SECTION 23;
THENCE EAST ALONG SAID NORTH LINE TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF NORTHWEST 1/4 OF
THE NORTHWEST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 23; THENCE SOUTH ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID
NORTHWEST 1/4 OF THE NORTHWEST 1/4 TO THE SOUTHEAST CORNER THEREOF; THENCE EAST
ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SAID NORTHWEST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION
23 AND THE NORTH LINE OF THE SOUTH 1/2 OF THE NORTHEAST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 23
TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SAID NORTHEAST 1/4 OF SAID
SECTION 23; THENCE SOUTH ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID SECTION 23 TO THE WEST 1/
4 CORNER OF SAID SECTION 24; THENCE EAST ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF SAID SOUTHWEST
1/4 OF SECTION 24 TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING.
   2.   District Connection Fees. Connection fees are hereby established and
shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the West Side Sanitary Sewer
Connection Fee District, pursuant to City Ordinance No. 5-99 #2 (33), at the
time of application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as
follows:
      A.   From the effective date of Ordinance No. 3-01 #1 (78) through June
30, 2001, a connection fee of $2,500.00 per acre of property served by the
sewer facilities shall be imposed. Thereafter, the per-acre connection fee
shall be annually adjusted as of July 1 of each year according to the following
schedule:
EFFECTIVE DATE CONNECTION FEE ($/ACRE)
EFFECTIVE DATE              CONNECTION FEE ($/ACRE)
July 1, 2001                $2,600.00
July 1, 2002                $2,700.00
July 1, 2003                $2,800.00
July 1, 2004                $2,910.00
July 1, 2005                $3,030.00
July 1, 2006                $3,150.00
July 1, 2007                $3,270.00
July 1, 2008                $3,400.00
July 1, 2009 and thereafter $3,500.00
 
      B.   The above-established connection fee schedule shall also apply to
any properties outside the West Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
which use or derive benefit from any of the sewer facilities constructed for
the West Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. The appropriate fee shall
be imposed at the time of determination that a benefit is derived by the
property.
      C.   The above-established connection fee schedule shall not apply to any
properties within the West Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District which do
not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities constructed for the West
Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District.
      D.   The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer
facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recording, or issuance of a building
or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
      E.   Any single-family residence existing or under construction upon the
effective date of Ordinance No. 3-01 #1 (78) located upon a parcel in excess of
one acre may apply for connection upon annexation to the City, subdivision of
said parcel into a single residence parcel and an outlot, and payment of a
single-acre connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall require
a revised application for connection and payment of the connection fee as
established in the above fee schedule.
      F.   The owner of any parcel being used as a public or nonprofit
recreational or park facility upon the effective date of Ordinance No. 3-01 #1
(78) may apply for connection upon annexation to the City and payment of a
single-acre connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall require
a revised application for connection and payment of the connection fee as
established in the above fee schedule.
   3.   Effect of Schedule. The above-established connection fee schedule shall
remain in force and effect until such time that the Council adopts an ordinance
to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years for the
West Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. Nothing herein is intended to
restrict the Council from appropriate adjustment of the connection fee schedule
to reflect future construction costs.
99.05   SOUTHEAST SIDE SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT.
   1.   The Southeast Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District is hereby
established, consisting of a tract of land in Sections 19 and 30, Township 79
North, Range 22 West, and Section 25 and 36, Township 79 North, Range 23 West
of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa, more particularly described
as follows:
   THAT PART OF:
   The South ½ of the Southeast ¼ of said Section 24;
   AND
   The Northeast ¼ and the North ½ of the Southeast ¼, all in said Section 25;
   AND
   The Southwest ¼ and the Southeast ¼, all in said Section 19, including
Country Cove Plats 1, 2 and 4, being Official Plats;
   AND
   The Northwest ¼, the West ¼ of the Northeast ¼, the East ¾ of the North ¼ of
said Northeast ¼, the North ½ of the Southwest ¼ and the West ¾ of the North ½
of the Southeast ¼, all in said Section 30.
   2.   District Connection Fees. Connection fees are hereby established and
shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the Southeast Side Sanitary
Sewer Connection Fee District, pursuant to City Ordinance No. 5-99 #2 (33), at
the time of application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities,
as follows:
      A.   From the effective date of Ordinance No. 05-02 #1 (103) through June
30, 2002, a connection fee of $2,500.00 per acre of property served by the
sewer facilities shall be imposed. Thereafter, the per-acre connection fee
shall be annually adjusted as of July 1 of each year according to the following
schedule:
EFFECTIVE DATE CONNECTION FEE ($/ACRE)
EFFECTIVE DATE              CONNECTION FEE ($/ACRE)
July 1, 2002                $2,600.00
July 1, 2003                $2,700.00
July 1, 2004                $2,800.00
July 1, 2005                $2,910.00
July 1, 2006                $3,030.00
July 1, 2007                $3,150.00
July 1, 2008                $3,270.00
July 1, 2009                $3,400.00
July 1, 2010 and thereafter $3,500.00
 
      B.   The above-established connection fee schedule shall also apply to
any properties outside the Southeast Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee
District which use or derive benefit from any of the sewer facilities
constructed for the Southeast Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. The
appropriate fee shall be imposed at the time of determination that a benefit is
derived by the property.
      C.   The above-established connection fee schedule shall not apply to any
properties within the Southeast Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
which do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities constructed for
the Southeast Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District.
      D.   The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer
facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recording, or issuance of a building
or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
      E.   Any single-family residence existing or under construction upon the
effective date of Ordinance No. 05-02 #1 (103) located upon a parcel in excess
of one acre may apply for connection upon annexation to the City, subdivision
of said parcel into a single residence parcel and an outlot, and payment of a
single-acre connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall require
a revised application for connection and payment of the connection fee as
established in the above fee schedule.
      F.   The owner of any parcel being used as a public or nonprofit
recreational or park facility upon the effective date of Ordinance No. 05-02 #1
(103) may apply for connection upon annexation to the City and payment of a
single-acre connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall require
a revised application for connection and payment of the connection fee as
established in the above fee schedule.
   3.   Effect of Schedule. The above-established connection fee schedule shall
remain in force and effect until such time that the Council adopts an ordinance
to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years for the
Southeast Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. Nothing herein is
intended to restrict the Council from appropriate adjustment of the connection
fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
99.06   SOUTH SIDE SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT.
   1.   The South Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District is hereby
established, consisting of a tract of land in Sections 30 and 31, Township 79
North, Range 22 West, and Sections 25, 26 and 36, Township 79 North, Range 23
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa, more particularly
described as follows:
   A PART OF SECTION 30, 31 IN TOWNSHIP 79 NORTH, RANGE 22 WEST OF THE 5TH
P.M., AND A PART OF SECTION 25, 26, 36 IN TOWNSHIP 79 NORTH, RANGE 23 WEST OF
THE 5TH P.M., ALL BEING IN POLK COUNTY, IOWA AND MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS
FOLLOWS:
   BEGINNING AT THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF SAID SECTION 31; THENCE SOUTH ALONG THE
EAST LINE OF THE NORTHEAST ¼ OF SAID SECTION 31 TO THE EAST ¼ CORNER OF SAID
SECTION 31; THENCE WEST ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID NORTHEAST ¼ OF SECTION 31
TO THE CENTER OF SAID SECTION 31; THENCE CONTINUING WEST ALONG THE SOUTH LINE
OF THE NORTHWEST ¼ OF SAID SECTION 31 TO THE WEST ¼ CORNER OF SAID SECTION 31;
THENCE CONTINUING WEST ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF THE NORTHEAST ¼ OF SAID SECTION
36 TO A POINT ON THE EAST LINE OF PARCEL “B” AS SHOWN ON A PLAT OF SURVEY
RECORDED IN BOOK 10390, PAGE 159; THENCE NORTH ALONG SAID EAST LINE OF PARCEL
“B” TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF SAID PARCEL “B”; THENCE WEST ALONG THE NORTH
LINE OF SAID PARCEL “B” TO THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF SAID PARCEL “B”; THENCE
SOUTH ALONG THE WEST LINE OF SAID PARCEL “B” TO A POINT ON SAID SOUTH LINE OF
THE NORTHEAST ¼ OF SECTION 36; THENCE WEST ALONG SAID SOUTH LINE OF THE
NORTHEAST ¼ OF SECTION 36 TO THE CENTER OF SAID SECTION 36; THENCE NORTH ALONG
THE WEST LINE OF SAID NORTHEAST ¼ OF SECTION 36 TO THE NORTH ¼ CORNER OF SAID
SECTION 36; THENCE WEST ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF THE SOUTHWEST ¼ OF SAID SECTION
25 TO THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF SAID SECTION 25; THENCE CONTINUING WEST ALONG THE
SOUTH LINE OF THE SOUTHEAST ¼ OF SAID SECTION 26 TO A POINT ON THE EASTERLY
RIGHT OF WAY LINE OF U.S. HIGHWAY 65; THENCE NORTH ALONG SAID EASTERLY U.S.
HIGHWAY 65 RIGHT OF WAY LINE TO A POINT ON THE SOUTH LINE OF THE SOUTHWEST ¼ OF
THE NORTHEAST ¼ OF SAID SECTION 26; THENCE WEST ALONG SAID EASTERLY U.S.
HIGHWAY 65 RIGHT OF WAY LINE AND ALONG SAID SOUTH LINE OF THE SOUTHWEST ¼ OF
THE NORTHEAST ¼ OF SECTION 26 TO A POINT ON THE EASTERLY RIGHT OF WAY LINE OF
THE ABANDONED CHICAGO, ROCK ISLAND AND PACIFIC RAILROAD; THENCE NORTH ALONG
SAID EASTERLY RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY LINE TO A POINT ON THE NORTH LINE OF SAID
SOUTHWEST ¼ OF THE NORTHEAST ¼ OF SECTION 26; THENCE EAST ALONG SAID NORTH LINE
OF THE SOUTHWEST ¼ OF THE NORTHEAST ¼ AND ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF THE SOUTHEAST
¼ OF THE NORTHEAST ¼ OF SAID SECTION 26 TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF SAID
SOUTHEAST ¼ OF THE NORTHEAST ¼ OF SECTION 26; THENCE CONTINUING EAST ALONG THE
NORTH LINE OF THE SOUTHWEST ¼ OF THE NORTHWEST ¼ AND ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF
THE SOUTHEAST ¼ OF THE NORTHWEST ¼ AND ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF THE SOUTHWEST ¼
OF THE NORTHEAST ¼ AND ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF THE SOUTHEAST ¼ OF THE NORTHEAST
¼ ALL IN SAID SECTION 25 TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF SAID SOUTHEAST ¼ OF THE
NORTHEAST ¼ OF SECTION 25; THENCE CONTINUING WEST ON THE NORTH LINE OF THE
SOUTHWEST ¼ OF THE NORTHWEST ¼ AND ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF THE SOUTHEAST ¼ OF
THE NORTHWEST ¼ AND ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF THE SOUTHWEST ¼ OF THE NORTHEAST ¼
AND ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF THE SOUTHEAST ¼ OF THE NORTHEAST ¼ ALL IN SAID
SECTION 30 TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF SAID SOUTHEAST ¼ OF THE NORTHEAST ¼ OF
SECTION 30; THENCE SOUTH ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID SOUTHEAST ¼ OF THE
NORTHEAST ¼ TO THE EAST ¼ CORNER OF SAID SECTION 30; THENCE SOUTH ALONG THE
EAST LINE OF THE SOUTHEAST ¼ OF SAID SECTION 30 TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING.
   2.   District Connection Fees. Connection fees are hereby established and
shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the South Side Sanitary Sewer
Connection Fee District, pursuant to Ordinance No. 5-99 #2 (33), at the time of
application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as follows:
      A.   From the effective date of Ordinance No. 7-17-06 #2 (223) through
June 30, 2007, a connection fee of $3,000.00 per acre of property served by the
sewer facilities shall be imposed. Thereafter, the per-acre connection fee
shall be annually adjusted as of July 1 of each year according to the following
schedule:
EFFECTIVE DATE CONNECTION FEE ($/ACRE)
EFFECTIVE DATE              CONNECTION FEE ($/ACRE)
July 1, 2007                $3,100.00
July 1, 2008                $3,200.00
July 1, 2009                $3,300.00
July 1, 2010                $,3,400.00
July 1, 2011                $3,500.00
July 1, 2012                $3,600.00
July 1, 2013                $3,700.00
July 1, 2014                $3,800.00
July 1, 2015 and thereafter $3,900.00
 
      B.   The above-established connection fee schedule shall also apply to
any properties outside the South Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
which use or derive benefit from any of the sewer facilities constructed for
the South Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. The appropriate fee
shall be imposed at the time of determination that a benefit is derived by the
property.
      C.   The above-established connection fee schedule shall not apply to any
properties within the South Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District which
do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities constructed for the
South Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District.
      D.   The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer
facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recording, or issuance of a building
or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
      E.   Any single-family residence existing or under construction upon the
effective date of Ordinance No. 7-17-06 #2 (223) located upon a parcel in
excess of one acre may apply for connection upon annexation to the City,
subdivision of said parcel into a single residence parcel and an outlot, and
payment of a single-acre connection fee. Any future development of said parcel
shall require a revised application for connection and payment of the
connection fee as established in the above fee schedule.
      F.   The owner of any parcel being used as a public or nonprofit
recreational or park facility upon the effective date of Ordinance No. 7-17-06
#2 (223) may apply for connection upon annexation to the City and payment of a
single-acre connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall require
a revised application for connection and payment of the connection fee as
established in the above fee schedule.
   3.   Effect of Schedule. The above-established connection fee schedule shall
remain in force and effect until such time that the Council adopts an ordinance
to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years for the
South Side Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. Nothing herein is intended
to restrict the Council from appropriate adjustment of the connection fee
schedule to reflect future construction costs
99.07   NORTH I-80 SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT.
   1.   The North I-80 Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District is hereby
established, consisting of a tract of land in Sections 2, 3, 10, 11, and 12,
Township 79 North, Range 23 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County,
Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
   A PART OF SECTIONS 2, 3, 10, 11 AND 12 IN TOWNSHIP 79 NORTH, RANGE 23 WEST
OF THE 5TH P.M., POLK COUNTY, IOWA AND MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS:
   THE WEST 1/2 OF THE WEST 1/2 OF THE SOUTHWEST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 2;
   AND
   THE SOUTH 1/2 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF THE SOUTHWEST 1/4 OF THE SOUTHWEST 1/
4 OF SAID SECTION 2;
   AND
   THE SOUTH 1/2 OF THE SOUTHWEST 1/4 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF THE SOUTHWEST 1/
4 OF SAID SECTION 2;
   AND
   THE EAST 1/2 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 3;
   AND
   THE EAST 1/2 OF THE SOUTHWEST 1/4 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 3;
   AND
   THAT PART OF SAID SECTION 10 LYING NORTH OF INTERSTATE HIGHWAY 80;
   AND
   THE NORTHWEST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 11;
   AND
   THE NORTHWEST 1/4 OF THE SOUTHWEST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 11 LYING NORTH OF
INTERSTATE HIGHWAY 80
   AND
   THE WEST 1/2 OF THE NORTHEAST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 11 LYING NORTH OF A LINE
BEGINNING AT THE CENTER OF SAID SECTION 11; THENCE EAST 107.1 FEET; THENCE
NORTHEASTERLY TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF THE SOUTHWEST 1/4 OF THE NORTHEAST 1/
4 THEREOF;
   AND
   THE NORTHEAST 1/4 OF THE NORTHEAST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 11 LYING NORTH AND
WEST OF HIGHWAY 65;
   AND
   THE NORTHWEST 1/4 OF THE NORTHWEST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 12 LYING NORTH AND
WEST OF HIGHWAY 65.
   2.   District Connection Fees. Connection fees are hereby established and
shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the North I-80 Sanitary Sewer
Connection Fee District, pursuant to Ordinance No. 5-99 #2(33), at the time of
application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as follows:
      A.   From the effective date of Ordinance No. 03-16-2009 #1 (300) through
June 30, 2009, a connection fee of $2,500.00 per acre of property served by the
sewer facilities shall be imposed. Thereafter, the per-acre connection fee
shall be annually adjusted as of July 1 of each year according to the following
schedule:
EFFECTIVE DATE CONNECTION FEE ($/ACRE)
EFFECTIVE DATE              CONNECTION FEE ($/ACRE)
July 1, 2009                $2,600.00
July 1, 2010                $2,700.00
July 1, 2011                $2,800.00
July 1, 2012                $2,900.00
July 1, 2013                $3,000.00
July 1, 2014                $3,100.00
July 1, 2015                $3,200.00
July 1, 2016                $3,300.00
July 1, 2017 and thereafter $3,400.00
 
      B.   The above-established connection fee schedule shall also apply to
any properties outside the North I-80 Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
which use or derive benefit from any of the sewer facilities constructed for
the North I-80 Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. The appropriate fee
shall be imposed at the time of determination that a benefit is derived by the
property.
      C.   The above-established connection fee schedule shall not apply to any
properties within the North I-80 Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District which
do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities constructed for the
North I-80 Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District.
      D.   The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer
facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recording, or issuance of a building
or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
      E.   Any single-family residence existing or under construction upon the
effective date of Ordinance No. 03-16-2009 #1 (300) located upon a parcel in
excess of one acre may apply for connection upon annexation to the City,
subdivision of said parcel into a single residence parcel and an outlot, and
payment of a single-acre connection fee. Any future development of said parcel
shall require a revised application for connection and payment of the
connection fee as established in the above fee schedule.
      F.   The owner of any parcel being used as a public or nonprofit
recreational or park facility upon the effective date of Ordinance No. 03-16-
2009 #1 (300) may apply for connection upon annexation to the City and payment
of a single-acre connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall
require a revised application for connection and payment of the connection fee
as established in the above fee schedule.
   3.   Effect of Schedule. The above-established connection fee schedule shall
remain in force and effect until such time that the Council adopts an ordinance
to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years for the
North I-80 Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. Nothing herein is intended
to restrict the Council from appropriate adjustment of the connection fee
schedule to reflect future construction costs.
99.08   MUD CREEK SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT #1.
   1.   The Mud Creek Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District #1 is hereby
established, consisting of a tract of land more particularly described as
follows,
   A PART OF SECTIONS 4,5,7,8,9,16,17,18,19,20,21,28,29, TOWNSHIP 79 NORTH,
RANGE 22 WEST OF THE 5TH P.M., POLK COUNTY, IOWA, LYING SOUTH OF THE SOUTH
RIGHT OF WAY LINE OF US HIGHWAY 6 AND WEST OF THE CENTERLINE OF NE 96TH STREET
AND NORTH OF THE CENTERLINE OF NE 27TH AVE. AND EAST OF THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED
LINE:
   BEGINNING AT THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF FRANZEN PLAT 1, AN OFFICIAL PLAT;
THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID FRANZEN PLAT 1 TO THE NORTHWEST
CORNER OF STREET LOT A OF FRANZEN PLAT 5, AN OFFICIAL PLAT; THENCE EASTERLY
ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF SAID STREET LOT A TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF SAID
STREET LOT A; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID FRANZEN PLAT 5 TO
THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF LOT D, FRANZEN PLAT 4, AN OFFICIAL PLAT; THENCE
SOUTHERLY ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID FRANZEN PLAT 4 TO THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF
SAID LOT D; THENCE WESTERLY ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID FRANZEN PLAT 4,
FRANZEN PLAT 2, AN OFFICIAL PLAT, AND SAID FRANZEN PLAT 1 TO THE NORTHWEST
CORNER OF PARCEL “D” AS FILED IN BOOK 7213, PAGE 957 OF THE POLK COUNTY
RECORDER’S OFFICE; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG THE WEST LINE OF SAID PARCEL “D” TO
THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF PARCEL “F” AS FILED IN BOOK 7213, PAGE 957 OF THE POLK
COUNTY RECORDER’S OFFICE; THENCE WESTERLY ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF SAID PARCEL
“F” TO THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF SAID PARCEL “F”; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG SAID
WEST LINE OF PARCEL “F’” TO THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF THE NORTH 70.00 FEET OF
PARCEL “B” AS FILED IN BOOK 7185, PAGE 969 OF THE POLK COUNTY RECORDER’S
OFFICE; THENCE WESTERLY ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID NORTH 70.00 FEET OF PARCEL
“B” TO THE WEST LINE OF SAID SECTION 7; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG SAID WEST LINE
OF SECTION 7 AND THE WEST LINE OF SAID SECTION 18 TO THE INTERSECTION OF SAID
WEST LINE OF SECTION 18 AND THE WESTERLY EXTENSION OF THE NORTH LINE OF PARCEL
“M” AS FILED IN BOOK 8289, PAGE 641 OF THE POLK COUNTY RECORDER’S OFFICE;
THENCE EASTERLY ALONG SAID WESTERLY EXTENSION OF SAID NORTH LINE AND THE NORTH
LINE OF SAID PARCEL “M” TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF SAID PARCEL “M”; THENCE
SOUTHERLY ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID PARCEL “M” AND THE EAST LINE OF PARCEL
“E”, AS FILED IN BOOK 7467, PAGE 387 OF THE POLK COUNTY RECORDER’S OFFICE TO
THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF SAID PARCEL “E”; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG THE EASTERLY
EXTENSION OF THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID PARCEL “E” TO THE WEST LINE OF PARCEL “O”,
AS FILED IN BOOK 10797, PAGE 712 OF THE POLK COUNTY RECORDER’S OFFICE; THENCE
SOUTHERLY ALONG SAID WEST LINE AND THE EXTENSION OF SAID WEST LINE TO THE SOUTH
RIGHT OF WAY LINE OF THE IOWA INTERSTATE RAILROAD; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG SAID
SOUTH RIGHT OF WAY LINE TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF FAIRLANE ADDITION, AN
OFFICIAL PLAT; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID FAIRLANE ADDITION
TO THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF SAID FAIRLANE ADDITION BEING THE CENTER OF SAID
SECTION 18; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SAID
SECTION 18 TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF THE WEST 1/2 OF SAID SOUTHEAST 1/4;
THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID WEST 1/2 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 TO
THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF SAID WEST 1/2 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4; THENCE EASTERLY
ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF THE EAST 1/2 OF SAID SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 18
TO THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF SAID EAST 1/2 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4; THENCE SOUTHERLY
ALONG THE EAST LINE OF THE NORTHEAST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 19 TO THE EAST 1/
4 CORNER OF SAID SECTION 19; THENCE WESTERLY ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF THE EAST
1/2 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 19 TO THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF SAID
EAST 1/2 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG THE WEST LINE OF SAID
EAST 1/2 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 TO THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF THE NORTHEAST 1/4 OF
SAID SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SECTION 19; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID
NORTHEAST 1/4 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 TO THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF SAID NORTHEAST 1/
4 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG THE EAST OF SAID SECTION 19 AND
SECTION 30 TO THE CENTERLINE OF NE 27TH AVE. BEING THE POINT OF TERMINUS.
   EXCEPT
   THE EAST 1/2 OF SAID SECTION 9 AND THE NORTHEAST 1/4 OF THE NORTHWEST 1/4 OF
SAID SECTION 9 AND THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 4 LYING SOUTH OF SAID US
HIGHWAY 6 AND THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF THE SOUTHWEST 1/4 OF SAID SECTION 4 LYING
SOUTH OF SAID US HIGHWAY 6.
   2.   District Connection Fees. Connection fees are hereby established and
shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the Mud Creek Sanitary Sewer
Connection Fee District #1, pursuant to Ordinance No. 5-99 #2(33), at the time
of application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as
follows:
      A.   From the effective date of this ordinance through June 30, 2022, a
connection fee of $4,300.00 per acre of property served by the sewer facilities
shall be imposed. Thereafter, the per-acre connection fee shall be annually
adjusted as of July 1 of each year according to the following schedule:
EFFECTIVE DATE CONNECTION FEE ($/ACRE)
EFFECTIVE DATE              CONNECTION FEE ($/ACRE)
July 1, 2022                $4,430.00
July 1, 2023                $4,560.00
July 1, 2024                $4,700.00
July 1, 2025                $4,840.00
July 1, 2026                $4,990.00
July 1, 2027                $5,140.00
July 1, 2028                $5,290.00
July 1, 2029                $5,450.00
July 1, 2030 and thereafter $5,610.00
 
      B.   The above-established connection fee schedule shall also apply to
any properties outside the Mud Creek Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District #1
which use or derive benefit from any of the sewer facilities constructed for
the Mud Creek Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District #1. The appropriate fee
shall be imposed at the time of determination that a benefit is derived by the
property.
      C.   The above-established connection fee schedule shall not apply to any
properties within the Mud Creek Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District #1 which
do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities constructed for the Mud
Creek Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District #1.
      D.   The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer
facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recording, or issuance of a building
or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
      E.   Any single-family residence existing or under construction upon the
effective date of this ordinance located upon a parcel in excess of one acre
may apply for connection upon annexation to the City, subdivision of said
parcel into a single residence parcel and an outlot, and payment of a single-
acre connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall require a
revised application for connection and payment of the connection fee as
established in the above fee schedule.
      F.   The owner of any parcel being used as a public or nonprofit
recreational or park facility upon the effective date of this ordinance may
apply for connection upon annexation to the City and payment of a single-acre
connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall require a revised
application for connection and payment of the connection fee as established in
the above fee schedule.
   3.   Effect of Schedule. The above-established connection fee schedule shall
remain in force and effect until such time that the Council adopts an ordinance
to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years for the Mud
Creek Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District #1. Nothing herein is intended to
restrict the Council from appropriate adjustment of the connection fee schedule
to reflect future construction costs.
99.09   MUCHIKINOCK CREEK SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT #1.
   1.   The Muchikinock Creek Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District #1 is
hereby established, consisting of a tract of land more particularly described
as follows:
   THE NORTH 1/2 AND THE NORTH 1/2 OF THE SOUTH 1/2 OF SECTION 9, TOWNSHIP 79
NORTH, RANGE 23 WEST OF THE 5TH P.M.
   AND
   THE NORTH 1/2 AND THE NORTH 1/2 OF THE SOUTH 1/2 OF SECTION 8, TOWNSHIP 79
NORTH, RANGE 23 WEST OF THE 5TH P.M. LYING EAST OF THE CENTERLINE OF NE BERWICK
DRIVE.
   AND
   LOTS 1 THROUGH 19, BERWICK, AN OFFICIAL PLAT.
   AND
   LOTS 7 AND 8, BERWICK PLACE, AN OFFICIAL PLAT.
   AND
   LOTS 5 AND 6, BAUER HEIGHTS PLAT 3, AN OFFICIAL PLAT
   AND
   LOT 2 OF THE OFFICIAL PLAT OF THE NORTH 1/2 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 AND THE
SOUTH 1/2 OF THE NORTHEAST 1/4 OF SECTION 8, TOWNSHIP 79 NORTH, RANGE 23 WEST
OF THE 5TH P.M.
   AND
   THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SECTION 5, TOWNSHIP 79 NORTH, RANGE 23 WEST OF THE 5TH
P.M.
   AND
   THE NORTHEAST FRACTIONAL 1/4 LYING SOUTHEASTERLY OF THE CENTERLINE OF NE
BERWICK DRIVE EXCEPT LOTS 1 THROUGH 6 BER ­ OAK ACRES, AN OFFICIAL PLAT AND
EXCEPT LOT 1 BER - OAK ACRES PLAT 2, AN OFFICIAL PLAT AND EXCEPT THE EAST 266
FEET OF THE NORTH 56.87 ACRES OF THE NORTHEAST FRACTIONAL 1/4 AND EXCEPT THE
EAST 34.43 ACRES OF THE NORTH 56.87 ACRES SOUTHEAST OF NE BERWICK DRIVE OF THE
NORTHEAST FRACTIONAL 1/4 ALL BEING A PART OF SECTION 5, TOWNSHIP 79 NORTH,
RANGE 23 WEST OF THE 5TH P.M.
   AND
   ALL OF SECTION 4, TOWNSHIP 79 NORTH, RANGE 23 WEST OF THE 5TH P.M.
   AND
   THE NORTH 1/2 AND THE SOUTHWEST 1/4 OF SECTION 3, TOWNSHIP 79 NORTH, RANGE
23 WEST OF THE 5TH P.M.
   AND
   THE NORTHWEST 1/4 AND THE SOUTH 1/2 OF THE NORTHEAST 1/4 AND THE NORTH 1/
2 OF THE SOUTH 1/2 OF SECTION 2, TOWNSHIP 79 NORTH, RANGE 23 WEST OF THE 5TH
P.M.
   AND
   ALL OF SECTIONS 33 AND 34, TOWNSHIP 80 NORTH, RANGE 23 WEST OF THE 5TH P.M.
   AND
   THE WEST 1/2 OF SECTION 35, TOWNSHIP 80 NORTH, RANGE 23 WEST OF THE 5THP.M.
   AND
   THE WEST 616.15 FEET OF THE NORTH 793.86 FEET OF THE NORTHWEST 1/4 OF THE
NORTHEAST 1/4 OF SECTION 35, TOWNSHIP 80 NORTH, RANGE 23 WEST OF THE 5TH P.M.
   2.   District Connection Fees. Connection fees are hereby established and
shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the Muchikinock Creek
Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District #1, pursuant to Ordinance No. 5-99 #2
(33), at the time of application to connect their properties to said sewer
facilities, as follows:
      A.   From the effective date of this ordinance through June 30, 2023, a
connection fee of $5,100.00 per acre of property served by the sewer facilities
shall be imposed. Thereafter, the per-acre connection fee shall be annually
adjusted as of July 1 of each year according to the following schedule:
EFFECTIVE DATE CONNECTION FEE ($/ACRE)
EFFECTIVE DATE              CONNECTION FEE ($/ACRE)
July 1, 2023                $5,100.00
July 1, 2024                $5,250.00
July 1, 2025                $5,410.00
July 1, 2026                $5,570.00
July 1, 2027                $5,740.00
July 1, 2028                $5,910.00
July 1, 2029                $6,090.00
July 1, 2030                $6,270.00
July 1, 2031 and thereafter $6,460.00
 
      B.   The above-established connection fee schedule shall also apply to
any properties outside the Muchikinock Creek Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee
District #1 which use or derive benefit from any of the sewer facilities
constructed for the Muchikinock Creek Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
#1. The appropriate fee shall be imposed at the time of determination that a
benefit is derived by the property.
      C.   The above-established connection fee schedule shall not apply to any
properties within the Muchikinock Creek Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
#1 which do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities constructed for
the Muchikinock Creek Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District #1.
      D.   The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer
facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recording, or issuance of a building
or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
      E.   Any single-family residence existing or under construction upon the
effective date of this ordinance located upon a parcel in excess of one acre
may apply for connection upon annexation to the City, subdivision of said
parcel into a single residence parcel and an outlot, and payment of a single-
acre connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall require a
revised application for connection and payment of the connection fee as
established in the above fee schedule.
      F.   The owner of any parcel being used as a public or nonprofit
recreational or park facility upon the effective date of this ordinance may
apply for connection upon annexation to the City and payment of a single-acre
connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall require a revised
application for connection and payment of the connection fee as established in
the above fee schedule.
   3.   Effect of Schedule. The above-established connection fee schedule shall
remain in force and effect until such time that the Council adopts an ordinance
to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years for the
Muchikinock Creek Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District #1. Nothing herein is
intended to restrict the Council from appropriate adjustment of the connection
fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
CHAPTER 100
REGULATION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER, COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER, AND HAULED WASTE
 
EDITOR’S NOTE
The Regulation of Industrial Wastewater, Commercial Wastewater and Hauled
Waste, adopted August 15, 2022, by Ordinance_No._8-15-2022_#01_(607), and
amendments thereto, contained in a separate volume, are a part of this Code of
Ordinances and are in full force and effect.
 
CHAPTER 101
FOOTING DRAIN DISCONNECTION PROGRAM
 
101.01 Purpose                    101.06 Non-Compliance Fee for Footing Drain
                                  Connection
101.02 Applicability              101.07 Rebuttable Presumption
101.03 Notification Procedure     101.08 Refund of Non-Compliance Fee
101.04 Removal of Footing Drain   101.09 Inspection and Notice
Connections Required
101.05 Approved Removal Procedure  
 
101.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to eliminate footing drain connections to the
sanitary sewer system by the establishment of procedures of notification and
procedures of removal for sanitary sewer system customers to disconnect the
footing drain from the sanitary sewer system within a specified period of time,
and to establish monthly surcharge payments for sanitary sewer system customers
with previous notification that fail to disconnect footing drains within a
specified period of time following the notification.
101.02   APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall be applicable to all properties located within the
corporate boundaries of the City that are not currently connected to a public
storm sewer system or public footing drain collection system.
101.03   NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE.
   The Community Services Director shall notify, by certified mail or other
method as approved by the Council, sanitary sewer system customers that
directly or indirectly connect footing drains, foundation drains, roof
downspouts, sump pumps, sump pits, or similar systems or devices to the
sanitary sewer system. The notification shall mandate that disconnection from
the sanitary sewer system is required within the specified period of time and
installation of a sump pump pit, sump pump, discharge line, and connection to a
public storm sewer system or public footing drain collection system is
required.
101.04   REMOVAL OF FOOTING DRAIN CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.
   All direct or indirect connections of a footing drain, foundation drain,
roof downspouts, sump pump, sump pit, or similar system or device intended to
collect and convey groundwater along, adjacent to, beside or under the footing,
foundation, or basement of any building shall be disconnected from the sanitary
sewer system within 180 days after the notification by the Community Services
Director. Disconnection shall mean removal of any direct or indirect connection
to the sanitary sewer system, including direct connections to the sanitary
sewer service, connections to a sanitary sewer floor drain or similar plumbing
fixture that would allow footing drain flow to enter the sanitary sewer system.
101.05   APPROVED REMOVAL PROCEDURE.
   The approved removal procedure for a direct or indirect footing drain
connection to the sanitary sewer system under this chapter must fully comply
with the following:
   1.   Prior Inspection. Prior to any work on the removal or disconnection of
the footing drain connection, the existing connection must be inspected by the
City. The sanitary sewer system customer shall be responsible to schedule the
inspection.
   2.   Approved System. An approved system for the removal of footing drain
connections must be used. The approved system shall consist of a sump pump and
sump pit with a discharge to an approved storm sewer connection, an approved
footing drain collection connection, or an approved yard location.
   3.   Plugging of Existing Connection. Any direct or indirect connection
between the footing drain and the sanitary sewer system of the building shall
be permanently plugged.
   4.   Construction Inspection. Upon installation of the sump pump pit, sump
pump, and plumbing connections, and prior to installation of the concrete
floor, the sanitary sewer customer shall be responsible to schedule a City
inspection of the completed work.
   5.   Floor Drain Connection Prohibited. The new system shall be installed in
such a manner that direct or indirect flow from the footing drain to a floor
drain shall not be possible.
   6.   Post-Construction Inspection. The installation of the sump pump and
associated facilities work shall be inspected by the City. The sanitary sewer
customer shall be responsible to schedule the post-construction inspection.
101.06   NON-COMPLIANCE FEE FOR FOOTING DRAIN CONNECTION.
   Any sanitary sewer customer with a direct or indirect footing drain
connection to the sanitary sewer system, being properly notified as described
under Section
101.03, and remaining in place 180 days after said notification, shall be
subject to a monthly surcharge of $100.00 for potential un-metered flow
contributed to the sanitary sewer system. The payment will be in addition to
all other sanitary sewer user charges.
101.07   REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION.
   There is a presumption that all sanitary sewer customers receiving
notification have a footing drain connection to the sanitary sewer system as
prohibited under this chapter. Effective 180 days after notification that
properties that have not completed an approved removal procedure or other
equivalent removal procedure inspected and documented by the City shall be
presumed to have a footing drain connection for purposes of this chapter.
101.08   REFUND OF NON-COMPLIANCE FEE.
   Any property owner subject to the non-compliance fee under this chapter may
request the City to inspect the sanitary sewer service. If the City determines
there was no direct or indirect footing drain connection as of the date of non-
compliance, the City shall refund all un-metered flow payments collected. In
the event the City determines a footing drain disconnection was completed and
the footing drain connection no longer exists, the City shall discontinue the
imposition of the un-metered flow charges for that sanitary sewer customer and
shall refund previous non-compliance fee payments. Such refund shall be limited
to the number of monthly payments made or three months, whichever is smaller.
101.09   INSPECTION AND NOTICE.
   The City may conduct periodic inspections of properties to confirm there are
no direct or indirect connections of the footing drain to the sanitary sewer
system. If during an inspection the City determines there is a direct or
indirect connection as a result of a modification of the system to allow for a
direct or indirect connection, failure to maintain or replace a failed sump
pump that would allow an indirect or direct connection to the sanitary sewer
system, or such other cause as may allow a direct or indirect connection, the
City shall provide the property owner a written notice. The property owner
shall be provided 30 days to cure the defect and to arrange for a re-inspection
by the City. If at the end of 30 days the direct or indirect connection has not
been inspected and determined to have been removed, the property shall be
subject to the un-metered flow charge provisions under this chapter. The
payment shall continue until such time as the City determines, through
inspection, the direct or indirect footing drain connection no longer exists.
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
 
105.01 Purpose                        105.08 Off-Premises Disposal of Yard
                                      Waste
105.02 Definitions                    105.09 Separation and Disposal of Banned
                                      Substances
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required     105.10 Littering Prohibited
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard         105.11 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.05 Open Burning Restricted        105.12 Waste Storage Containers
105.06 Separation of Yard Waste       105.13 Prohibited Practices
Required
105.07 On-Premises Composting of Yard 105.14 Sanitary Disposal Project
Waste                                 Designated
 
105.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Solid
Waste Control is to provide for the sanitary storage, collection and disposal
of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens of the City from such
hazards to their health, safety, and welfare as may result from the
uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.
105.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Banned substance” means any waste prohibited by the Code of Iowa from
being disposed of in sanitary landfills, including yard waste, lead acid
batteries, oil, and medical waste.
   2.   “Bundle” means a stack of brush or tree branches bound together.
   3.   “Commercial establishment” means and includes all businesses and
operations in the City which are not defined as residences, including schools,
churches, and apartment buildings.
   4.   “Composting” means a controlled microbial degradation of organic waste
to produce a relatively nuisance-free product of potential value as a soil
conditioner.
   5.   “Container” means a reusable and clearly marked receptacle constructed
of plastic or metal materials.
   6.   “Degradable bags” are any untreated bags or biodegradable plastic bags
acceptable to the composting station or facility and used by the licensed
hauler.
   7.   “Director” means the director of the State Department of Natural
Resources
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.101(2)(b))
   8.   “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit, or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361(2))
   9.   “Dumpsters” means large metal containers with lids.
   10.   “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a
structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used,
or are intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
   11.   “Garbage” means all waste generated by normal residential and
commercial day-to-day operations, and fitting in an approved bag, container, or
properly bundled. The following items are specifically excluded from the
garbage classification:
      A.   Furniture and appliances, including box springs and mattresses;
      B.   Dead animals;
      C.   Waste generated by kennel operations;
      D.   Vehicle parts, oil, grease;
      E.   Construction debris, paint;
      F.   Trees, dirt, rubble, yard waste;
      G.   Ammunition and other hazardous materials.
   12.   “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage.
The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds,
leaves, grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings.
(IAC, 567-20.2(455B))
   13.   “Lead acid batteries” means those batteries which contain lead plates
and acid.
   14.   “Licensed hauler” or “collector” means any person with a valid license
obtained from the City and who is engaged in the business, process or any part
thereof of storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of solid waste.
   15.   “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials,
or debris not exceeding 10 pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume. Litter
includes, but is not limited, to empty beverage containers, cigarette butts,
food waste packaging, other food or candy wrappers, handbills, empty cartons,
or boxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361(2))
   16.   “Medical waste” means that waste determined to be infectious by the
Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
   17.   “Oil” means any petroleum based or synthetic oil.
   18.   “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person
residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating, or transacting business in
any premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities,
liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
   19.   “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including, but
not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street
cleanings, market and industrial solid waste, and sewage treatment waste in dry
or semisolid form.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   20.   “Residence” means a single-family dwelling and any multiple-family
dwelling up to and including four separate quarters. Garden type apartments and
row type housing units shall be considered residential premises regardless of
the total number of such apartments or units which may be included in a given
housing development. Single-family attached dwelling units, having individual
ownership, are deemed to be residences.
   21.   “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a
result of residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on
the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires,
trade wastes, and any locally recyclable goods or plastics.
(IAC, 567-20.2(455B))
   22.   “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible
and non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   23.   “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it
does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   24.   “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances
(including all real and personal property connected with such facilities) that
are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved,
extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid
waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and
which are approved by the Director of the State Department of Natural
Resources. “Sanitary disposal project” does not include a pyrolysis or
gasification facility as defined in Section 455B.301 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
   25.   “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar
discarded solid or semisolid materials, including, but not limited to, such
materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic
activities. Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of
the Code of Iowa. Solid waste does not include any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
      A.   Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
      B.   Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa,
except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes
have been adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
      C.   Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
      D.   Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable
State or federal standards.
      E.   Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing
process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as a
discarded material.
      F.   Material that is legitimately recycled pursuant to Section 455D.4A
of the Code of Iowa.
      G.   Post-use polymers or recoverable feedstocks that are any of the
following:
         (1)   Processed at a pyrolysis or gasification facility.
         (2)   Held at a pyrolysis or gasification facility prior to processing
to ensure production is not interrupted.
   26.   “Yard waste” means debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden
waste, prunings, weeds, brush, and trees which are produced as part of yard and
garden development and maintenance. Yard waste does not include tree stumps or
any treated lumber such as landscape timbers or railroad ties.
105.03   SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all
refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a nuisance. Any
such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than 30 days
shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such nuisances in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in
district court.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)
105.04   HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.
   It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises,
improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste that
constitute a health, sanitation, or fire hazard.
105.05   OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED.
   No person shall allow, cause, or permit open burning of combustible
materials where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air
without passing through a chimney or stack, except as provided in Chapter 161.
105.06   SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED.
   All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other
solid waste accumulated on the premises and shall be composted on the premises
or placed in authorized bags, containers, or bundles for collection. All such
bags or containers to be collected shall be clearly marked or indicated that
they are yard waste.
105.07   ON-PREMISES COMPOSTING OF YARD WASTE.
   All yard waste material to be composted on the premises on which it is
generated or collected shall be done so in a manner so as not to create a
nuisance or odor to a neighboring residence or business. Yard waste generated,
composted, and disposed of on the same premises where it originated does not
require a permit.
105.08   OFF-PREMISES DISPOSAL OF YARD WASTE.
   Yard waste not composted and intended only for off-premises disposal shall
be collected from residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional
premises. All yard waste materials shall be placed in either the appropriately
marked containers or specially marked degradable bags or tied bundles. All
disposal of yard waste materials shall be done in accordance with the
additional policies and guidelines established by the composting station or
authority.
105.09   SEPARATION AND DISPOSAL OF BANNED SUBSTANCES.
   1.   All banned substances shall be separated by the owner or occupant from
all other solid waste accumulated on the premises.
   2.   All solid waste picked up by any person or licensed hauler, within the
limits of the City, for disposal in the Des Moines Metro Landfill shall not
contain banned substances.
   3.   If banned substances have not been separated from other solid waste
prior to collection and transportation, the hauler of the waste shall be
responsible for the separation and disposal. Banned waste shall be disposed of
at the appropriate collection site or City approved facility and all other
solid waste disposed of at the landfill.
105.10   LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that
nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection
and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such
purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor
vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to
which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.11   TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for
collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall be transported
and disposed of as prescribed by the Director. As used in this section, “toxic
and hazardous waste” means waste materials, including, but not limited to,
poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological waste, flammable
or explosive materials, and similar harmful waste which requires special
handling and which must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve the
environment and protect the public health and safety.
(567 IAC 100.2)
(567 IAC 102.14(2) and 400 IAC 27.14(2))
105.12   WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS.
   Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or renting any premises,
dwelling unit, or any place where refuse accumulates shall provide and at all
times maintain in good order and repair portable containers for refuse in
accordance with the following:
   1.   Container Specifications. Waste storage containers shall comply with
the following specifications:
      A.   Residential. Residential waste containers, whether they are
reusable, portable containers or heavy-duty disposable garbage bags, shall be
of not less than 20 gallons or more than 35 gallons in nominal capacity, and
shall be leak-proof and waterproof. The total weight of any container and
contents shall not exceed 75 pounds. Disposable containers shall be kept
securely fastened and shall be of sufficient strength to maintain integrity
when lifted, and reusable containers shall be in conformity with the following:
         (1)   Be fitted with a fly-tight lid that shall be kept in place
except when depositing or removing the contents of the container.
         (2)   Have handles, bails, or other suitable lifting devices or
features.
         (3)   Be of a type originally manufactured for the storage of
residential waste with tapered sides for easy emptying.
         (4)   Be of lightweight and sturdy construction.
      B.   Galvanized metal containers, rubber or fiberglass containers, and
plastic containers that do not become brittle in cold weather may be used.
      C.   Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or
renting any commercial premises where an excessive amount of refuse accumulates
and where its storage in portable containers as required above is impractical,
shall maintain metal bulk storage containers approved by the City.
   2.   Storage of Containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be
stored upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall
be stored upon private property, unless the owner has been granted written
permission from the City to use public property for such purposes. The storage
site shall be well drained; fully accessible to collection equipment, public
health personnel, and fire inspection personnel. All owners of residential and
commercial premises shall be responsible for proper storage of all garbage and
yard waste to prevent materials from being blown or scattered around
neighboring yards and streets.
   3.   Location of Containers for Collection. Containers for the storage of
residential solid waste awaiting collection shall be placed at the curb line by
the owner or occupant of the premises served. Containers or other solid waste
placed at the curb line shall not be so placed more than 12 hours in advance of
the regularly scheduled collection day and shall be promptly removed from the
curb line following collection and in no event later than 12 hours following
the day of pickup. In the case of areas which have open ditch roads, placement
shall be along the front property line of the premises adjacent to the
driveway.
   4.   Nonconforming Containers. Solid waste placed in containers which are
not in compliance with the provisions of this section will not be collected.
   5.   Yard Waste. Yard waste placed in the authorized bags, containers, or in
tied bundles shall be placed three to six feet from other garbage or refuse
prior to pick up. No yard waste materials shall be placed out for pickup more
than 48 hours in advance of the regularly scheduled collection day.
   The number of bags, containers, or bundles of waste material placed out for
collection shall be unlimited unless regulated or limited by the hauler of the
waste materials.
105.13   PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   1.   Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste
containers not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of
such containers.
   2.   Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste
collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance
of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the
City, or those of any other authorized waste collection service.
   3.   Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed
for high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid, or gaseous
combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid
residues contain little or no combustible material, as acceptable to the
Environmental Protection Commission.
   4.   Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste which has been placed out
for collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste
collector. Sworn law enforcement officers are exempt from this subsection, as
they are authorized by the City to collect or pick up, or cause to be collected
or picked up, any recyclable materials or solid waste based on Section 808.16
of the Code of Iowa, exception to search warrant requirement, garbage searches.
105.14   SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED.
   The sanitary landfill facilities operated by the Metropolitan Solid Waste
Agency are hereby designated as the official “Public Sanitary Disposal Project”
for the disposal of solid waste produced or originating within the City.
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
 
106.01 Collection Service      106.06 Banned Substances
106.02 Collection Vehicles     106.07 Bulky Rubbish
106.03 Loading                 106.08 Right of Entry
106.04 Frequency of Collection 106.09 Collector’s License
106.05 Yard Waste              106.10 Violations
106.01   COLLECTION SERVICE.
   The collection of solid waste within the City shall be only by collectors
licensed by the City. Sworn law enforcement officers are exempt from this
subsection, as they are authorized by the City to collect or pick up, or cause
to be collected or picked up, any recyclable materials or solid waste based on
Section 808.16 of the Code of Iowa, exception to search warrant requirement,
garbage searches.
106.02   COLLECTION VEHICLES.
   Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage
and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall be
leakproof, durable, and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned
to prevent nuisances, pollution, or insect breeding and shall be maintained in
good repair. Collection vehicles, whether commercial or private, containing
refuse, solid waste, or garbage shall not be parked in or within 500 feet of a
residential area for a period exceeding two hours except in cases of mechanical
breakdown or other emergency. Empty collection vehicles, whether commercial or
private, shall not be parked in or within 100 feet of a residential area for a
period exceeding two hours except in cases of mechanical breakdown or other
emergency.
106.03   LOADING.
   Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any
solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will
not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or
loss of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up
immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or
container and the area properly cleaned.
106.04   FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
   All solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at least once
each week and from commercial, industrial, and institutional premises as
frequently as may be necessary, but not less than once each week. Yard waste
materials shall be scheduled for pickup at least once per week between April 1
and December 1.
106.05   YARD WASTE.
   All licensed haulers shall provide the City with a description of the method
they intend to use to separately collect and haul yard waste, and shall provide
an annual written report accounting for the amount of yard waste collected and
delivered for composting to the County composting facility.
106.06   BANNED SUBSTANCES.
   Licensed haulers shall keep an accurate accounting and submit an annual
written report to the City detailing the amount of banned substances which have
been collected and delivered during each month of the reporting year.
106.07   BULKY RUBBISH.
   Bulky rubbish which is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal
manner of other solid waste may be collected by the collector upon request in
accordance with procedures therefore established by the Council.
106.08   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private property
for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this
chapter; however, solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or
other residential buildings.
106.09   COLLECTOR’S LICENSE.
   No person, with the exception of sworn law enforcement officers, shall
engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of
solid waste or yard waste within the City without first obtaining from the City
an annual license in accordance with the following:
   1.   Application. Application for a solid waste collector’s license shall be
made to the Clerk and provide the following:
      A.   Name and Address. The full name and address of the applicant, and if
a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers thereof.
      B.   Equipment. A complete and accurate listing of the number and type of
collection and transportation equipment to be used.
      C.   Collection Program. A complete description of the frequency, routes,
and method of collection and transportation to be used.
      D.   Disposal. A statement as to the precise location and method of
disposal or processing facilities to be used.
   2.   Insurance. No collector’s license shall be issued until and unless the
applicant therefore, in addition to all other requirements set forth, shall
file and maintain with the City evidence of satisfactory public liability
insurance covering all operations of the applicant pertaining to such business
and all equipment and vehicles to be operated in the conduct thereof in the
amount of $2,000,000.00. Each insurance policy required hereunder shall include
as a part thereof provisions requiring the insurance carrier to notify the City
of the expiration, cancellation, or other termination of coverage with an
absolute notification clause of not less than 10 days prior to the effective
date of such action. Said policies shall name the City as an additional insured
for all policies and proof of such coverage must be sent to the City annually.
   3.   License Fee. A license fee in the amount of $100.00 shall accompany the
application. In the event the requested license is not granted, the fee paid
shall be refunded to the applicant.
   4.   License Issued. If the Council, upon investigation, finds the
application to be in order and determines that the applicant will collect,
transport, process, or dispose of solid waste without hazard to the public
health or damage to the environment and in conformity with law and ordinance,
the requested license shall be issued to be effective for a period of one year
from the date approved.
   5.   License Renewal. An annual license may be renewed simply upon payment
of the required fee, provided the applicant agrees to continue to operate in
substantially the same manner as provided in the original application and
provided the applicant furnishes the Clerk with a current listing of vehicles,
equipment, and facilities in use.
   6.   License Not Transferable. No license authorized by this chapter may be
transferred to another person.
   7.   Owner May Transport. Nothing herein is to be construed so as to prevent
the owner from transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises owned,
occupied, or used by such owner, provided such refuse is disposed of properly
in an approved sanitary disposal project.
   8.   Grading or Excavation Excepted. No license or permit is required for
the removal, hauling, or disposal of earth and rock material from grading or
excavation activities; however, all such materials shall be conveyed in tight
vehicles, trucks, or receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the
material being transported spills upon any public right-of-way.
106.10   VIOLATIONS.
   The City may, in its discretion, enjoin any operations by any person or
licensed hauler who violates any of the provisions of Chapter 105 and Chapter
106. Licensed haulers may also be subject to a revocation of license to haul
waste at the discretion of the City. Every violator of the provisions of these
chapters shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
such violation occurs.
CHAPTER 107
RECYCLING FOR MULTI-FAMILY UNITS
 
107.01 Purpose                        107.07 Applicability of Regulations
107.02 Definitions                    107.08 Collection and Transportation of
                                      Recyclables
107.03 Establishment of Recycling     107.09 Storage of Recyclables
Program
107.04 Reporting Requirements         107.10 Preparation and Placement for
                                      Collection
107.05 Authorization of Collectors    107.11 Collection by Unauthorized Persons
107.06 License Application, Term, and 107.12 Enforcement
Revocation
107.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote recycling by requiring property
owners to provide facilities for the source separation of recyclable materials
at multi-family dwelling unit suites.
107.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Collection” means the transportation of the municipal waste from the
place it is generated and includes all activities up to the time the waste is
delivered to a recycling facility or solid waste disposal site.
   2.   “Collector” means a person authorized by the City to collect,
transport, and dispose of municipal waste or recyclable materials.
   3.   “Commingled” means source separated, nonputrescible recyclable
materials that have been mixed at the source of generation (i.e., placed in the
same container).
   4.   “Designated recyclable material” means those items set forth for
recycling by the Metro Solid Waste Agency.
   5.   “Dwelling unit” means a group of rooms located within a structure and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating for the exclusive use of the
occupants thereof.
   6.   “Multi-family dwelling” means any building under one roof which
contains four or more complete dwelling units.
   7.   “Municipal waste” means any garbage, refuse, industrial, lunchroom, or
office waste, and other material including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or
contained gaseous material resulting from the operation of multi-family
dwellings.
   8.   “Nearby” means adjoining, adjacent, or contiguous.
   9.   “Non-recyclable material” means any material not defined as recyclable
material.
   10.   “Premises” means real property on which any multi-family dwelling unit
or combination of units sharing common driveways are located.
   11.   “Recycling facility” means any facility employing a technology that is
a process that separates or recovers reusable materials that can be sold or
reused by a manufacturer as a substitute for or a supplement to virgin raw
materials.
   12.   “Recycling” means the separation, collection, processing, recovering,
sale, or reuse of materials which would otherwise be disposed of as municipal
waste.
   13.   “Source separation” means the separation of recyclable materials from
the municipal waste stream at the point of waste generation.
107.03   ESTABLISHMENT OF RECYCLING PROGRAM.
   There is hereby established a recycling program for the source separation,
separate collection, and recycling of designated recyclable materials generated
within the City from all multi-family dwellings not presently served by
existing residential recycling collection programs.
   1.   Collection of designated recyclable material pursuant to this chapter
shall be made at least twice per month, or more often as necessary, as
determined by the Public Works Director or other designee of the City
Administrator, and the storage of said designated recyclable materials shall
not result in the creation of a public nuisance.
   2.   All multi-family dwellings which are not presently part of existing
residential recycling collection programs shall be required to provide the
facilities for the source separation of all designated recyclable materials
generated on the premises and shall arrange for the collection of said
materials to be transported to a recycling facility.
   3.   Program development, implementation, and operation shall be the
responsibility of the same entity which contracts for the private collection
and disposal of solid waste on the premises .
   4.   The City reserves the right to amend the list of designated recyclable
materials at any time.
107.04   REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   It is the responsibility of all commercial waste haulers collecting solid
waste or designated recyclable materials generated in the City to submit a
recycling report to the City on an annual basis. Said report shall identify
individual establishments being served and the total weight of recyclable
materials collected as well as identification of the processor of each
recovered recyclable material. All such reports of the previous year shall be
submitted, on forms provided by the City, to the Public Works Director or other
designee of the City Administrator by January 31. The City reserves the right
to require any additional information deemed necessary by the Public Works
Director or other designee of the City Administrator.
107.05   AUTHORIZATION OF COLLECTORS.
   All commercial solid waste haulers or haulers of designated recyclable
material who, as a commercial enterprise, provide the service of collection of
said designated recyclable material or waste to owners or operators of multi-
family dwellings units shall be duly authorized by the Department of Public
Works through the issuance of a license.
107.06   LICENSE APPLICATION, TERM, AND REVOCATION.
   All applications for licensing shall be issued by the Clerk’s office for an
administrative fee of $10.00 in addition to any fees for a hauler’s license.
The license shall be for a one-year period and shall be approved in accordance
with the following:
   1.   Licenses for collection of solid waste or designated recyclable
materials may be issued only to those persons who can provide satisfactory
evidence they are capable of providing the necessary services and can comply
with the provisions and intent of this chapter. The City reserves the right to
disapprove any application for a license for just cause.
   2.   Every applicant, before being granted a designated recyclable materials
collection license or a solid waste license, shall submit proof that all said
materials will be transported in vehicles that are tarped, covered, or closed
and that the materials being transported are not capable of blowing or falling
out or away from the transporting vehicle.
107.07   APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS.
   Any person or persons engaged in the collection, processing, and marketing
of designated recycling materials within the City or who collects solid waste
within the City, and all householders, firms, corporations, co-partnerships,
and any and all persons who may or do produce solid waste or designated
recyclable materials shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
107.08   COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION OF RECYCLABLES.
   1.   Any person transporting designated recyclable materials within the City
shall prevent or remedy any spillage from vehicles or containers used in the
transportation of such designated recyclable materials. Such vehicles or
containers shall not be overfilled and shall be cleaned at sufficiently
frequent intervals to prevent obnoxious odors or unhealthful conditions. Such
vehicles shall also be so constructed, loaded, and driven as to prevent any
portion of the load from falling out upon the streets or highways.
   2.   Collectors shall return the recycling receptacles to the premises from
which they have been removed in a manner so as not to create a public nuisance.
Collectors shall also collect and remove all recyclable materials for which
they are responsible to collect from the premises.
107.09   STORAGE OF RECYCLABLES.
   1.   It is the duty of every owner or entity which contracts for the private
collection and disposal of solid waste from the premises to provide and keep,
at all times, a sufficient number of containers to hold all designated
recyclable materials which may accumulate during the intervals between
collection of such materials by the authorized collector. Containers may be
located on-site or on nearby premises with the permission of the affected
property owner or otherwise in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Owners of multi-family dwelling units shall ensure that each dwelling unit has
access to the containers and that said containers are sufficient to hold all
designated recyclable materials accumulated by the occupants of the dwelling
unit during the intervals between collections.
   2.   All designated recyclable materials accumulated by owners or occupants
of multi-family dwelling units shall be placed in containers which are durable,
water tight, and made of metal or plastic, and marked with the recycling symbol
or other acceptable markings. The containers shall remain on the premises at
all times and shall be kept in a clean condition. The type of bulk container to
be furnished to the collector shall be acceptable to the Public Works Director
or other designee of the City Administrator. Containers shall have lids if
necessary to avert a public nuisance or protect the marketing quality of the
designated recyclable materials. Such lids must remain closed except when
designated recyclable materials are being placed in or removed from the
container. The container shall be clearly marked with both the recyclable
symbol and with the type of materials to be deposited in the container. The
container shall be kept clean and in good repair. The number of such containers
shall be sufficient to handle the volume of recyclables which accumulate
between collection intervals.
   3.   Bulk storage containers for collection at multi-family dwellings using
private collection shall be located on such premises at a place agreed upon by
such owner and occupant of the property and the authorized collector. Such
location shall not interfere with private or public sidewalks, walkways,
driveways, roads, streets, highways, or entrances and exits of private or
public buildings and shall be in compliance with all applicable laws. Bulk
storage containers which are on wheels to facilitate their movement shall
remain blocked at all times while unattended to prevent unintentional movement.
107.10   PREPARATION AND PLACEMENT FOR COLLECTION.
   Designated recyclable materials shall be separated and prepared in a manner
consistent with recycling market requirements and places at a designated area
separate from municipal waste for collection at such time and dates as may be
agreed upon between the collector and the establishment.
107.11   COLLECTION BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS.
   It is a violation of this chapter for any persons unauthorized by the City
to collect or pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up, any recyclable
materials or solid waste. Each such collection in violation hereof shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be subject to a civil
penalty of $100.00 for each offense. Sworn law enforcement officers are exempt
from this chapter, as they are authorized by the City to collect or pick up, or
cause to be collected or picked up, any recyclable materials or solid waste
based on Section 808.16 of the Code of Iowa, exception to search warrant
requirements; garbage searches.
107.12   ENFORCEMENT.
   The staff of the City is hereby authorized and directed to administer and
enforce this chapter. At apartment complexes, the City staff will tie recycling
compliance into their biannual multi-family inspections and include it on the
inspector’s checklist. Enforcement relative to multi-family recycling may also
be handled by more frequent inspections or on a complaint basis. Any person who
fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with any terms or provisions of this
chapter or any regulation or requirement pursuant hereto and authorized hereby,
shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1.00 per month for each dwelling unit
on the premises in violation of this chapter.
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
110.01 Franchise Granted        110.09 Brush and Trees
110.02 Company Rights           110.10 Indemnification
110.03 Location and Relocation  110.11 Franchise Fee
110.04 Excavations              110.12 Fee Refunds
110.05 Vacations                110.13 Binding Franchise
110.06 Relocation Not Required  110.14 Termination
110.07 Relocation Reimbursement 110.15 Severability
110.08 Confidential Information 110.16 Effective
110.01   FRANCHISE GRANTED.
   There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, a State corporation,
hereinafter called “Company,” and to its successors and assigns, the right and
non-exclusive franchise to acquire, construct, reconstruct, replace, erect,
maintain, and operate in the City of Altoona, Iowa, hereinafter called the
“City,” a system for the transmission and distribution of natural gas along,
under, over, and upon the streets, avenues, rights-of-way, alleys, public
places, or public grounds (excluding parks) to serve customers within the City,
and to furnish and sell natural gas to the City and its inhabitants. The
Council reserves to itself the right to extend this franchise to parks at the
request of the Company. The Company is granted the right to exercise of powers
of eminent domain. This franchise shall be effective for a 22-year period from
and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. † 6    
 
Notes
6 †  EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 03-21-2016 #05(426), adopting a natural gas
  franchise for the City, was passed and adopted on April 18, 2016.
110.02   COMPANY RIGHTS.
   The Company shall have the right to lay, re-lay, operate, repair, construct,
reconstruct, replace, and extend natural gas pipes, mains, conduit, fixtures,
valves, support brackets, line markers, and other accessories as well as to
excavate for the distribution of natural gas in and through the City, provided
the same shall be placed in accord with this franchise and this Code of
Ordinances and regulations of the City, regarding the placement of structures,
facilities, accessories, or other objects in the right-of-way by utilities and
other users of the right-of-way, including ordinances which assign corridors or
other placements to users of the right-of-way and requirements which may be
adopted regarding separations of structures, facilities, accessories, or other
objects.
110.03   LOCATION AND RELOCATION.
   The Company shall, excluding facilities located in private easements
(whether titled in Company exclusively or in Company and other entities), in
accordance with State law including Company's Tariff on file with and made
effective by the Iowa Utilities Board as may subsequently be amended
(“Tariff”), at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its existing pipes,
mains, conduits, and facilities in, on, over, or under any public street,
avenue, right-of-way, or alley in the City in such a manner as the City may
reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction,
reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of the street, avenue, right-of-way, or
alley. If the City has a reasonable alternative route for the street, avenue,
right-of-way, or alley or an alternative construction method, which would not
cause the relocation of the Company installations or would minimize the cost or
expense of relocation of Company installations, the City and Company shall work
together to consider said alternative route, or construction method. The City
shall, in the extension or modification of streets and roads, make provision
for the placement of Company service lines and facilities on City-owned right-
of-way without charge to Company. In planning for the extension or modification
of streets, the City shall, to the extent practicable, design such changes to
limit the need for the relocation of Company facilities. The City shall be
responsible for surveying and staking the right-of-way for City projects that
require the Company to relocate Company facilities. If requested, the City
shall provide, at no cost to the Company, copies of the relocation plan and
profile and cross-section drawings. If tree or vegetation removals must be
completed by the City as part of the City’s project and are necessary whether
or not utility facilities must be relocated, the City, at its own cost, shall
be responsible for said removals. If the timing of said removals does not
coincide with Company’s facilities relocation schedule and the Company must
remove those materials that are included in the City’s portion of the project,
the City shall either remove the trees or vegetation or reimburse the Company
for the expenses incurred to remove them. If project funds from a source other
than the City are available to pay for the relocation of utility facilities,
the City shall attempt to secure said funds and provide them to the Company to
compensate the Company for the costs of relocation.
110.04   EXCAVATIONS.
   In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys, and public places for
the installation, maintenance, or repair of gas pipes, mains, conduit,
fixtures, accessories, or other appliances, the Company shall not unreasonably
obstruct the use of the streets. The Company in making such excavations shall,
if required by ordinance, obtain a City permit therefore and shall not
unnecessarily obstruct the use of streets, avenues, or alleys, shall provide
the City with 24 hours’ notice prior to the actual commencement of the work,
and shall comply with all provisions and requirements of the City in its
regulation of the use of City right-of-way in performing such work. In
emergencies which require immediate excavation, the Company may proceed with
the work without first applying for or obtaining the permit, provided, however,
that the Company shall apply for and obtain the excavation permit as soon as
possible after commencing such emergency work. The Company shall comply with
all provisions and requirements of the City in its regulation of the use of
City right-of-way in performing such work. To the extent not inconsistent with
this franchise, the Company shall comply with all City ordinances regarding
paving cuts, placement of facilities, and restoration of pavement and other
public infrastructure. The Company shall replace the surface, restoring the
condition as existed prior to the Company’s excavation, but shall not be
required to improve or modify the public right-of-way. The Company shall
complete all repairs in a timely and prompt manner. Company agrees any
replacement of road surface shall conform to current City ordinances regarding
its depth and composition.
110.05   VACATIONS.
   Vacating a street, avenue, alley, public ground, or public right-of-way
shall not deprive the Company of its right to operate and maintain existing
facilities and their replacements on, below, above, or beneath the vacated
property. Prior to the City abandoning or vacating any street, avenue, alley,
right-of-way, or public ground where the Company has installed gas lines,
mains, or facilities, the City shall grant the Company a utility easement for
said facilities.
110.06   RELOCATION NOT REQUIRED.
   The Company shall not be required to relocate, at its cost and expense,
Company facilities in the public right-of-way that have been relocated at
Company expense at the direction of the City in the previous five years.
110.07   RELOCATION REIMBURSEMENT.
   Pursuant to relocation of Company facilities as may be required by Sections
100.04, 100.05, and 100.06, if the City orders or requests the Company to
relocate its existing facilities or equipment in order to directly facilitate
the project of a commercial or private developer or other non-public entity,
the City shall require the developer or non-public entity to reimburse the
Company for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocation of its
existing facilities or equipment. The Company shall not be required to relocate
in order to facilitate such private project at its expense.
110.08   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Upon reasonable request, the Company shall provide the City, on a project
specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location, relative to
boundaries of the right-of-way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it
has control that is located in City right-of-way, including documents, maps,
and other information in paper or electronic or other forms (“Information”).
The Company and City recognize the Information may, in whole or part, be
considered a confidential record under State or federal law or both. Therefore,
the City shall not release any information without prior consent of the Company
and shall return the Information to Company upon request. City recognizes that
Company claims the Information may constitute a trade secret or is otherwise
protected from public disclosure by State or federal law on other grounds and
agrees to retain the Information in its non-public files. Furthermore, the City
agrees that no documents, maps, or information provided to the City by the
Company shall be made available to the public or other entities if such
documents or information are exempt from disclosure under the provisions of the
Freedom of Information Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Critical
Energy Infrastructure requirements pursuant to 18 CPR 388.112 and 388.113, or
Chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa, as such statutes and regulations may be amended
from time to time. In the event any action at law, in equity or administrative
is brought against the City regarding disclosure of any document which the
Company has designated as a trade secret or as otherwise protected from
disclosure, the City shall promptly notify the Company. The Company shall have
the right to assume, upon request of the City, the defense of said action. The
Company shall reimburse the City any and all cost, including attorney fees and
penalties to the extent allowed by law, which may result from any said action.
110.09   BRUSH AND TREES.
   The Company is granted the right to remove brush and trees from the right-
of-way or other locations where gas pipe or mains are located consistent with
the requirements of State or federal regulations.
110.10   INDEMNIFICATION.
   The Company shall indemnify, save, and hold harmless the City from any and
all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs, or expenses, including attorneys’
fees, on account of injury or damage to any person or property, to the extent
caused or occasioned, in whole or part, by the Company’s negligence in
construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation, or maintenance of the
natural gas distribution system authorized by this franchise; provided,
however, that the Company shall not be obligated to defend, indemnify, and save
harmless the City for any costs or damages to the extent arising, in whole or
part, from the negligence of the City, its officers, employees, or agents.
110.11   FRANCHISE FEE.
   There is hereby imposed a franchise fee of five percent upon the gross
revenue generated from sales of natural and mixed gas by the Company within the
corporate limits of the City. The franchise fee shall be remitted by the
Company to the City on or before the last business day of the calendar quarter
following the close of the calendar quarter in which the franchise fee is
charged.
110.12   FEE REFUNDS.
   The Company shall not, under any circumstances, be required to return or
refund any franchise fees that have been collected from customers and remitted
to the City. In the event the Company is required to provide data or
information in defense of the City’s imposition of franchise fees or the
Company is required to assist the City in identifying customers or calculating
any franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual customers, the City shall
reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by the Company to provide such
data or information.
110.13   BINDING FRANCHISE.
   This franchise shall apply to and bind the City and the Company and their
successors and assigns.
110.14   TERMINATION.
   Either City or Company (“party”) may terminate this franchise if the other
party shall be materially in breach of its provisions. Upon the occurrence of a
material breach, the non-breaching party shall provide the breaching party with
notification by certified mail specifying the alleged breach. The breaching
party shall have 60 days to cure the breach, unless it notifies the non-
breaching party, and the parties agree upon a longer period for cure. If the
breach is not cured within the cure period, the non-breaching party may
terminate this franchise. A party shall not be considered to be in breach of
this franchise if it has operated in compliance with State or federal law. A
party shall not be considered to have breached this franchise if the alleged
breach is the result of the actions of a third party or the other party.
110.15   SEVERABILITY.
   If any of the provisions of this franchise chapter are for any reason
declared to be illegal or void, the lawful provisions of this franchise
chapter, which are severable from said unlawful provisions, shall be and remain
in full force and effect, the same as if the franchise chapter contained no
illegal or void provisions.
110.16   EFFECTIVE.
   This chapter and the rights and privileges herein granted shall become
effective and binding upon its approval and passage in accordance with State
law and the written acceptance by the Company. The City shall provide Company
with an original signed and sealed copy of this chapter within 10 days of its
final passage. The Company shall, within 30 days after the Council approval of
this chapter, file in the office of the Clerk, its acceptance in writing of all
the terms and provisions of this chapter. Following Council approval, this
chapter shall be published in accordance with the Code of Iowa. The effective
date of this chapter shall be the date of publication. In the event Company
does not file its written acceptance of this chapter within 30 days after its
approval by the Council, this chapter shall be void and of no effect.
CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
111.01 Franchise Granted            111.14 Franchise Fee
111.02 Rights and Privileges        111.15 Fee Exemptions
111.03 Poles and Wires              111.16 Modifying Fees
111.04 Trimming Trees               111.17 Collection of Fees
111.05 Construction and Maintenance 111.18 Identifying Customers
111.06 Excavations                  111.19 Franchise Fee Indemnification
111.07 Utility Easements            111.20 Fee Remittance
111.08 Relocation not Required      111.21 Fee Administration
111.09 Relocation Reimbursement     111.22 Fee Refunds
111.10 Indemnification              111.23 Obligation to Collect
111.11 Information                  111.24 Obligation Relieved
111.12 Applicable Regulations       111.25 Termination
111.13 Quality and Quantity          
111.01   FRANCHISE GRANTED.
   There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, a State corporation,
hereinafter called the “Company,” and its successors and assigns, the right and
non-exclusive franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain, and operate in
the City of Altoona, Iowa, hereinafter called the “City,” a system for the
transmission and distribution of electric energy and communications signals
along, under, over, and upon the streets, avenues, alleys, and public places to
serve customers within and without the City, and to furnish and sell electric
energy to the City and its inhabitants. For the term of this franchise, the
Company is granted the right of eminent domain, the exercise of which is
subject to Council approval upon application by the Company. This franchise
shall be effective for a 25-year period from and after the effective date of
the ordinance codified by this chapter, however, that either the City or the
Company may, during the first 90 days following the tenth, fifteenth, and
twentieth anniversaries of the effective date of the franchise, provide written
notice to the other party of its desire to amend the franchise. The parties
shall negotiate these amendments in good faith for a period of up to 90 days
following receipt of notice. If, at the conclusion of the negotiation period,
the City determines in good faith that the franchise, if continued without
amendment, will have a material or significant adverse impact on the City or
the Company’s electric customers located within the corporate limits of the
City, the City may terminate the franchise. The City shall have the burden to
objectively demonstrate the material or significant adverse impact. Failure to
amend the franchise at the first option does not render invalid the City’s
second option to amend the franchise. † 7
 
Notes
7 †  EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 5-20-2013 #01 (367), adopting an electric
  franchise for the City, was passed and adopted on June 17, 2013.
111.02   RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES.
   The rights and privileges hereby granted are subject to the restrictions and
limitations of Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa 2011, or as subsequently amended
or changed.
111.03   POLES AND WIRES.
   The Company shall have the right to erect all necessary poles and to place
thereon the necessary wires, fixtures, and accessories as well as excavate and
bury conductors for the distribution of electric energy and communications
signals in and through the City, but all said conduits and poles shall be
placed as not to unreasonably interfere with the construction of any water
pipes, drain or sewer, or the flow of water there from, which have been or may
hereafter be located by authority of the City.
111.04   TRIMMING TREES.
   The Company is authorized and empowered to prune or remove, at Company
expense, any tree extending into any street, alley, or public grounds to
maintain electric reliability, safety, to restore utility service and to
prevent limbs, branches, or trunks from interfering with the wires and
facilities of the Company. The pruning and removal of trees shall be done in
accordance with current nationally accepted safety and utility industry
standards and federal and State law, rules, and regulations.
111.05   CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The Company shall, excluding facilities located in private easements
(whether titled in Company exclusively or in Company and other entities), in
accordance with State law including Company’s tariff on file with and made
effective by the Iowa Utilities Board as may subsequently be amended
(“Tariff”), at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its existing
facilities or equipment in, on, over, or under any public street or alley in
the City in such a manner as the City may reasonably require for the purposes
of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of the
street or alley of such street or alley. The City and the Company shall work
together to develop a suitable alternative route or construction method so as
to eliminate or minimize the cost and expense to the Company of relocation of
Company installations. The City shall be responsible for surveying and staking
the right-of-way for City projects that require the Company to relocate Company
facilities. If requested, the City shall provide, at no cost to the Company,
copies of the relocation plan and profile and cross-section drawings. If tree
removals must be completed by the City as part of the City’s project and are
necessary whether or not utility facilities must be relocated, the City, at its
own cost, shall be responsible for said removals. If the timing of the tree
removals does not coincide with the Company facilities relocation schedule and
the Company must remove trees that are included in the City’s portion of the
project, the City shall either remove the trees or reimburse the Company for
the expenses incurred to remove said trees. If project funds from a source
other than the City are available to pay for the relocation of utility
facilities, the City shall attempt to secure said funds and provide them to the
Company to compensate the Company for the costs of relocation.
111.06   EXCAVATIONS.
   In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys, and public places for
the installation, maintenance, or repair of conductor, conduits, or the
erection of poles and wires or other appliances, the Company shall not
unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets, and shall replace the surface,
restoring the condition as existed prior to the Company excavation. The Company
shall not be required to restore or modify public right-of-way, sidewalks, or
other areas in or adjacent to the Company project to a condition superior to
its immediate previously existing condition or to a condition required for the
City to comply with City, State, or federal rules, regulations, or law. Company
agrees any replacement of road surface shall conform to current Code of
Ordinances regarding its depth and composition.
111.07   UTILITY EASEMENTS.
   Vacating a street, avenue, alley, public ground, or public right-of-way
shall not deprive the Company of its right to operate and maintain existing
facilities on, below, above, or beneath the vacated property. Prior to the City
abandoning or vacating any street, avenue, alley, or public ground where the
Company has electric facilities in the vicinity, the City shall provide Company
with not less than 60 days’ advance notice of the City’s proposed action and,
upon request, grant the Company a utility easement covering existing and future
facilities and activities. If the City fails to grant the Company a utility
easement for said facilities prior to abandoning or vacating a street, avenue,
alley, or public ground, the City shall, at its cost and expense, obtain
easements for existing Company facilities.
111.08   RELOCATION NOT REQUIRED.
   The Company shall not be required to relocate, at its cost and expense,
Company facilities in the public right-of-way that have been relocated at
Company expense at the direction of the City in the previous five years.
111.09   RELOCATION REIMBURSEMENT.
   Pursuant to relocation of Company facilities as may be required by Sections
111.03,
111.05,
111.06,
111.07, and
111.08, if the City orders or requests the Company to relocate its existing
facilities or equipment in order to facilitate the project of a commercial or
private developer or other non-public entity, the City shall reimburse, or the
City shall require the developer or non-public entity to reimburse, the Company
for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocation of its existing
facilities or equipment. The Company shall not be required to relocate in order
to facilitate such private project at its expense.
111.10   INDEMNIFICATION.
   The Company shall indemnify and save harmless the City from any and all
claims, suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses, on account of injury or
damage to any person or property, to the extent caused or occasioned by the
Company’s negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation, or
maintenance of the electric facilities authorized by this franchise; provided,
however, that the Company shall not be obligated to defend, indemnify, and save
harmless the City for any costs or damages to the extent arising from the
negligence of the City, its officers, employees, or agents.
111.11   INFORMATION.
   Upon reasonable request, the Company shall provide the City, on a project
specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location, relative to
boundaries of the right-of-way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it
has control that is located in City right-of-way. The Company and City
recognize the information provided will, under current State law, constitute
public records, but that nonetheless, some information provided will be
confidential under State or federal law, or both. Therefore, the City shall not
release any information with respect to the location or type of equipment which
the Company owns or controls in the right-of-way which may constitute a trade
secret, or which may otherwise be protected from public disclosure by State or
federal law. Furthermore, the City agrees that no documents, maps, or
information provided to the City by the Company shall be made available to the
public or other entities if such documents or information are exempt from
disclosure under the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission Critical Energy Infrastructure requirements
pursuant to 18 CFR 388.112 and 388.113, or Chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa, as
such statutes and regulations may be amended from time to time.
111.12   APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   The Company shall construct, operate, and maintain its facilities in
accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board ,or its
successors, and State law.
111.13   QUALITY AND QUANTITY.
   During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish electric energy
in the quantity and quality consistent with and in accordance with the
applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board, the Company’s tariff and
made effective by the Iowa Utilities Board, or its successors, and State law.
111.14   FRANCHISE FEE.
   There is hereby imposed upon and shall be collected from the retail electric
customers of the Company receiving service, pursuant to the Tariff, located
within the corporate limits of the City and remitted by the Company to the
City, a franchise fee from each customer class as set forth below of the gross
receipts, minus uncollectable amounts, derived by the Company from the delivery
and sale of electric energy to customers within the corporate limits of the
City.
   1.   Residential Customers   five percent.
   2.   Non-Residential Customers   five percent.
111.15   FEE EXEMPTIONS.
   The City may, as allowed by State law, exempt customer classes of sales from
imposition of the franchise fee, or modify, decrease, or eliminate the
franchise fee. The City reserves the right to cancel any or all the franchise
fee exemptions and also reserves the right to grant exemptions to customer
classes in compliance with State law and Section
111.16 of this chapter. The City does therefore exempt the customer classes or
customer groups shown below franchise fees.
   1.   Customer classes initially exempted by the City.
111.16   MODIFYING FEES.
   The City agrees to modify the level of franchise fees imposed only once in
any 24-month period. Any such ordinance exempting classes of customers,
increasing, decreasing, modifying, or eliminating the franchise fee shall
become effective, and billings reflecting the change shall commence on an
agreed upon date which is not less than 60 days following written notice to the
Company by certified mail. The Company shall not be required to implement such
new ordinance unless and until it determines that it has received appropriate
official documentation of final action by the Council.
111.17   COLLECTION OF FEES.
   The City recognizes the administrative burden collecting franchise fees
imposes upon the Company and the Company requires lead time to commence
collecting said franchise fees. The Company will commence collecting franchise
fees on or before the first Company billing cycle of the first calendar month
following 90 days of receipt of information required of the City to implement
the franchise fee, including the City’s documentation of customer classes
subject to or exempted from City-imposed franchise fee. The City shall provide
the information and data required in a form and format acceptable to the
Company. The Company will, if requested by the City, provide the City with a
list of premises considered by the Company to be within the corporate limits of
the City.
111.18   IDENTIFYING CUSTOMERS.
   The City shall be solely responsible for identifying customer classes
subject to or exempt from paying the City imposed franchise fee. The City shall
be solely responsible for notifying Company of its corporate limits, including,
over time, annexations or other alterations thereto, and customer classes that
it wishes to subject to, or to the extent permitted by law, exempt from paying
the franchise fee. The City shall provide to the Company, by certified mail,
copies of annexation ordinances in a timely manner to ensure appropriate
franchise fee collection from customers within the corporate limits of the
City. The Company shall have no obligation to collect franchise fees from
customers in annexed areas until and unless such ordinances have been provided
to the Company by certified mail. The Company shall commence collecting
franchise fees in the annexed areas no sooner than 60 days after receiving
annexation ordinances from the City.
111.19   FRANCHISE FEE INDEMNIFICATION.
   The City shall indemnify the Company from claims of any nature arising out
of or related to the imposition and collection of the franchise fee. In
addition, the Company shall not be liable for collecting franchise fees from
any customer originally or subsequently identified, or incorrectly identified,
by the City as being subject to the franchise fee, or being subject to a
different level of franchise fees, or being exempt from the imposition of
franchise fees.
111.20   FEE REMITTANCE.
   The Company shall remit franchise fee revenues to the City no more
frequently than on or before the last business day of the month following each
quarter as follows.
   1.   January, February, and March; and
   2.   April, May, and June; and
   3.   July, August, and September; and
   4.   October, November, and December.
MidAmerican shall provide City with notice at least 30 days in advance of any
changes made in this collection schedule, including any alterations in the
calendar quarters or any other changes in the remittance periods.
111.21   FEE ADMINISTRATION.
   The City recognizes that the costs of franchise fee administration are not
charged directly to the City and agrees it shall, if required by the Company,
reimburse the Company for any initial or ongoing costs incurred by the Company
in collecting franchise fees that Company deemed by negotiations by the City
and the Company to be in excess of typical costs of franchise fee
administration.
111.22   FEE REFUNDS.
   The Company shall not, under any circumstances, be required to return or
refund any franchise fees that have been collected from City customers and
remitted to the City. In the event the Company is required to provide data or
information in defense of the City’s imposition of franchise fees or the
Company is required to assist the City in identifying customers or calculating
any franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual customers, the City shall
reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by the Company to provide such
data or information.
111.23   OBLIGATION TO COLLECT.
   The obligation to collect and remit the fee imposed by this chapter is
modified or repealed if:
   1.   Any other person is authorized to sell electricity at retail to City
consumers and the City imposes a franchise fee or its lawful equivalent at zero
or a lesser rate than provided in this chapter, in which case the obligation of
Company to collect and remit franchise fee shall be modified to zero or the
lesser rate;
   2.   The City adds additional territory by annexation or consolidation and
is unable or unwilling to impose the franchise fee upon all persons selling
electricity at retail to consumers within the additional territory, in which
case the franchise fee imposed on the revenue from sales by Company in the
additional territory shall be zero or equal to that of the lowest fee being
paid by any other retail seller of electricity within the City; or
   3.   Legislation is enacted by the Iowa General Assembly, or the Supreme
Court of Iowa issues a final ruling regarding franchise fees, or the Iowa
Utilities Board issues a final nonappealable order (collectively, “final
franchise fee action”) that modifies, but does not repeal, the ability of the
City to impose a franchise fee or the ability of Company to collect from City
customers and remit franchise fees to City. Within 60 days of final franchise
fee action, the City shall notify Company and the parties shall meet to
determine whether this ordinance can be revised, and, if so, how to revise the
franchise fee on a continuing basis to meet revised legal requirements. After
final franchise fee action and until passage by the City of revisions to the
franchise fee ordinance, Company may temporarily discontinue collection and
remittance of the franchise fee if, in its sole opinion, it believes it is
required to do so in order to comply with revised legal requirements.
111.24   OBLIGATION RELIEVED.
   The other provisions of this chapter, to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Company shall be completely relieved of its obligation to collect and remit to
the City the franchise fee as, effective as the date specified below with no
liability therefore under each of any of the following circumstances as
determined to exist in the sole discretion of Company:
   1.   Any of the imposition, collection, or remittance of a franchise fee is
ruled to be unlawful by the Supreme Court of Iowa, effective as of the date of
such ruling or as may be specified by that Court.
   2.   The Iowa General Assembly enacts legislation making imposition,
collection, or remittance of a franchise fee unlawful, effective as of the date
lawfully specified by the General Assembly.
   3.   The Iowa Utilities Board, or its successor agency, denies the Company
the right to impose, collect, or remit a franchise fee provided such denial is
affirmed by the Supreme Court of Iowa, effective as of the date of the final
agency order from which the appeal is taken.
111.25   TERMINATION.
   Either City or Company (“party”) may terminate this franchise if the other
party shall be materially in breach of its provisions. Upon the occurrence of a
material breach, the non-breaching party shall provide the breaching party with
notification by certified mail specifying the alleged breach. The breaching
party shall have 60 days to cure the breach, unless it notifies the non-
breaching party, and the parties agree upon a longer period for cure. If the
breach is not cured within the cure period, the non-breaching party may
terminate this franchise. A party shall not be considered to be in breach of
this franchise if it has operated in compliance with State or federal law. A
party shall not be considered to have breached this franchise if the alleged
breach is the result of the actions of a third party or the other party.
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
 
120.01
License or    120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
Permit
Required
120.02
General       120.06 Amusement Devices
Prohibition
120.03        120.07 Special Provisions - Violations of Renewing Class “E” Alcohol Retail
Investigation Licensee
120.04 Action  
by Council
 
 
120.01   LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for
sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a retail alcohol
license, wine permit, or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122, and 123.171)
120.02   GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer, or keep for sale,
possess, or transport alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer except upon the terms,
conditions, limitations, and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code
of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty
may be imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39, and 123.50)
120.03   INVESTIGATION.
   Upon receipt of an application for a retail alcohol license, the Clerk may
forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an investigation and
submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the
application. The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine if they
conform to the requirements of the City. The Council shall not approve an
application for a license for any premises that does not conform to the
applicable law and ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04   ACTION BY COUNCIL.
   The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of a retail
alcohol license, shall endorse its approval or disapproval on the application,
and shall forward the application with the necessary fee and bond, if required,
to the Iowa Department of Revenue.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32(2))
120.05   PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.
   A person holding a retail alcohol license and the person’s agents or
employees shall not do any of the following:
   1.   Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(1))
   2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage on the premises covered by the
license, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(b))
   3.   Sell alcoholic beverages to any person on credit, except with a bona
fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its
members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests, or to
retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center, or
events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(c))
   4.   Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold, except as
follows:
      A.   Definitions. For use in this subsection the following terms are
defined as follows:
         (1)   “Bar” means an establishment where one may purchase alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises and in which the serving of food is
only incidental to the consumption of those beverages.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2(1))
         (2)   “Restaurant” means eating establishments, including private and
public school cafeterias, which offer food to the public, guests, or employees,
including the kitchen and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere, and including a bar area within a restaurant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2(17))
      B.   This subsection shall not apply if the employer has, on file,
written permission from the parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a person 16
or 17 years of age for the person to sell or serve alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises where sold. However, a person 16 or 17 years of age
shall not work in a bar as defined in Paragraph A.
         (1)   The employer shall keep a copy of the written permission on file
until the person is either 18 years of age or no longer engaged in the sale of
or serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.
         (2)   If written permission is on file in accordance with Paragraph B,
a person 16 or 17 years of age may sell or serve alcoholic beverages in a
restaurant as defined above in Paragraph A during the hours in which the
restaurant serves food.
      C.   A person 16 or 17 years of age shall not sell or serve alcoholic
beverages under this subsection unless at least two employees 18 years of age
or older are physically present in the area where alcoholic beverages are sold
or served.
      D.   If a person employed under this subsection reports an incident of
workplace harassment to the employer or if the employer otherwise becomes aware
of such an incident, the employer shall report the incident to the employee’s
parent, guardian, or legal custodian and to the Iowa Civil Rights Commission,
which shall determine if any action is necessary or appropriate under Chapter
216 of the Code of Iowa.
      E.   An employer that employs a person under this subsection shall
require the person to attend training on prevention and response to sexual
harassment upon commencing employment.
      F.   Prior to a person commencing employment under this subsection, the
employer shall notify the employer’s dramshop liability insurer, in a form and
time period prescribed by the Director, that the employer is employing a person
under this subsection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(f))
   5.   In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow the
mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine, beer, or any
other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(i))
   6.   Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(a))
   7.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises
covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(j))
   8.   Keep on premises covered by a retail alcohol license any alcoholic
liquor in any container except the original package purchased from the Iowa
Department of Revenue and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the
premises for immediate consumption. However, mixed drinks or cocktails that are
mixed on the premises and are not for immediate consumption may be consumed on
the licensed premises, subject to rules adopted by the Iowa Department of
Revenue.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(d))
   9.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or
receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or
adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents, or remaining
contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly
possess any original package that has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(e))
   10.   Allow any person other than the licensee or employees of the licensee
to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or
other container that is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except
as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(g))
   11.   Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine that is used to
vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized
form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(k))
120.06   AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   The following provisions pertain to electrical or mechanical amusement
devices possessed and used in accordance with Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa.
(Said devices are allowed only in premises with a retail alcohol license, as
specifically authorized in said Chapter 99B.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.57)
   1.   As used in this section, “registered electrical or mechanical amusement
device” means an electrical or mechanical device required to be registered with
the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals, as provided in Section 99B.53 of
the Code of Iowa.
   2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to participate in the
operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.
   3.   It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing a registered electrical
or mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing a
registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a
person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation of a registered
electrical or mechanical amusement device.
   4.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation
of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under
the age of 21.
120.07   SPECIAL PROVISIONS - VIOLATIONS OF RENEWING CLASS “E” ALCOHOL RETAIL
LICENSEE.
   If any violation of Section
120.05(1-11) occurs, the Council can unenroll any Class “E” retail alcohol
license from the automatic renewal program of the State’s Alcoholic Beverages
Division Automatic Renewal Program (up to 51 days from the expiration date of
the license.) If the previous licensee manually reapplies, the provision of
Chapter 120 shall apply to the City’s review and approval or disapproval of the
application.
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
 
121.01 Definitions             121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required         121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application             121.08 Self-Service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees                    121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
 
121.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
   1.   “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or
containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or
by any other means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not include cigarettes,
tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug
or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   2.   “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of
tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and
irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored,
adulterated, or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper
or cover made of paper or any other material. However, cigarette shall not be
construed to include cigars.
   3.   “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products are sold, stored, or kept for
the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
   4.   “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes, or offers for
sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption,
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, irrespective of
the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages in the business
of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products to ultimate consumers.
   5.   “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement,
or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of
the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or
employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access
location.
   6.   “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars;
cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and
other smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and
other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and
sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such
manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for
both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
   7.   “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not
contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic
circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of
shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a solution or other
substance. “Vapor product” includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any
cartridge or other container of a solution or other substance, which may or may
not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device. “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a
drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter
V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
121.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   1.   Retail Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a
holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products,
or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit
the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products
within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit
shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be
easily seen by the public and the persons authorized to inspect the place of
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
   2.   Retail Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products at any place of business without first having
received a permit as a retailer for each place of business owned or operated by
the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
   A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also
obtain a retail tobacco permit. However, if a retailer only holds a retail
cigarette permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the
retailer shall not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products, during such time.
121.03   APPLICATION.
   A completed application on forms furnished by the State Department of
Revenue or on forms made available or approved by the Department and
accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal
applications shall be filed at least five days prior to the last regular
meeting of the Council in June. If a renewal application is not timely filed,
and a special Council meeting is called to act on the application, the costs of
such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
121.04   FEES.
   The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
 
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING:    FEE:
July, August, or September     $75.00
October, November, or December $56.25
January, February, or March    $37.50
April, May, or June            $18.75
 
121.05   ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.
   Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be
issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for
which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of
each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit
to the Iowa Department of Revenue within 30 days of issuance of a permit.
121.06   REFUNDS.
   A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the
City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
121.07   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
   A person shall not sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any
person under 21 years of age. The provision of this section includes
prohibiting a person under 21 years of age from purchasing tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a
vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the
provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and
hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation,
assess the following:
   1.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty
in the amount of $300.00. Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under
this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period
of 14 days.
   2.   For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall
be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 or the retailer’s permit
shall be suspended for a period of 30 days. The retailer may select its
preference in the penalty to be applied under this subsection.
   3.   For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.
   4.   For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 60 days.
   5.   For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s
permit shall be revoked.
The Clerk shall give 10 days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy
of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a
permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the
time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22, and 453A.36(6))
121.08   SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.
   Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as
provided in Section 453A.36(6) of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell
or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
vapor products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09   PERMIT REVOCATION.
   Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by
the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or
any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be
issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person
for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has
expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown
to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail
permit to the Iowa Department of Revenue within 30 days of the revocation or
suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose                  122.10 Time Restriction
122.02 Definitions              122.11 Revocation of License
122.03 License Required         122.12 Hearing
122.04 Application for License  122.13 Record and Determination
122.05 License Fees             122.14 Appeal
122.06 Bond Required            122.15 Effect of Revocation
122.07 License Issued           122.16 Rebates
122.08 Display of License       122.17 License Exemptions
122.09 License Not Transferable 122.18 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
 
122.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against
fraud, unfair competition, and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by
licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants.
122.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or
offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to
house or upon the public street.
   2.   “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from
house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any
order for goods, services, subscriptions, or merchandise to be delivered at a
future date.
   3.   “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or
itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires,
leases, or occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or who operates out
of a vehicle that is parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary
association with a local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer, or conduct of
such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any
local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer does not exempt any person from
being considered a transient merchant.
122.03   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting, or in the business of a
transient merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein
provided is in violation of this chapter.
122.04   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   The application shall be filed with the Police Department and shall contain
the following information:
   1.   Name, permanent and local address, and local phone number;
   2.   Date of birth and physical description;
   3.   Company name and address;
   4.   Description of merchandise;
   5.   Transient merchants shall include the address from which business will
be conducted and supply written permission from the property owner, their
designee, or leasing agent.
   6.   Last three places of business, including, in the case of transient
merchants, the complete addresses from which business was conducted;
   7.   Applicant’s supervisor or manager and their local address;
   8.   Length of time to be covered by the license;
   9.   A list of all convictions for criminal misdemeanor offenses (excluding
traffic offenses) during the 10 years prior to application and a list of all
convictions for criminal felony offenses during the solicitor’s lifetime. The
list shall include the type of offense, the city, county, and state where the
offense occurred and the date of conviction of each offense;
   10.   A list of all pending criminal misdemeanor and felony charges,
including the type of offense charged and the city, county, and state where the
offense allegedly occurred;
   11.   Applicants and each person soliciting who reside in the State shall
provide, at their expense, an officially sealed, State of Iowa Division of
Criminal Investigation (DCI) personal background check to the City, which is
dated no more than 30 days prior to the application. Applicants and solicitors
who do not reside in the State shall provide, at their expense, an equivalent
personal background check from their state of residence.
   12.   Each solicitor may be fingerprinted and a photograph may be taken of
each solicitor by the Police Department, at the solicitor’s expense, along with
copy of the solicitor’s driver license or identification card.
122.05   LICENSE FEES.
   1.   The Council shall establish the amount of the license fee for 30-day
and 90-day solicitor licenses by resolution. The Council shall also establish
the amount of the licensee fee for one-day and seven-day transient merchant
licenses by resolution. At the time of the license issuance, the applicant
shall pay the Clerk the applicable license fee in addition to the application
fee.
   2.   Any licensee who surrenders their license prior to the date of
expiration shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the fee.
122.06   BOND REQUIRED.
   Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant, an
applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed a
bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of
Iowa.
122.07   LICENSE ISSUED.
   If the Clerk finds the application is completed in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be correct,
and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued immediately.
122.08   DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all times
while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective
customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements
of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant’s
license in the merchant’s place of business.
122.09   LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in
any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the
application.
122.10   TIME RESTRICTION.
   All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said licenses are
in force and effect only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
122.11   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the Clerk may
revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for the following reasons:
   1.   Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in
the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
   2.   Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has
otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
   3.   Endangered Public Welfare, Health, or Safety. The licensee has
conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare,
safety, order, or morals.
   The Clerk shall send the written notice to the licensee at the licensee’s
local address. The notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against
the licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated,
and the date, time, and place for hearing on the matter.
122.12   HEARING.
   The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any
complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in
the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative,
fail to appear without good cause, the Clerk may proceed to a determination of
the complaint.
122.13   RECORD AND DETERMINATION.
   The Clerk shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and
shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the Clerk
finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or
State law.
122.14   APPEAL.
   If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall make a
part of the record the reasons for such revocation or refusal. The licensee, or
the applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next
regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify, or affirm the decision of the
Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall
carry out the decision of the Council.
122.15   EFFECT OF REVOCATION.
   Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any
license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the
revocation.
122.16   REBATES.
   Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled to
a rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it
expires. The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing the total
license fee by the number of days for which the license was issued and then
multiplying the result by the number of full days not expired. In all cases, at
least $5.00 of the original fee shall be retained by the City to cover
administrative costs.
122.17   LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.
   1.   Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for, or selling
subscriptions to newspapers.
   2.   Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl
Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America, and similar organizations.
   3.   Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for
sale their own products.
   4.   Students. Students representing the Southeast Polk Community School
District conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the
school.
   5.   Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit
additional business or make special sales.
   6.   Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses
or institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or
institutional use.
   7.   Minor Businesses. An on-site transactional business traditionally
operated exclusively by a person under the age of 18, operated on an occasional
basis for no more than 89 calendar days in a calendar year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3(15))
122.18   CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations
operating under the provisions of Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa desiring to
solicit money or to distribute literature are exempt from the operation of
Sections
122.04 and
122.05. All such organizations are required to submit to the Clerk in writing
the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought, names
and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period
during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions,
fees, or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof. If
the Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or nonprofit
organization, the Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license containing the
above information to the applicant. In the event the Clerk denies the
exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the
decision to the Council, as provided in Section
122.14 of this chapter.
CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS
 
123.01 House Mover Defined 123.07 Permit Issued
123.02 Permit Required     123.08 Public Safety
123.03 Application         123.09 Time Limit
123.04 Bond Required       123.10 Removal by City
123.05 Insurance Required  123.11 Protect Pavement
123.06 Permit Fee          123.12 Overhead Wires
 
123.01   HOUSE MOVER DEFINED.
   A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a building or
similar structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the
building or structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks,
dollies, or any other specialized moving equipment.
123.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover as
herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building,
or similar structure to be moved.
123.03   APPLICATION.
   Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the Clerk
on a form provided by the City. The application shall include:
   1.   Name and Address. The applicant’s full name and address and, if a
corporation, the names and addresses of its principal officers.
   2.   Building Location. An accurate description of the present location and
future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
   3.   Routing Plan. A routing plan approved by the Police Chief, street
superintendent, and public utility officials. The route approved shall be the
shortest route compatible with the greatest public convenience and safety.
123.04   BOND REQUIRED.
   The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the minimum sum of
$1,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the
State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to
the City or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City
in the course of moving the building or structure.
123.05   INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that
the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration
of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the
following minimum amounts:
   1.   Bodily Injury – $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
   2.   Property Damage – $50,000.00 per accident.
123.06   PERMIT FEE.
   A permit fee of $10.00 shall be payable at the time of filing the
application with the Clerk. A separate permit shall be required for each house,
building, or similar structure to be moved.
123.07   PERMIT ISSUED.
   Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate,
and payment of the required fee, the Clerk shall issue a permit.
123.08   PUBLIC SAFETY.
   At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, or public property, the permittee shall maintain flag
persons at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to
the sides, behind, and ahead of the building or structure. At all times when
the building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or
public property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights
at the intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind, and ahead of
the building or structure.
123.09   TIME LIMIT.
   No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to
remain upon any street or other public way for a period of more than 12 hours
without having first secured the written approval of the City.
123.10   REMOVAL BY CITY.
   In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation
of Section
123.09, the City is authorized to remove such building or structure and assess
the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the permit
holder’s bond.
123.11   PROTECT PAVEMENT.
   It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement,
unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are at
least one inch in width for each 1,000 pounds of weight of such building. If
there is any question as to the weight of a house or building, the estimate of
the City as to such weight shall be final.
123.12   OVERHEAD WIRES.
   The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone,
cable television, and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and
replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same.
CHAPTER 124
LICENSING OF JUNK DEALERS
 
124.01 Purpose                    124.08 Screening Requirements
124.02 Definitions                124.09 General Operating Requirements
124.03 License Required           124.10 Inspections
124.04 License Application        124.11 License Renewal
124.05 Processing of License      124.12 License Suspension or Revocation
Application
124.06 License Fee                124.13 Appeals
124.07 License Issuance and Terms  
 
124.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens and safety of property of the City by providing for the licensing
and inspection of junkyards and the elimination of the open storage of junk
except in authorized places.
124.02   DEFINITIONS.
   Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions
apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
   1.   “Business premises” or “premises” means the area of a junkyard as
described in a junk dealer’s license or application for license, as provided in
this chapter.
   2.   “Inoperable motor vehicle” means any motor vehicle which lacks:
      A.   Current registration; or
      B.   Two or more wheels or other component parts, the absence of which
renders the vehicle totally unfit for legal use on the highways.
   3.   “Junk” means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper,
trash, rubber debris, waste, or junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, or
parts of automobiles; or iron, steel, or other old or scrap ferrous or
nonferrous material, old bottles or other glass, bones, tinware, plastic, or
discarded household goods, or hardware, and other waste or discarded material
that might be prepared to be used again in some form, but “junk” shall not
include materials or objects accumulated by a person as by-products, waste, or
scraps from the operation of the person’s own business or materials or objects
held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of its own manufacturing
processes.
   4.   “Junk dealer” means any person who buys, sells, transfers, delivers, or
stores junk, including all persons who carry on such business at a junk shop or
junkyard or as a peddler, and any person who, by advertisement, sign, or
otherwise, holds themselves out as a junk dealer, or dealer in the articles
described in Section 124.02(3) of this chapter, including a person engaged in
the activity known as “auto salvage,” but “junk dealer” does not include
businesses engaged in the towing, repairing, or storing of wrecked motor
vehicles where sales of such wrecked motor vehicles are only incidental to the
collection of repair and storage charges.
   5.   “Junkyard” means a yard, lot, or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors
or in an enclosed building, containing junk as defined above, upon which occur
one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling, or
offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by parts, for a business or
commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such act or acts are to be
used for charity, or any place where more than two inoperable motor vehicles,
or used parts and materials thereof, when taken together equal the bulk of two
motor vehicles, are stored or deposited.
124.03   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to act as a junk dealer in the City, whether
personally, by agents, or employees, singly, or in connection with some other
business or enterprise, without first having obtained a license in a accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
124.04   LICENSE APPLICATION.
   An applicant for a license under this chapter shall file with the Clerk a
written application signed by the applicant, if an individual, by all partners,
if a partnership, or by the president or chief officer of a corporation or
other organization. The application shall include the following:
   1.   Name, residence address, and telephone number of each individual owner,
partner, or, if a corporation or other organization, each officer and director.
   2.   Trade names used during the previous five years by the applicant and
each person signing the application, and the locations of prior establishments.
   3.   The trade name and address of the business on behalf of which
application is made and its telephone number.
   4.   Exact address or location of the place where the business is or is
proposed to be carried on, and a sketch of the actual premises to be used in
connection with the business, showing adjoining roads, property lines,
buildings, and uses.
124.05   PROCESSING OF LICENSE APPLICATION.
   1.   Upon receipt of a completed application for license, the Clerk shall
forward one copy to the Building Official.
   2.   Upon receipt of a copy of said application, the Building Official shall
cause an inspection to be made of the premises described in the application to
determine whether or not the premises meet the requirements of the Building
Code then in effect in the City, and whether or not the activities of the junk
dealer are permitted by and are proposed to be conducted in compliance with all
zoning ordinances then in effect, and whether or not said premises meet all
other requirements of this chapter, this Code of Ordinances, and State law.
   3.   The Building Official, after examination of the premises, shall submit
an inspection report to the Clerk indicating whether or not the premises
inspected are approved. If the premises are disapproved, the Building Official
shall set forth in the report the reasons for disapproval. If the premises are
disapproved and the unlawful conditions reported can be corrected, the Building
Official shall so state in the report and grant the applicant a reasonable but
specific time to correct the condition. Final action on the application shall
then be postponed until receipt of a supplementary report from the Building
Official after the specified date.
124.06   LICENSE FEE.
   1.   The application for a junk dealer’s license shall be accompanied by an
annual license fee of $100.00, to be paid to the Clerk.
   2.   All licenses issued hereunder shall be effective from the date of
issuance to and including June 30 next succeeding the date of issuance. The
license fee set forth above shall be prorated on a quarterly basis from the
date of issuance to the time of expiration.
   3.   If an application for license or renewal of license is denied, the
license fee shall be refunded to the applicant.
124.07   LICENSE ISSUANCE AND TERMS.
   1.   After approval of said application by the Building Official and receipt
of the required license fee, the Clerk shall issue to the applicant a junk
dealer’s license and the Clerk shall also notify the Police Chief, Fire Chief,
and Building Official of the issuance of the license, the person to whom the
same was issued, the effective dates thereof, and the address of the licensed
premises.
   2.   All licenses issued hereunder shall be numbered serially in the order
issued, and they shall set forth the following information:
      A.   The name of the licensee;
      B.   The street address and an accurate description of the business
premises or proposed business premises where junk dealer’s activities will be
conducted;
      C.   The fee paid;
      D.   The expiration date.
   3.   The licensee shall post the license in a conspicuous place on the
licensed premises.
   4.   No license issued hereunder shall be transferable, and a separate
license shall be required for each business premises.
124.08   SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   Except in those instances described in Section 124.08(2) below, a
junkyard as defined in this chapter must be surrounded by a solid opaque fence
or wall, of uniform design and color, and not less than six feet high, which
substantially screens the area in which junk is stored or deposited. The fence
must be kept in good repair and shall not be used for advertising displays or
signs. Suitable gates, likewise opaque, are required, which shall be closed and
locked after business hours or when the junkyard is unattended. A portion of
any gate, not to exceed 10 feet in length, may be constructed of a non-opaque
material to permit observation of the fenced premises. No junk shall be
permitted to be stored or deposited outside of the fence, nor may junk be
stacked higher than the fence within 30 feet of the fence. The Building
Official shall inspect the fences and gates of all junkyards on an annual
basis.
   2.   Variations from the requirements of this section may be granted as
follows:
      A.   If the perimeter of the junkyard is effectively blocked from public
view by natural terrain features or is substantially lower in elevation than
the surrounding terrain in a manner which renders thereby the opacity
requirements hereof ineffective, the Building Official may, upon application,
allow the substitution of a suitable fence in place of the solid opaque fence
required herein.
      B.   If two or more junkyards which otherwise meet the standards of this
chapter abut each other and are located on lots adjoining each other, the
fencing requirement of this chapter shall be waived by the Building Official
for such common boundary so long as the common boundary continues to exist.
      C.   If the junkyard that is the subject of the application abuts against
an opaque fence which meets the fencing requirements, or an opaque structure
which is not less than six feet high, the fencing requirement of this section
shall be waived by the Building Official for such common boundary.
124.09   GENERAL OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   The following general operating requirements shall apply to all junk dealers
in the City limits:
   1.   The junkyard, and all things kept therein, shall be maintained in a
sanitary condition.
   2.   No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such
manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes.
   3.   No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract
vermin shall be kept on the premises, nor shall any refuse of any kind be kept
on the premises, unless such refuse is junk as defined herein and is in use in
the licensed business.
   4.   No junk shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public
street, walkway, or curb or become scattered or blown off the business
premises.
   5.   Junk shall be stored and arranged so as to permit easy access to all
such junk for firefighting purposes.
   6.   No combustible material of any kind not necessary to the licensed
business shall be kept on the premises; nor shall the premises be allowed to
become a fire hazard.
   7.   Gasoline and oil shall be removed from any scrapped engines or vehicles
on the premises.
   8.   No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be carried on
in connection with the licensed business on a Sunday, any legal holiday, or at
any time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   9.   No automobile or part thereof shall be burned for wrecking or salvage
purposes in or on premises occupied as a junkyard unless the same is burned in
a manner that has been approved by the Fire Chief; and all motor vehicle
gasoline and fuel tanks shall be separated and removed from motor vehicles
intended for salvage purposes prior to cutting, stacking, or burning such
vehicles.
   10.   Each junk dealer shall keep complete, accurate, and legible records of
all purchases in the English language. The records shall be kept in a permanent
type register that shall be kept on the premises. The records shall be
available for inspection by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, police officer, or
authorized agent of the City for a period of at least six months. The records
shall include:
      A.   The name and residence of the person from whom the junk was received
or purchased.
      B.   Reasonably accurate inventory and description of each article.
      C.   The value or amount paid for each article.
   11.   No junk dealer shall purchase or receive any personal property from
any minor without first receiving the consent in writing, of the parent or
guardian. Such written consent shall be included in the permanent records as
defined in Section 124.09(10).
   12.   Upon written order of the Police Chief or the designated
representative, each junk dealer shall segregate specific items or categories
of items and hold such items until authorized to dispose of the items by the
Police Department. The holding period shall not exceed 45 days.
   13.   No junk dealer shall conceal, secrete, or destroy, for the purpose of
concealing, any article purchased or received by the dealer for the purposes of
preventing identification thereof by any officer or any person claiming the
same. No junk dealer shall sell, melt up, break up, or otherwise dispose of any
article the dealer has reason to believe has been stolen, or which is adversely
claimed by any person, or which the dealer has been notified not to sell or
otherwise dispose of by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, or police officer, without
first obtaining a permit in writing from the Police Chief.
124.10   INSPECTIONS.
   The Fire Chief and Building Official, during the period a junk dealer’s
license is in effect, may inspect all premises licensed hereunder at such
intervals as they shall deem reasonable to determine whether or not the
premises are being operated and maintained in compliance with all applicable
regulations, ordinances, and laws. No person shall prevent, hinder, or obstruct
or attempt to prevent, hinder, or obstruct the Building Official or other
authorized persons in the performance of their duties set forth in this
chapter.
124.11   LICENSE RENEWAL.
   1.   Licenses may be renewed in the same manner and under the same
conditions as originally issued hereunder. Applications for renewal of junk
dealer’s licenses shall be submitted to the Clerk at least 30 days prior to the
expiration of the license then in effect. Applications for renewal of junk
dealers’ licenses shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of
Section 124.05.
   2.   When renewal of a license is denied, the junk dealer previously
licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall have a period of six months
immediately after such denial in which to conclude the business and dispose of
the junk during which time the junk dealer shall be required to comply with all
the terms and conditions of the ordinances of the City, except the licensing
requirements of this chapter. If litigation is pending contesting the denial or
revocation of a license, the Clerk may grant an extension of time during which
the junk dealer may operate pending the final outcome of such litigation.
124.12   LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The Clerk may suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder for any of the
following reasons:
   1.   The licensee, any agent, or employee has been convicted of a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter.
   2.   The Fire Chief, Building Official, or Police Chief has found that the
licensee has failed to comply with one or more of the provisions of this
chapter or the licensed premises fail to comply with one or more of the
provisions of this chapter or of some other regulation, ordinance, or statute,
and the licensee has failed to correct such condition within the reasonable
time specified by the Building Official in accordance with the report the
Building Official has submitted under Section
124.05(3).
124.13   APPEALS.
   Any applicant who has been denied a license or renewal under this chapter or
any licensee under this chapter whose license has been suspended or revoked may
appeal to the Council by filing with the Clerk, within seven days after the
aggrieved party receives notice of the adverse administrative decision, a
written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds upon which the appeal is
based. The Council shall, within 15 days after the filing of said notice of
appeal, fix a time and place of hearing on the appeal. The hearing shall be
commenced within 30 days of the filing of the appeal. If the Council finds,
from the evidence presented at the hearing, that the appellant has been denied
a license without just cause, or that the appellant’s license has been
suspended or revoked without just cause, it may reverse or modify the
administrative decision
CHAPTER 125
MASSAGE THERAPY AND REFLEXOLOGY BUSINESS LICENSING
 
125.01 Purpose                       125.07 Conditions Governing Issuance
125.02 Definitions                   125.08 Exemptions
125.03 License Required              125.09 Grounds for Denial and Revocation
                                     or Suspension
125.04 License Fee                   125.10 Appeal Process
125.05 Application                   125.11 Restriction and Regulations
125.06 Granting or Denial of License 125.12 Penalty
 
125.01   PURPOSE.
   State licensed massage therapists and businesses offering massage therapy
services perform an important service in addressing the health and wellbeing of
our citizens. Unfortunately, there are businesses that advertise they provide
massage therapy or other therapeutic services, but they are engaged in various
illegal activities which may include prostitution or human trafficking. This
chapter is not intended to discourage a legitimately licensed massage therapist
or massage therapy business from providing their services in the City. The
purpose of this chapter is to identify and address businesses that engage in
the practice of massage therapy without a license or are involved in illegal
activities which may include prostitution or human trafficking. Businesses
providing massage therapy yet conducting various types of illegal activity are
harmful to the City and the image of the massage therapy profession. Unlike
massage therapy, the State does not license reflexologists and reflexology
businesses in Section 152C of the Code of Iowa. Legitimate reflexologists and
businesses offering reflexology services perform an important service in
addressing the health and wellbeing of the City’s residents. Unfortunately,
there are businesses that advertise they provide reflexology services, but
actually engage in various illegal activities. This chapter is not intended to
discourage legitimate reflexologists or reflexology businesses from providing
their services in the City. The purpose of this chapter is to identify and
address businesses that engage in the practice of reflexology without a license
or are involved in illegal activities. Businesses providing reflexology yet
conducting various types of illegal activity are harmful to the City community
and the reflexology profession. The implementation of this chapter will better
enable the City to proactively screen, monitor, and remove businesses that are
engaged in illegal activity.
125.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the
meanings herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a
different meaning is intended.
   1.   “License” means permission granted by competent authority to exercise a
certain privilege that, without such authorization, would constitute an illegal
act. The document that confers permission to a person to engage in massage
therapy shall be issued by the Iowa Board of Massage Therapy for the State;
massage therapy business licenses shall be issued by the City.
   2.   “Massage therapy business” means any place of business wherein any of
the treatments, techniques, or methods of treatment referred to in Subsection 5
are administered, practiced, used, given, or applied.
   3.   “Massage therapist” means a person licensed to practice the health care
service of the healing art of massage therapy under Chapter 152C of the Code of
Iowa.
   4.   “Massage patron” means any person who receives, or pays to receive, a
massage or massage services from a massage therapist for value.
   5.   “Massage therapy” means performance for compensation of massage,
myotherapy, massotherapy, bodywork, bodywork therapy, or therapeutic massage,
including hydrotherapy, superficial hot and cold applications, vibration and
topical applications, or other therapy which involves manipulation of the
muscle and connective tissue of the body, excluding osseous tissue, to treat
the muscle tonus system for the purpose of enhancing health, muscle relaxation,
increasing range of motion, reducing stress, relieving pain, or improving
circulation.
   6.   “Reflexology business” means a place of business where only
“reflexology” is practiced or administered. Reflexology business does not mean
a massage therapy business where licensed massage therapists perform or
administer reflexology.
   7.   “Reflexologist” means a person who performs reflexology.
   8.   “Reflexology patron” means any person who receives, or pays to receive,
reflexology services from a reflexologist for value.
   9.   “Reflexology” means manipulation of the soft tissues of the human body
which is restricted to the hands, feet, or ears, performed by persons who do
not hold themselves out to be massage therapists or to be performing massage
therapy.
125.03   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   1.   No person shall operate a massage therapy or reflexology business,
either exclusively or in connection with another business, without being
licensed by the City as provided in this chapter.
   2.   If a business is operating as a massage therapy business as defined in
this chapter and reflexology services are being provided by a licensed massage
therapist, the business falls under the provisions of a massage therapy
business under this chapter, and does not have to obtain a separate reflexology
business license.
125.04   LICENSE FEE.
   1.   New Massage Therapy and Reflexology Businesses to the City.
      A.   The initial license fee for a new massage therapy or reflexology
business to the City is $75.00. There is an additional fee of $25.00 for each
person performing massage therapy or reflexology employed at the business. The
additional fee will apply to a maximum of three additional employees performing
massage therapy or reflexology at the business or a maximum license fee of
$150.00. The license fee and additional fees shall be paid when the application
is filed.
      B.   The license, if granted, and not revoked or suspended, shall be
valid so long as the business does not materially change ownership, business
name, or the service provided. An annual review shall be initiated by the
Police Department, to confirm business ownership, business name, service(s)
provided, and accurate and up-to-date state licenses for the employees
performing message therapy and reflexology.
   2.   Existing Massage Therapy and Reflexology Businesses within the City.
      A.   If an application properly submitted is approved, and the massage
therapy or reflexology business remains in continuous operation, renewal fees
for a massage therapy or reflexology business license will be waived. A massage
therapy or reflexology business grandfathered in under this section will be
required to pay a $25.00 fee for each additional employee not included in their
original application (up to a maximum fee of $75.00). The business will be
required to go through the annual review process.
   3.   A separate license shall be obtained for each place of business. The
licensee shall display the license in a prominent place in the licensed
business at all times.
   4.   How Renewal Fee Determined. The Police Department will track personnel
time costs related to the licensing program to quantify those costs and to
evaluate program effectiveness.
   5.   During the 12-month licensed period, the massage therapy or reflexology
businesses will be required to notify the Police Department of changes in
massage therapist or reflexology staffing or business manager.
125.05   APPLICATION.
   Application for a Massage Therapy or Reflexology Business License shall be
made on forms provided by the Police Department. The application must be
submitted to the Police Department within 60 days of the date this chapter
becoming effective and before opening a massage therapy or reflexology
business, whichever is earlier. The application shall include the most current
and updated information as requested below:
   1.   The business name, the address of the property to be used, and
documentation establishing the applicant’s interest in the premise on which the
business will be located, which shall be in the form of a lease, deed, or other
document that establishes the applicant’s interest;
   2.   The names, ages, and addresses of the applicant, owner, manager, and
all employees who are or will be employed or present on the premises to perform
massage therapy or reflexology. This includes all other persons who work on the
business premises, whether employees or independent contractors of the
business, along with a description of the work performed;
   3.   Dates and locations of other places the applicant has owned or operated
as a massage therapy or reflexology business;
   4.   Descriptions of all crimes or other offenses, including the time,
place, date, and disposition for which the applicant, owner, manager, and all
persons employed by the applicant or present on the premise to perform massage
therapy or reflexology have been arrested, charged, or convicted, excluding
traffic violations;
   5.   A statement as to whether the applicant, owner, manager, or any person
employed by the applicant has had any license or permit to perform massage
therapy or reflexology denied, revoked, or suspended in any city, state,
county, or any country and the reason for the denial, revocation, or
suspension;
   6.   A government issued photo identification card of the applicant, owner,
manager, and all employees or persons present on the premises who are or will
be employed to perform massage therapy or reflexology and independent
contractors of the business to verify and confirm identity of individuals
referenced in Subsection 2;
   7.   Such other information as the Police Chief may require for purposes of
conducting a background check. If it is determined that a nationwide background
check is required, the applicant may be responsible for the expense to complete
the background check.
   8.   Insurance. Any application for a license shall be accompanied by proof
of insurance, executed by an insurance company authorized to do business in the
State, in the amount of $2,000,000.00 per occurrence, $6,000,000.00 per policy
year. All insurance policies hereunder shall provide for at least 30 days prior
notice to the Police Department before a cancellation thereof is effective and
shall continue to provide coverage as to all matters arising during the term of
the insurance policy whether or not later cancelled.
   9.   Provide proof of current State massage therapy license for all
employees who are or will be employed or present on the premises to perform
massage therapy.
125.06   GRANTING OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   Prior to opening or operating any massage therapy or reflexology business
within the City, said proposed business shall obtain a business license from
the City. Business license applications shall be reviewed by the Police Chief,
who after considering all of the information provided and obtained in the
background check, shall either grant or deny the license.
125.07   CONDITIONS GOVERNING ISSUANCE.
   1.   No license shall be issued if the applicant or any of its owners,
managers, employees, or agents has a criminal conviction for a sex crime as
defined by Chapter 709 of the Code of Iowa, or for prostitution as defined by
Chapter 725 of the Code of Iowa, or for keeping a house of prostitution as
defined by Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa, or who is a registered sex
offender, or who has been denied a license by any other community.
   2.   Licenses shall be issued only if the applicant and all of its owners,
managers, employees, and agents are free of convictions for offenses which
involve sex crimes or which relate directly to such person's ability or fitness
to legally and safely perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of
the licensed activity.
   3.   Licenses shall only be issued to applicants who have provided all of
the information requested in the application and have cooperated with the
Police Department and other City officials in review of the application.
   4.   The business license, if issued, shall be displayed on the business
premises in a conspicuous public area.
125.08   EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to the following businesses:
   1.   Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons who are
licensed to practice medicine or surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery,
chiropractic, cosmetology arts and sciences, or podiatry in the State: or
athletic trainers, nurses, occupational therapists, physical therapists, or
physician assistants licensed, certified, or registered in this State or acting
under the prescription or supervision of a person licensed to practice
medicine, surgery, osteopathic medicine, or chiropractic in this State.
   2.   Massage therapists who are employed or are contracted to perform
massage therapy in a business identified in Section 125.08(1).
   3.   Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons who are
licensed, registered, or certified in another state, territory, the District of
Columbia, or a foreign country when incidentally and temporarily present in
this State to teach a course of instruction related to massage therapy and
bodywork therapy.
   4.   Businesses which offer the services of students enrolled in a program
recognized by the State Board of Massage Therapy while completing a clinical
requirement for graduation performed under the supervision of a licensed
person.
   5.   Persons giving massage therapy and bodywork to members of their
immediate family.
   6.   Persons engaged within the scope of practice of a profession with
established standards and ethics utilizing touch, words, and directed movement
to deepen awareness of existing patterns of movement in the body as well as to
suggest new possibilities of movement, provided that the practices performed or
services rendered are not designated or implied to be massage therapy. Such
practices include, but are not limited to, the Feldenkrais method, the Trager
approach, and mind-body centering.
   7.   Persons engaged within the scope of practice of a profession with
established standards and ethics in which touch is limited to that which is
essential for palpitation and affectation of the human energy system, provided
that the practices performed or services rendered are not designated or implied
to be massage therapy.
   8.   Persons incidentally present in this State to provide services as part
of an emergency response team working in conjunction with disaster relief
officials.
125.09   GROUNDS FOR DENIAL AND REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   It shall be grounds for denial, revocation, or suspension of an application
or massage therapy or reflexology business license if one or more of the
following conditions are met:
   1.   If the applicant or licensee is not complying with or has a history of
violations of the laws and ordinances that might adversely impact public health
or safety.
   2.   If the licensee solicits or advertises to offer services that are a
violation of this chapter.
   3.   If the licensee is convicted of any violation, reasonably related to
the licensed activity, or occurring on the licensed premise, of any City
ordinance or federal or State statute.
   4.   If there is fraud or deception involved in the license application.
   5.   If the licensee is found to be in control or possession of any narcotic
drugs or controlled substances on the premises, for which they are licensed to
operate, possession of which is illegal as defined by the States statutes or
this Code of Ordinances.
   6.   If the licensee has, in the past, engaged in willful disregard for
health codes and regulations.
   7.   If the applicant fails to provide all the information and certificates
required by this chapter.
   8.   If the licensee permits an unlicensed individuals to conduct massage
therapy or permits an undocumented individual to conduct reflexology services
at the licensee’s premises.
   9.   If the licensee refuses to permit any authorized police officers or
authorized City, County, or State governmental official to inspect the
premises, operations, each person’s government ID found to be practicing
massage therapy, and each person’s government ID that is found to be practicing
reflexology.
   10.   If the licensee is found to be violating provisions of this chapter or
the Code of Iowa.
   11.   If the business promotes its services on websites that are known to
advertise services that are illegal.
   12.   If the applicant or licensee is not complying with or has a history of
violations of sex crimes as defined by Chapter 709 of the Code of Iowa, or for
prostitution as defined by Chapter 725 of the Code of Iowa, or for keeping a
house of prostitution as defined by Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa, or who is
a registered sex offender, or the laws and ordinances that might adversely
impact public health or safety as determined by the Police Chief.
   13.   If the licensee provided incomplete or inaccurate information on the
application.
125.10   APPEAL PROCESS.
   1.   If an applicant has been denied, revoked, or suspended pursuant to this
chapter, then said applicant may file a written request with the City
Administrator for review of the decision of the Police Chief within 10 days
from the receipt of said notice of denial, revocation, or suspension. Failure
to file a written request for review of the decision within this time frame
shall constitute a waiver of any right to contest the decision to deny, revoke,
or suspend a license.
   2.   Within 10 days of the receipt of a request to review a decision of
denial, revocation, or suspension of any applicant’s license, the City
Administrator shall notify the applicant of a date, time, and place for a
hearing to review the decision of the Police Chief. Said hearing shall be
informal and the applicant may present any oral or written testimony the City
Administrator deems pertinent.
   3.   Within 10 days from the hearing held pursuant to Subsection 2, the City
Administrator will provide written findings and decision to the applicant.
   4.   If the applicant’s denial, revocation, or suspension is upheld by the
City Administrator, the applicant may then appeal said decision to the District
Court pursuant to the laws of the State.
125.11   RESTRICTION AND REGULATIONS.
   1.   Compliance with Law. The licensee and persons in its employ shall
comply with all applicable regulations and laws of the City and State.
   2.   Person in Charge. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation, or
other organizations, the applicant shall designate a person to be manager and
in responsible charge of the business. The manager shall be a resident of the
State. The manager shall provide written consent to serve as an agent for
service of notices and other process relating to the business. The manager
shall remain responsible for the conduct of the business until another suitable
person has been designated, in writing, by the licensee. The licensee shall
promptly notify the Police Chief, in writing, of any change indicating the
address of the new manager and the effective date of such change.
   3.   Hours of Business. The licensed premises shall not be open for business
nor shall patrons be permitted on the premises between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
125.12   PENALTY.
   1.   If a massage therapy or reflexology business is not licensed as
provided in this chapter, the business premises may be placarded. If the
business information that is produced is either inaccurate or incomplete, the
business may be placarded.
   2.   The Police Chief shall place in a highly noticeable location a placard
stating “Unlicensed Massage Therapy (or Reflexology). It is unlawful to provide
or receive massage therapy (or Reflexology) services; and is subject to
criminal or civil penalty per Altoona Municipal Code 125.” This notice shall
remain posted until required business information is obtained by the City or
other legal use has been established.
   3.   No person shall remove the placard posted pursuant to Subsection 2
without the approval of the Police Chief.
   4.   No person shall continue to offer or receive reflexology services after
a reflexology business has been placarded unless the Police Chief has approved
the removal of the placard.
   5.   A person who commits or attempts to commit, conspires to commit, or
aids or abets in the commission of an act constituting a violation of this
chapter, whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons
or as principal, agent, or accessory is guilty of a simple misdemeanor. A
person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly, or willfully induces, causes,
coerces, permits, or directs another to violate a provision of this chapter is
guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 126
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
 
126.01 Purpose                         126.05 Impounding Adult Newsracks
126.02 Definitions                     126.06 Minimal Distance Violations
126.03 Location of Adult Entertainment 126.07 Permitted Areas
Facilities
126.04 Identification of Newsracks      
 
126.01   PURPOSE.
   It is recognized that adult entertainment facilities have certain
objectionable side effects which render these adult facilities incompatible
with residential and family-oriented uses, when the adult facilities are
located directly adjacent to such uses. This chapter seeks to ensure that
residential and family-oriented uses and adult entertainment facilities will be
located in separate and compatible locations.
126.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Adult entertainment facilities” includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
      A.   “Adult bookstore” means an establishment having, as the primary
portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, and other periodicals which
are substantially devoted to the depiction of specified sexual activities and
specified anatomical areas.
      B.   “Adult business” means any business or establishment where a
specified sexual activity or specified anatomical area is displayed.
      C.   “Adult motel” means a motel or similar establishment offering public
accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized
by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
      D.   “Adult movie theater” means any theater, arcade, or similar
establishment where an enclosed building or open-air facility is used for
presenting material in the form of motion picture film, video tape, or other
similar means which is substantially devoted to the depiction of specified
sexual activities and specified anatomical areas, for observation by persons
therein.
      E.   “Adult newsrack” means any coin-operated machine or device which
dispenses material substantially devoted to the depiction of specified sexual
activities and specified anatomical areas.
      F.   “Adult nightclub” means any club, cabaret, nightclub, bar,
restaurant, or similar establishment where an enclosed building or open-air
facility is used for live performances which are characterized by the exposure
of specified sexual activities and specified anatomical areas, for observation
by persons therein.
   2.   “Specified anatomical area” means less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitalia, mature human buttocks; and a mature human female
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state - even if completely and opaquely
covered.
   3.   “Specified sexual activities” means patently offensive acts,
exhibitions, representations, depictions, or descriptions of:
      A.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      B.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy;
      C.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or female breast; and
      D.   Minors engaged in a prohibited sexual act or simulation of a
prohibited sexual act.
126.03   LOCATION OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES.
   1.   Prohibited Locations. No person, whether as principal or agent, clerk
or employee, either alone or for any other person, or as an officer of any
corporation, or otherwise, shall place, maintain, own, or operate any adult
bookstore, adult movie theater, adult nightclub, adult motel, adult business,
or adult newsrack in the following locations:
      A.   In any residential area of the City, including upon any sidewalk
abutting upon such residential area;
      B.   Within 1,000 feet of any residentially zoned or used property, or
any property designated on the City’s Comprehensive Plan as residentially
oriented.
      C.   Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of real property upon which is
located any of the following facilities:
         (1)   An elementary school, junior high school, or senior high school;
         (2)   A church which conducts religious programs;
         (3)   Park or recreational facilities operated and improved by the
City, County, County Conservation Board, or State;
         (4)   Federal, State, County, City, or special district governmental
offices;
         (5)   Supermarket or convenience market primarily engaged in the sale
of food;
         (6)   Restaurant, fast-food or food establishment, catering to family
trade.
      D.   Within 2,000 feet of any other adult entertainment facility, as
defined herein. For the purpose of this section, “adult newsrack” means a
single coin-operated device and not a machine with a double or triple
dispensing capacity.
   2.   Measurement of Distance. The distance between any two adult
entertainment facilities shall be measured in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each
business. The distance between any adult entertainment facilities and any
religious institution, school, public park, government office, supermarket,
restaurant, or any property designated for residential use or used for
residential purposes shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest property line of the adult
entertainment facilities to the closest property line of the religious
institution, school, public park, government office, supermarket, restaurant,
or property designated for residential use or used for residential purposes.
   3.   Signs. All on-site signage shall conform to Chapter 159.
   4.   Viewing Area.
      A.   It is unlawful to maintain, operate, manage, or permit to be
maintained, operated, or managed any adult theater or arcade in which the
viewing areas are not visible from a continuous main aisle or are obscured by a
curtain, door, wall, or other enclosure. For purposes of this section, “viewing
area” means the area where the patron or customer would ordinarily be
positioned while watching the performance, picture, show, or film.
      B.   It is unlawful for more than one person at a time to occupy any
individually partitioned viewing area or booth.
      C.   It is unlawful to create, maintain, or permit to be maintained any
holes or other openings between any two booths or individual viewing areas for
the purpose of providing viewing or physical access between the booth or
individual viewing areas.
      D.   The opening to the viewing area shall be from the main aisle.
126.04   IDENTIFICATION OF NEWSRACKS.
   The owners of adult newsracks shall have their names, addresses, and
telephone numbers clearly visible on each newsrack located within the City. If
the identification is not clearly visible, that shall be grounds for immediate
impoundment of the newsracks by the City.
126.05   IMPOUNDING ADULT NEWSRACKS.
   1.   Nonconforming Uses. The provisions of this Code of Ordinances dealing
with nonconforming uses are not applicable to the location of adult newsracks
existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but
thereafter the location of adult newsracks shall be subject to the
nonconforming uses provisions of this Code of Ordinances.
   2.   Impoundment. An adult newsrack found in violation of this chapter may
be impounded by any police officer or enforcement officer of the City after the
following action have occurred:
      A.   A notice of violation has been affixed to the adult newsrack stating
the section of this chapter which has been violated and stating that the adult
newsrack will be impounded if the violation is not abated within seven days;
      B.   A notice of violation has been sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner of the adult newsrack as identified on the
newsrack, if readable, stating the section of this chapter which has been
violated and stating that the adult newsrack will be impounded if the violation
is not abated within seven days;
      C.   The violation has not been abated within seven days after the
posting of the notice of violation or the mailing of the certified letter,
whichever occurs later;
      D.   The Police Department, or other enforcement officer, has presented
to any magistrate affidavits or other evidence sufficient to show a prima facie
violation of this chapter;
      E.   A magistrate has issued a written order permitting the impounding of
the adult newsrack pursuant to this chapter.
   3.   Filing of Complaint. Whenever an adult newsrack is impounded, a
complaint for violation of Section 126.03 must be filed within 14 days of the
impounding. If a final appealable decision in such action is not rendered
within 60 days after the date of filing this action, the complaint shall be
dismissed; provided, however, no complaint shall be dismissed because a final
appealable decision was not rendered within 60 days of the filing of the action
if the defendant named therein is responsible for extending the judicial
determination beyond the allowable time limit.
   4.   Redemption After Impoundment. The person who provides sufficient proof
of ownership of such adult newsrack may have such newsrack, together with all
moneys, if any, impounded, returned immediately after the filing of the
complaint for violation of Section 126.03 upon application to the Police
Department, or other enforcement officer. The person who provides sufficient
proof of ownership of such adult newsrack may have the contents of such
newsrack returned upon the date that a final appealable decision in such action
is rendered or upon the date the action is dismissed, upon application to the
Police Department, or the enforcement officer.
126.06   MINIMAL DISTANCE VIOLATIONS.
   It is recognized that adult newsracks may be jostled or inadvertently moved
minor distances by third persons with a resulting violation of the provisions
of Section 126.03. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, such
minimal distance violation, not exceeding five feet, shall not constitute a
violation of this chapter, and the Police Department, or other enforcement
officer, shall notify the owner of the adult newsracks by certified, return
receipt requested, mail of the existence of the minimal distance requirements.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, all adult newsracks shall
comply with the encroachment permit provisions of this Code of Ordinances.
126.07   PERMITTED AREAS.
   Adult entertainment facilities in the City are permitted in accordance with
the provisions of the Zoning Code.
CHAPTER 127
PAWNBROKERS
127.01 Definitions                     127.09 Renewals
127.02 License Required                127.10 Denial, Suspension, or Revocation
                                       of License
127.03 License - Criteria Required     127.11 Records
127.04 License Issuance                127.12 Records - Failure to Maintain
127.05 License Fee                     127.13 Identification Tags
127.06 Separate License for Each Place 127.14 Prohibited Acts
of Business
127.07 Display of License              127.15 Search for Stolen Property
127.08 Sale or Transfer of License      
 
127.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Pawnbroker” means every person who makes loans or advancements upon
pawn, pledge, or deposit of personal property, or who receives actual
possession of personal property as security for loans, with or without a
mortgage, or bill of sale thereon, or who by advertisement, sign, or otherwise
holds themselves out as a pawnbroker.
   2.   “Police reports” means:
      A.   “Positive” means a report or review complied by the Police Chief
which does not disclose a criminal record of a felony, or any conviction under
this chapter two or more times, in a calendar year, or a conviction under
Chapter 714 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   “Negative” means a report or review compiled by the Police Chief
which discloses a criminal record of a felony, or any conviction under this
chapter two or more times in a calendar year or a conviction under Chapter 714
of the Code of Iowa.
127.02   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the pawn business without first obtaining a
pawnbroker license. All applicants for such licenses shall apply in writing to
the Clerk. All license applications shall contain the following information:
   1.   The full name, residential address, business address, date of birth,
social security number of the applicant, and where the applicant is a
corporation or partnership, of the officers or partners;
   2.   The name and address of the owner of the business premises;
   3.   The business, occupation, or employment of the applicant, including
location thereof, for the two years immediately preceding the date of
application; and
   4.   The arrest record of the applicant and whether the applicant has ever
been convicted of any crime, except simple misdemeanor traffic violations. If
any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must
be made giving the place and court in which such conviction was had, the
specific charge under which the conviction was obtained, and the sentence
imposed as a result of such conviction.
127.03   LICENSE - CRITERIA REQUIRED.
   Upon receipt of a pawnbroker license application, the Clerk shall forward a
copy of the application to the Police Chief who shall review the application.
The applicant shall furnish such evidence as may reasonably be required in
support of the statements set forth in the application. The Police Chief shall
report to the Clerk within 30 days of receipt of the application considering
but not limited to the following criteria:
   1.   Whether the applicant, or the applicant’s agents or employees, charged
with receiving or distributing property, have been convicted of a felony.
However, if the conviction of a felony occurred more than five years before the
application for a pawnbroker license, and if such person’s rights of
citizenship have been restored by the Governor, such conviction shall not be a
bar to obtaining a pawnbroker license;
   2.   Whether the applicant has truthfully reported all relevant facts within
the pawnbroker application; and
   3.   The applicant has such financial standing and good reputation to
indicate that they will comply with all the laws of the State and the City.
127.04   LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   1.   Upon receipt of a positive police report and the appropriate fees, the
Clerk shall approve the application, if the applicant has fully complied with
all of the requirements of this chapter, and the Clerk shall thereupon issue a
pawnbroker license to the applicant and forward a copy of such to the Police
Chief. The license shall expire one year following issuance. The license shall
state the name and place of residence of the person licensed, the business to
be transacted and the place where it is to be carried on, and the date of
issuance and expiration of the license.
   2.   In the event that the Clerk determines that the applicant for a new or
renewal license has not fully complied with all of the requirements of this
chapter, or that the Police Department returns a negative report, or that the
applicant has falsified the application, than the Clerk shall, after
consultation with the legal department, advise the Council of the basis for
questioning the applicant’s qualifications, and the procedures for notice and
hearing as set forth in Section 127.10 shall apply.
127.05   LICENSE FEE.
   An applicant for a pawnbroker license shall submit a fee of $200.00 to the
Clerk at the time of filing the application. In the event the application is
denied, $50.00 of the total fee shall be retained to cover administrative
costs.
127.06   SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   Any person conducting several or separate pawnbroker businesses shall pay
the license fee and procure a license for each place and any violations in one
licensed premises shall be deemed violations in all premises licensed by that
pawnbroker.
127.07   DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every licensed pawnbroker shall display the license conspicuously in the
business so that it may be readily observed by all persons entering the
premises.
127.08   SALE OR TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No pawnbroker licenses shall be sold or transferred. The purchaser or
purchasers of any pawnbroker business or of the majority of the stock of any
corporation operating a pawnbroker business shall make application for and
obtain a new license before operating such business at the location for which
the license has been issued.
127.09   RENEWALS.
   Every licensed pawnbroker shall apply for a license annually by application
as if for an original license. There shall be no automatic renewal. Such
application shall be filed and the fee paid not less than 45 days prior to the
expiration of the current license.
127.10   DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   1.   A pawnbroker license may be denied, suspended, or revoked for any
violation of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the failure to comply
with new or renewal application procedures, a negative police report, or
falsification of a new or renewal application, or for the failure to maintain
records in conformity with the requirements enumerated under this chapter.
   2.   The Clerk shall, upon receipt of information alleging that grounds
exist to deny, suspend, or revoke the pawnbroker license of any applicant or
licensee under this chapter, and after consultation with the legal department,
report the circumstances to the Council, which in such case shall cause a
notice to be sent by ordinary mail to the applicant or licensee, which notice
shall state that a denial, suspension, or revocation hearing has been set
before the Council, the grounds for the proposed denial, suspension, or
revocation, the date and time of the hearing and the place where the hearing
will be conducted. Upon such hearing, if the Council shall determine that one
or more such grounds do exist, it may deny an application or suspend or revoke
an existing license. A suspension shall constitute a minimum period of 14
calendar days to a maximum period of 30 calendar days during which period the
licensee may not conduct any business except for redemptions and shall
conspicuously post a sign stating the terms of the suspension at the entrance
of the licensed premises. Such a sign shall be supplied by and posted by the
Police Chief. In the event such license is revoked, no pawnbroker license shall
be issued to that person for a period of one year.
127.11   RECORDS.
   The Police Department shall furnish pawn log sheets to every licensee who
shall accurately and legibly enter in ink in the English language the following
information at the time of purchase or receipt of any property:
   1.   The date and hour of the transaction;
   2.   The amount paid, advanced or loaned for the article;
   3.   A detailed and accurate description of the article;
   4.   When applicable, the model number, or serial number; and
   5.   The name and address of the person from whom the property is purchased
or received, date of birth, driver’s license number, State identification
number or social security number, sex, age, height, race, and type of photo
identification presented.
It shall not be deemed compliance with this section if the licensee or the
licensee’s agent or employee lists their own name as the person selling or
transferring the article. When the pawn log sheets are complete, or upon demand
from the Police Chief, the licensee shall surrender the original sheets to the
Police Chief who shall provide a copy of the sheets to the licensee; the
originals to remain the property of the City. The licensee shall also maintain
a record of the name and residential address of any person redeeming an article
of property, the date of such transaction, and description of the article
redeemed. In the event property is disposed of other than by redemption, the
licensee shall record a description of the property, how disposed of and the
name and address to whom the article was transferred. Such redemption or sales
records shall be maintained by the licensee for one year from the date of
transaction and shall be at all times open to examination and recordation by
the Police Chief.
127.12   RECORDS - FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
   No licensee, their agents, or employees shall fail to maintain or surrender
or falsify, delete, alter, destroy, or otherwise destroy any records required
by this chapter.
127.13   IDENTIFICATION TAGS.
   The licensee, their agents, or employees shall also legibly record the date
and hour the property was purchased or received on the property or such
information shall be securely affixed to the property. Such information must
conform to the information recorded pursuant to this chapter. However, those
licensed pawnbrokers in possession of property purchased or received prior to
October 7, 1996, and for which the date and hour of the transaction is not
known, shall submit to the Police Chief a complete and detailed description of
the property on an inventory sheet as provided by the Police Chief and the date
of such inventory shall be securely affixed to the property.
127.14   PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No licensee, their agents, or employees purchasing or receiving any article
of property shall:
   1.   Receive any property without first viewing a form of identification
containing a photograph of the person identified;
   2.   Melt, alter, destroy, sell, redeem, remove from the licensed premises,
or otherwise dispose of such article, within 15 days after the receipt and
report of any property is made as required by this chapter, except upon written
permission from the Police Chief;
   3.   Purchase or receive any property from any person under the age of 18
without their parent or guardian being present at the time of the transaction
and without receiving their written consent, a copy of which must be submitted
along with the records required by this chapter;
   4.   Purchase or receive any property or surrender any property from 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, and 6:00 p.m. Saturday through 8:00
a.m. Monday;
   5.   Conceal, secrete, or destroy for the purpose of concealing, any article
purchased or received for the purpose of preventing identification;
   6.   Deface, alter, or remove any serial number or identifying marks from an
article in their possession;
   7.   Take possession of defaced or altered property as described in
Subsection 6. However, those licensed pawnbrokers in possession of such
property as of October 7, 1996, shall have 60 days to dispose of such property.
127.15   SEARCH FOR STOLEN PROPERTY.
   Whenever the Police Chief has reason to believe that any licensee, their
agents, or employees has possession of any stolen property on the licensed
premises, the Police Chief shall have the right and duty to enter and search
the premises of such person for the purpose of discovering stolen property. No
licensee, their agents, or employees shall refuse, resist, or attempt to
prevent the Police Chief, with or without warrant, from examining the licensed
premises for the purpose of discovering stolen property or any violation of
this chapter.
CHAPTER 128
MOBILE FOOD VENDING
 
128.01 Purpose                        128.04 Mobile Food Vending Units
128.02 Definitions                    128.05 Unlawful Acts
128.03 Mobile Food Vendor Regulations 128.06 Suspension or Revocation of Permit
and Requirements
                                     128.07 Penalty
 
128.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the safety of the residents and
visitors of the City by permitting and regulating mobile food vendors and their
units.
128.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Food stand” means any article, device, fixture, or equipment that is
used as a place to provide food and includes, but is not limited to, food
tents, food shacks, food pods, or food booths that are non-motorized, with or
without a mobile kitchen, and facilitates the preparation, marketing, and sale
of food that is whole and unprocessed, prepared, or not potentially hazardous.
Food stands are not lawfully permitted as a permanent structure.
   2.   “Mobile food vending unit” means a food establishment that is self-
contained and readily moveable, which operates at a remote location away from
their home base of operations or returns to a home base of operations at the
end of each day.
   3.   “Mobile food vendor” means the person, corporation, entity, or group
obtaining the permit to prepare, market, or sell food from a mobile vending
unit or food stand.
   4.   “Pushcart” or “food cart” means a non-self-propelled food conveyance
unit which facilitates the preparation, marketing, and sale of food that is
whole and unprocessed, prepared, packaged, or non-potentially hazardous or
commissary-wrapped foods maintained at proper temperatures or pre-cooked foods
that require limited assembly, such as hot dogs or bratwursts.
   5.   “Special event” means a function or activity attended by members of the
public to include neighborhood activities and City-sponsored civic and social
events.
128.03   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   Any mobile food vendor, as defined in this chapter, shall comply with the
following requirements:
   1.   Permit Required. Any mobile food vendor must procure a permit as
provided for herein from the Fire Department.
   2.   Application for Permit; Fee. An application, in writing, shall be filed
with the Fire Department for a mobile food vendor permit under this chapter.
Such application shall set forth the applicant’s (owner) name, business name,
mailing address, email, and telephone number. The application shall also set
forth the Iowa Department of Inspections and Appeals Mobile Food Vendor Unit
Classification and Inspection Certificate, mobile food vendor unit description
(including photos), vehicle registration information, and a description of
kitchen, cooking, and preparation facilities and safety features on or in the
mobile food unit.
   3.   Application Fee. A non-refundable application fee shall be paid at the
time of filing such application for each mobile food unit a vendor is wishing
to deploy to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated on the
application, administrative costs, and the performance of the fire inspection
required of each mobile food unit.
   4.   Insurance and Bond Required. Each applicant for a mobile food vendor
permit required by this chapter shall, before the permit is issued to the
applicant, file with the Fire Department proof of liability insurance and a
personal surety bond in the amount of $1,000,000.00, conditioned that the
applicant shall comply with and observe the terms and conditions of all
provisions of this code relating to mobile food vendors, and will pay all
costs, fines, and penalties incurred on account of the applicant’s failure to
observe such provisions and will pay all damages resulting to any person by
reason of such applicant’s actions in violation of such terms and conditions.
   5.   Permit Issued. If the Fire Department finds the application is
completed in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, the facts
stated therein are found to be correct, the application fee paid, and the Fire
Chief or Fire Marshal has reviewed and approved said application, a permit may
be issued. The permit shall authorize the applicant to engage in the activities
of a mobile food vendor as defined in this chapter (specified limitations may
be applied) for one year from the date of issue, provided that nothing herein
shall authorize any act or practice which is contrary to any law or ordinance.
Upon expiration of the permit, a new application shall be made and a new permit
may be issued in the same manner as the original permit, including applicable
fees.
   6.   Display of Permit. Each mobile food vendor unit permitted under this
chapter shall keep such permit in possession at all times while doing business
in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective customers, exhibit the
permit as evidence of compliance with all requirements of this chapter.
128.04   MOBILE FOOD VENDING UNITS.
   1.   Mobile Food Unit Permitting. It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in the commercial sale of food or beverages to the public from a
temporary or mobile facility within the City without first obtaining a mobile
food vending unit permit from the City, in addition to any other State,
federal, or County permits, certifications, and licenses (impromptu children’s
lemonade stands, selling of Girl Scout cookies, farmer’s markets, or other
similar civic organization sales are exempt from this permitting process).
      A.   A mobile food vending unit permit is an annual permit that expires
after one year from the date of issuance and must be renewed prior to the first
event after that date.
      B.   Each mobile food vending unit (vehicle, trailer, etc.) shall be
permitted separately. No permit transfer is allowed.
      C.   Although certain activities may be exempt from the permitting
requirements of this chapter, any food service to the public in the City is
expected to comply with all other local, County, and State requirements for
health inspections, licensing, safety, and fire code requirements.
      D.   The applicant for a mobile food vending unit permit must also review
and comply with the performance and safety standards as outlined within the
application packet in preparation for the fire safety inspection conducted by
the Fire Department.
   2.   Permit Application Fees. At the time of the submittal of a permit
application, the applicant shall pay to the Fire Department the application fee
for each mobile food unit the vendor is wishing to deploy for use within the
City.
      A.   The amount of the permit application fee(s) shall be determined in
accordance with an established fee schedule. Such fee schedule may be modified
from time to time with approval of the Council.
      B.   Any party who surrenders their permit prior to the date of
expiration shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the application
and fire inspection fee.
   3.   Fire Department Inspections.
      A.   All mobile food units that have cooking facilities or use products
with grease laden vapors (Class III and Class IV State licenses) shall be
inspected by the Fire Department prior to initiation of business operations
within the City.
      B.   Inspections are required for each applicable mobile food unit
annually and prior to issuance of a mobile food unit vending permit. It shall
be the obligation of the mobile food vendor to schedule the inspections with
the Fire Department. Class I and II State license classifications are not
required to meet this inspection requirement.
      C.   All Class III and IV mobile food units shall have acceptable fire
suppression systems and fire safety equipment, as determined by the Fire
Department through inspection and via the mobile food vendor unit performance
standards.
      D.   Upon completion of the annual fire inspection, a certificate shall
be issued to the applicant to verify completion of the fire inspection for each
mobile food unit. Said certificate shall be kept in the mobile food unit during
operation.
   4.   Mobile Food Unit Permit Application.
      A.   Filing. Application requests shall be filed with the Fire
Department. No application request shall be accepted for filing and processing
unless it conforms to the requirements of this section. This would include a
complete and true application, all of the required materials and information
prescribed, and is accompanied by the appropriate fee(s).
      B.   Timely Submittal. Unless otherwise provided herein, applications
must be submitted not less than 30 calendar days prior to the proposed start
date of the mobile food unit activities.
      C.   Applicant’s Responsibility. Receiving approval of a mobile food unit
permit from the City shall not preclude, supersede, circumvent, or waive the
applicant’s responsibility to obtain any additional permits, licenses, and
approvals for other applicable local, State, and federal regulations.
      D.   Application. Application shall be made on a form provided by the
Fire Department and shall include:
         (1)   Full name of the applicant.
         (2)   Applicant’s contact information including mailing address, phone
numbers, and e-mail address.
         (3)   State health inspection certificate with the classification
level of the State license.
         (4)   Description of the kitchen facilities, cooking facilities,
preparation area, and safety features.
         (5)   Photographs of the mobile food unit from the front, both sides,
and back.
         (6)   Make, model, and year of vehicle to be used.
         (7)   License plate number and vehicle registration.
         (8)   Overall size of the vehicle; length and width.
         (9)   Copy of Fire Department fire inspection certificate
         (10)   Applicable fee.
      E.   Applications Deemed Withdrawn. Any application received shall be
deemed withdrawn if it has been held in abeyance, awaiting the submittal of
additional requested information from the applicant, and if the applicant has
not communicated in writing with the Fire Department and made reasonable
progress within 30 days from the last written notification from the Fire
Department to the applicant. The application and inspection fee are non-
refundable. Any application deemed withdrawn shall require submission of a new
application and fee to begin a new review and approval process.
      F.   Issuance of Permit. Upon completion of the review process and a
determination of compliance with the applicable regulations, the Fire
Department will issue a mobile food unit permit.
      G.   Modification of License After Issuance. Should the mobile food
vendor change the food or beverage being offered during the term of an issued
license that would change the designation of the mobile food unit to a higher
State licensing level classification, a new application and fire inspection
shall be required, along with applicable fees.
   5.   Unattended Mobile Food Unit. No mobile food unit shall be left
unattended or stored on any site overnight, unless the mobile food unit is a
participant in a multiple (contiguous) day, City permitted, public property
special event. Any mobile food unit found unattended shall be considered in
violation of these regulations and subject to permit revocation, municipal
infraction, towing, or any other action legally allowed.
128.05   UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   1.   Fraudulent Representation or Harassment. No mobile food vendor party
shall falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quality, character, or quantity
of any article, item, or commodity offered for sale, or sell any unwholesome or
tainted food or foodstuffs. No party shall harass, intimidate, coerce, or
threaten any individual to induce a sale.
   2.   Failure to Maintain Licenses and Permits. Failure of any applicant to
maintain the appropriate County, State, and federal licenses and permits,
during the term of the local permit shall be considered an unlawful act and
subject to revocation or any other penalties available to the City.
128.06   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   1.   The Fire Department may suspend or revoke any permit issued under this
chapter, for any of, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      A.   The party has made fraudulent statements in their application for
the permit or in the conduct of their business.
      B.   The party has violated this chapter or any other chapter of this
Code or has otherwise conducted their business in an unlawful manner.
      C.   The party has conducted their business in such a manner as to
endanger the public welfare, safety, order, or morals.
      D.   The Fire Department has received and investigated three or more
founded complaints during the permit period related to the way the party is
conducting business.
   2.   Notice of Suspension or Revocation; Right to Appeal. The Fire
Department shall cause notice of the permit revocation to be served in person
by a City official, by mail, or by electronic means to the party’s local
address, which notice shall specify the reasons for such action, at which time
operations of the party must cease within the corporate limits of the City. The
party may appeal the revocation of the permit to the Council at its next
regularly scheduled meeting by filing with the Fire Department a written
request for an appeal to the Council at least 10 days prior to the meeting. The
Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the Fire Department to
revoke such permit. If a permit is revoked, no refund of any permit fee paid
shall be made. Upon the revocation of a permit, the party is not eligible for
the issuance of a new permit under this chapter for a period of one year from
the date the permit revocation is served in person or deposited in the U.S.
mail.
128.07   PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, violations of this chapter are simple
misdemeanors subject to a fine or imprisonment and may also be punishable as
municipal infractions subject to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule
of civil penalties of this Code. Each day a municipal infraction occurs or is
permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. The Fire Chief or Fire
Marshal, shall have the authority to enforce this chapter and request citations
be issued by the Police Department for violations of this chapter. The Police
Department shall have the discretion to enforce this chapter as either a simple
misdemeanor or municipal infraction.
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
 
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices     135.08 Burning Prohibited
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing        135.09 Excavations
135.03 Placing Debris On              135.10 Maintenance of Parking or Terrace
135.04 Playing In                     135.11 Failure to Maintain
135.05 Traveling On Barricaded Street 135.12 Dumping of Snow
or Alley
135.06 Use for Business Purposes      135.13 Underground Irrigation Systems in
                                      Parking
135.07 Washing Vehicles                
 
135.01   REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.
   It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy, or
carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard, or other
article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected, or placed
thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places
in said street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02   OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.
   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface, or injure any street or
alley in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03   PLACING DEBRIS ON.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any
glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, leaves, grass, or any other debris likely to be washed into the storm
sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any person,
animal, or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04   PLAYING IN.
   It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets or
alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2))
135.05   TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.
   It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street
or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed
thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer, or
member of the Fire Department.
135.06   USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.
   It is unlawful to park, store, or place, temporarily or permanently, any
machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale, or offering
same for sale, without permission of the Council.
135.07   WASHING VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street, or alley
for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does
not prevent any person from washing or cleaning their own vehicle or equipment
when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
135.08   BURNING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or other combustible
material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09   EXCAVATIONS.
   No person shall dig, excavate, or in any manner disturb any street, parking,
or alley except in accordance with the following:
   1.   Permit Required. No excavation shall be commenced without first
obtaining a permit. A written application for such permit shall be filed with
the City and shall contain the following:
      A.   An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in
front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
      B.   A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is
to be made;
      C.   The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and
restoration of the street or alley surface; and
      D.   Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
   2.   Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner
that will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the
uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street.
   3.   Barricades, Fencing, and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing, and
warning lights meeting The Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways and OSHA standards shall be so placed as to protect the
public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or maintaining
adequate barricades, fencing, or warning lights shall be paid to the City by
the permit holder or property owner.
   4.   Bond Required. The applicant shall post with the City a penal bond in
the minimum sum of $25,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to issue
such bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for
any damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs
incurred by the City in the course of administration of this section. In lieu
of a surety bond, a cash deposit of $25,000.00 may be filed with the City.
   5.   Insurance Required. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of
insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance
in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents
and employees for the following minimum amounts:
      A.   General Liability - $1,000,000.00.
      B.   General Aggregate - $2,000,000.00.
      C.   Commercial Umbrella - $5,000,000.00.
      D.   Pollution or Professional - $1,000,000.00.
   6.   Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the
condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner
satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the permit holder or property
owner.
   7.   Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City.
Backfill shall not be deemed completed, and no resurfacing of any improved
street or alley surface shall begin, until such backfill is inspected and
approved by the City. The permit holder or property owner shall provide the
City with notice at least 24 hours prior to the time when inspection of
backfill is desired.
   8.   Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be
discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of 24 hours after the
approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the City
has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and charge any expenses
for such work to the permit holder or property owner.
   9.   Responsibility for Costs. The permit holder or property owner shall
bear all costs and expenses incident to the excavation. The permit holder and
owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
   10.   Notification. At least 48 hours prior to the commencement of the
excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, the person
performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and
provide the center with the information required under Section 480.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
   11.   Permit Fee. A permit fee, as established in the Engineering Schedule
of Fees, shall be payable at the time of filing the application with the City.
A separate permit shall be required for each excavation.
   12.   Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application and filing of bond and
insurance certificate, a permit shall be issued. A separate permit shall be
required for each excavation.
135.10   MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE.
   1.   The abutting property owner shall maintain all property outside the lot
and property lines and inside the curb lines upon public streets and shall keep
such area in a safe condition, free from nuisances, obstructions, and hazards.
In the absence of a curb, such property shall extend from the property line to
that portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes. The
abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead
wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes, but
is not limited to, timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up
litter and debris. Specifically, but not by way of the proceeding, the property
owner shall maintain all grass areas or approved vegetative ground cover in the
public right-of-way to a height or length not to exceed six inches, except as
otherwise specifically allowed in this section. The abutting property owner may
be liable for damages caused by failure to maintain the publicly owned property
or right-of-way.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(c))
   2.   The public parking area shall be planted entirely with:(i) turf grass;
(ii) approved vegetative ground cover; (iii) permitted plantings, as planted
and maintained at a height not to exceed 42 inches in an area located within 36
inches of a single mail box that is used for U.S. mail delivery; or (iv)
approved landscape materials or permitted plantings as authorized by the Public
Works Superintendent. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the public parking must be
easily traversable by individuals and any materials or plantings placed in the
public parking may not:
      A.   Interfere with the ability of individuals to freely enter or exit
their vehicles from or onto the public parking;
      B.   Interfere with the ability of motorists to see vehicles or
pedestrians on the public right-of-way, including the public sidewalk or trail;
or
      C.   Interfere with the use, maintenance of utilities, or drainage of the
right-of-way, all as determined by the Public Works Superintendent.
   3.   The term “vegetative ground cover” means a ground cover that does not
grow higher than six inches and is of a species approved by the Public Works
Superintendent. The term “permitted plantings” means nonwoody, thornless
plantings. The term “approved landscape materials” means permeable landscape
materials such as pebbles, wood chips, or such other permeable materials as are
approved from time to time by the Public Works Superintendent.
   4.   In the event the City or any public utility shall disturb the public
right-of-way or street work, the City or public utility shall restore any turf
grass area to a similar condition existing prior to the disturbance, by
reseeding such turf grass area. The City or public utility shall have no duty
to replace any plantings, bushes, or vegetation in the public parking other
than turf grass.
135.11   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
   If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the
above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required
action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the
same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(e))
135.12   DUMPING OF SNOW.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be
thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters,
or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a
hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial
drives in the Business District it is absolutely necessary to move the snow
onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed
promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt removal of
such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2))
135.13   UNDERGROUND IRRIGATION SYSTEMS IN PARKING.
   Abutting property owners may install and maintain underground lawn
irrigation systems in the parking, providing that all related equipment, except
necessary and direct connections from the water supply to the underground
irrigation system, is located solely in an area within one foot of the street
side of the sidewalk, or between five and six feet of the property line in
areas where sidewalks are not installed. Abutting property owners acting
pursuant to these provisions do so at their own risk and without any right,
title, or interest in the parking or in the free use and enjoyment of the
parking for the purpose allowed in this section. Abutting property owners
acting pursuant to this section should take notice of the fact that
installations in the parking will be subject to damage or destruction at any
time that the City or a person with a utility easement deems it necessary to
enter upon the parking for construction, maintenance, or any other purpose.
Removal of underground lawn irrigation systems may be required at any time by
the City and replacement of system is the sole responsibility of the abutting
property owner.
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose                               136.11 Interference with Sidewalk
                                             Improvements
136.02 Definitions                           136.12 Awnings
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice, and             136.13 Encroaching Steps
Accumulations
136.04 Property Owner’s Responsibility for 136.14 Openings and Enclosures
Maintenance
136.05 City May Order Repairs                136.15 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
136.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered         136.16 Defacing
136.07 Permit Required                       136.17 Debris on Sidewalks
136.08 Sidewalk Standards                    136.18 Merchandise Display
136.09 Barricades and Warning Lights         136.19 Sales Stands
136.10 Failure to Repair or Barricade         
 
136.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement, or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner
and to minimize the liability of the City.
136.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the
sidewalk when it is hardening.
   2.   “Defective sidewalk” means any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more
of the following characteristics:
      A.   Vertical separations greater than one-half inch or more.
      B.   Horizontal separations equal to one inch or more.
      C.   Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more and at
least four inches in diameter.
      D.   Spalling over 50 percent of a single square of the sidewalk with one
or more depressions equal to one-half inch or more.
      E.   Spalling over less than 50 percent of a single square of the
sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more.
      F.   A single square of sidewalk cracked into six or more pieces.
      G.   A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth.
      H.   A change from the design or construction grade equal to or greater
than three-fourths inch per foot.
   3.   “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the
particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
   4.   “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete
is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
   5.   “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any
sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification
required herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.
   6.   “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.
   7.   “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or
suburban areas.
   8.   “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement, or removal of a public sidewalk or the excavating, filling, or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
   9.   “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing
the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
136.03   REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS.
   1.   It is the responsibility of the abutting property owner to remove snow,
ice, and accumulations from the entire width and length of sidewalk located
between the back of the public street curb, or, in the absence of a curb, the
edge of the public street pavement, to the property owner’s actual property
line or in an area on private property that is dedicated, as indicated on the
plat of record, for the use of pedestrian traffic, excluding bike paths within
24 hours following the cessation of the weather event by which they were
deposited, as defined by the National Weather Service or other event by which
they were deposited, provided, however, that in extraordinary weather
circumstances the Public Works Director may extend the period of time provided
herein. In those situations the Public Works Director will deliver to
representative news media a statement indicating the amount of additional time
the property owners shall have to remove accumulations from sidewalks. The
abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused by failure to remove
snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(b) and (e))
   2.   In instances where a property owner has a sidewalk adjacent to both the
front and rear of the property and the rear sidewalk is shared by adjoining
property owners, the owner with two sidewalks is only responsible for the
removal of snow, ice, and accumulations in the front area. The owner who has
adjoining property, in this situation, would be responsible for removal of
snow, ice, and accumulations on the sidewalks in the rear area.
   3.   If both properties have both a front area and a rear area sidewalk,
both adjoining property owners are mutually responsible for removal of snow,
ice, and accumulations on the sidewalk in the rear area.
   4.   When accumulations have formed upon any sidewalk so that it cannot be
reasonably removed, such as ice or packed down snow, the abutting property
owner shall keep and maintain such accumulations sprinkled with fine cinders,
sand, or deicing chemicals in such a manner as to provide traction and prevent
the sidewalk from being dangerous to persons using the same for the entire
width and length. This subsection is not to be construed as a substitute for
the removal of accumulations and only applies when accumulations cannot be
reasonably removed; however, all accumulations shall be removed as soon as
practical.
   5.   The Public Works Director or any peace officer shall enforce the
provisions of this section. If any snow, ice, or accumulations are not removed
as required above, including any extraordinary weather circumstances, within
the time designated by the Public Works Director, the Public Works Director or
any peace officer is authorized to issue a citation or may post notice to such
owner by placing written notice on the main entrance to the principle
structure, requiring the owner to remove snow, ice, and accumulations within 12
hours and, if such action is not completed within the time stated in the
notice, the Public Works Director may cause the work to be done and assess the
costs thereof as a special tax against the abutting property and collect the
same according to law.
136.04   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
   It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to repair, replace,
or reconstruct, or cause to be repaired, replaced, or reconstructed, all broken
or defective sidewalks and to maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any
sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or
traveled portion of the public street. In instances where a property owner has
a sidewalk in both the front and rear yard and the rear sidewalk is shared by
adjoining property owners, the resident with two sidewalks is only responsible
to repair, replace or reconstruct, or cause to be repaired, replaced or
reconstructed, all broken or defective sidewalks in the front yard. The
resident who has the adjoining property, in this situation, would be
responsible for repairing, replacing or reconstructing, or cause to be
repaired, replaced, or reconstructed, all broken or defective sidewalks in the
rear yard.
136.05   CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.
   If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the
Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner
to repair, replace, or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if
such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the Council
may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the abutting
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(d) and (e))
136.06   SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.
   The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any
street or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such
improvement to abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa. The Council may waive required sidewalks on
property that does not extend to or connect with any other sidewalks in the
areas where development is not likely to occur. If development should occur,
the provisions of Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa will be in effect upon
completion.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.07   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall remove, reconstruct, or install a sidewalk unless such
person has obtained a permit from the City and has agreed in writing that said
removal, reconstruction, or installation will comply with all ordinances and
requirements of the City for such work.
136.08   SIDEWALK STANDARDS.
   Sidewalks repaired, replaced, or constructed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards:
   1.   Cement. Portland cement shall be the only cement used to construct and
repair sidewalks.
   2.   Construction. Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction.
   3.   Sidewalk Base. Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-
drained soil. Where soil is not well drained, a three-inch sub-base of compact,
clean, coarse gravel shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil drainage is to be
determined by the City.
   4.   Sidewalk Bed. The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the constructed
sidewalk will be at an established grade.
   5.   Length, Width, and Depth. Length, width, and depth requirements are as
follows:
      A.   Residential sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide and four
inches thick, and each section shall be no more than five feet in length.
      B.   Business District sidewalks shall extend from the property line to
the curb. Each section shall be four inches thick and no more than six feet in
length.
      C.   Driveway areas shall be not less than six inches in thickness.
   6.   Location. Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge
(edge nearest the abutting private property) one foot from the property line,
unless the Council establishes a different distance due to special
circumstances.
   7.   Grade. Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the street,
which is the established grade.
   8.   Elevations. The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation even
with the curb at the curb or not less than one-half inch above the curb for
each foot between the curb and the sidewalk.
   9.   Slope. All sidewalks shall slope one-fourth inch per foot toward the
curb.
   10.   Finish. All sidewalks shall be finished with a broom finish or wood
float finish.
   11.   Curb Ramps and Sloped Areas for Persons with Disabilities. If a
street, road, or highway is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped
area shall be constructed or installed at each intersection of the street,
road, or highway with a sidewalk or path. If a sidewalk or path is newly built
or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed or installed
at each intersection of the sidewalk or path with a street, highway, or road.
Curb ramps and sloped areas that are required pursuant to this subsection shall
be constructed or installed in compliance with applicable federal requirements
adopted in accordance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act,
including (but not limited to) the guidelines issued by the Federal
Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)
136.09   BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue,
highway, passageway, or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when
any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons
having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or
lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be
deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at
each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in
the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to
keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades
both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using
the street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable
for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act
or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any
misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply
with provisions hereof.
136.10   FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.
   It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the
owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of
failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or
erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.11   INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
   No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon
any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or
destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove,
destroy, mar, or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove, or
deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.12   AWNINGS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any
sidewalk unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight feet above
the surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck, canvas or
other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets securely fastened
to the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct the
sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians.
136.13   ENCROACHING STEPS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any
building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the
Council.
136.14   OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.
   It is unlawful for a person to:
   1.   Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any
cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any
portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the
Council.
   2.   Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating, or cover to any vault on
any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the
public.
   3.   Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings
on or within six feet of any sidewalk.
136.15   FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to
place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.16   DEFACING.
   It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint, or writing
on any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.17   DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass,
nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal,
or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal, or
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2))
136.18   MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.
   It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods
or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with
the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case
shall more than three feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for
such purposes.
136.19   SALES STANDS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand
for the sale of fruit, vegetables, or other substances or commodities on any
sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.
CHAPTER 137
DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
 
137.01 Permit         137.05 Driveways on Unpaved Streets
137.02 Permit Fee     137.06 Culvert Removal
137.03 Specifications 137.07 Grades
137.04 Costs          137.08 Damaged Culverts
 
137.01   PERMIT.
   It is illegal for any person to break out or remove a corporate curb along
any paved street, or to construct a private drive from an unpaved street,
without first obtaining a permit from the Clerk or Building Department. No such
permit shall have any force or effect unless approval shall be endorsed of the
fact on said permit by the Building Inspector.
137.02   PERMIT FEE.
   Before any permit is issued, the person who makes the application shall pay
a fee to the Clerk based upon the schedule of fees adopted by resolution of the
Council.
137.03   SPECIFICATIONS.
   1.   For lots less than 100 feet wide at the right-of-way line, no
automobile driveway for a single-family residential property shall be designed,
constructed, or maintained in the City that is more than 24 feet in width at
the sidewalk. For lots 100 feet wide or greater at the right-of-way line, a
single-family residential property automobile driveway may have a maximum width
of 12 feet per garage stall up to a total maximum width of 36 feet, except when
located on a cul-de-sac bulb where the maximum width remains 24 feet at the
sidewalk. No automobile driveway for a single-family residential property shall
be designed, constructed, or maintained in the City that is within four feet of
the throat of an intake to any sewer, unless otherwise approved by the City’s
engineering staff. For single-family residential lots 100 feet wide or greater
at the right-of-way line, a maximum of two driveways leading to the same lot,
or serving the same property will be allowed, but they shall be at least 20
feet apart. Between such driveways, the sidewalk zone shall be limited to the
use of pedestrians only.
   2.   In all cases where said permit has been granted, the concrete curb
shall be ground in accordance with the latest published versions of the Urban
Design Standards for Public Improvements and the Urban Standard Specifications
for Public Improvements and the driveway shall be paved by concrete extending
from the curb to the inside of the existing sidewalk line within 30 days from
the removal of the curb with not less than six inches of concrete. If it is
shown to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director that the existing
sidewalk has substantially the same strength as six inches of concrete, said
paving need only extend to the outside of the sidewalk line. All work is to be
done in a workmanlike manner, inspected and approved by the Public Works
Director. All driveway approaches shall be paved from the street to the
sidewalk according to the latest published versions of the Urban Design
Standards for Public Improvements and the Urban Standard Specifications for
Public Improvements. If there is no sidewalk, the approach shall extend to the
property line. The approach shall be inspected by the City.
137.04   COSTS.
   If, after 30 days after the concrete curb has been ground, the person so
doing fails or refuses to pave the driveway, as provided herein, the City shall
have the right to do so without notice, and assess the cost thereof, as a
special tax against the abutting property and collect the same according to
law.
137.05   DRIVEWAYS ON UNPAVED STREETS.
   When a permit has been granted to construct a private driveway from an
unpaved street, the person receiving said permit shall perform the necessary
grading and install a culvert, if required, constructed of either corrugated
iron or concrete with a minimum diameter of 15 inches and a maximum length of
24 feet, the permit holder to bear the cost of said culvert.
137.06   CULVERT REMOVAL.
   The Public Works Director is hereby empowered to order existing culverts
replaced which do not meet the requirements of Section 137.05 when the Public
Works Director deems the existing culvert will not satisfactorily carry away
run-off water.
137.07   GRADES.
   All culverts erected or replaced shall conform to the established ditch
grade, as determined by the engineer or Public Works Director.
137.08   DAMAGED CULVERTS.
   If the Public Works Director finds it necessary to replace damaged or
unsatisfactory culverts, the property owner shall be charged with the costs of
the same, and if not paid within 90 days from the date of completion of said
replacement, said cost shall be assessed as a special tax against the abutting
property and collected according to law.
CHAPTER 138
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
 
138.01 Power to Vacate                138.04 Findings Required
138.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 138.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or
                                      Alleys
138.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing     138.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
 
 
138.01   POWER TO VACATE.
   When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of
the City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds, the
Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(a))
138.02   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   Any proposal to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public
grounds shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for its study and recommendation prior to further consideration by the Council.
The Commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the
Council within 30 days after the date the proposed vacation is referred to the
Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
138.03   NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.
   The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the
time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.
138.04   FINDINGS REQUIRED.
   No street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds shall be vacated
unless the Council finds that:
   1.   Public Use. The street, alley, portion thereof, or any public ground
proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore,
its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified.
   2.   Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of
property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
138.05   DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.
   When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the
City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public ground,
the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
138.06   DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.
   The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a governmental
body for a public purpose or to a fair.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.15(2) and 364.7(3))
EDITOR’S NOTE
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted, vacating certain streets, alleys, or public grounds
and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO.        ADOPTED            ORDINANCE NO.        ADOPTED
74A1                 June 17, 1976      04-20-2020 #01 (546) April 20, 2020
9-87.2               September 8, 1987  07-06-2020 #01 (549) March 1, 2021
4-93 #1 (118)        April 5, 1993      01-18-2021 #02 (568) January 18, 2021
4-93 #2 (119)        April 5, 1993      9-20-2021 #01 (586)  September 20, 2021
8-01 #3 (88)         September 4, 2001  04-18-2022 #03 (603) April 18, 2022
8-15-05 #3 (186)     September 19, 2005 11-21-2022 #02 (617) November 21, 2022
7-18-05 #2(183)      February 20, 2006  04-17-2023 #02 (628) April 17, 2023
6-05-06 #1(216)      June 5, 2006       12-04-2023 #01 (647) December 4, 2023
02-18-2013 #01 (364) February 18, 2013  02-05-2024 #01 (653) February 5, 2024
9-03-2013 #01 (381)  September 3, 2013                       
11-17-2014 (399)     November 17, 2014                       
05-18-2015 #1 (407)  July 20, 2015                           
07-20-2015 #03 (413) July 20, 2015                           
12-21-2015 #01 (418) December 21, 2015                       
12-21-2015 #2 (419)  December 21, 2015                       
02-15-2016 #01 (421) February 15, 2016                       
05-02-2016 #01 (428) May 2, 2016                             
05-02-2016 #02 (429) May 2, 2016                             
05-02-2016 #03 (430) May 2, 2016                             
05-16-2016 #01 (431) May 16, 2016                            
06-20-2016 #02 (433) July 18, 2016                           
11-21-2016 #01 (443) November 21, 2016                       
12-19-2016 #02 (446) December 19, 2016                       
02-20-2017 #01 (449) February 20, 2017                       
04-17-2017 #04 (454) April 17, 2017                          
09-05-2017 #01 (466)September 5, 2017                       
09-05-2017 #2 (467) September 5, 2017                       
09-05-2017 #3 (468) September 5, 2017                       
09-05-2017 #4 (469) September 5, 2017                       
09-05-2017 #5 (470) September 5, 2017                       
11-06-2017 #01 (474) November 6, 2017                        
04-02-2018 #01 (484) April 2, 2018                           
04-02-2018 #02 (485) April 2, 2018                           
06-18-2018 #01 (492) July 2, 2018                            
09 - 17 - 2018  # 01 September 17, 2018                      
(501)
03-18-2019 #02 (515) March 18, 2019                          
05-06-2019 #02 (522) May 20, 2019                            
08-05-2019 #01 (525) August 5, 2019                          
08-19-2019 #01 (527) August 19, 2019                         
CHAPTER 139
STREET GRADES
 
139.01 Purpose and Definition 139.03 Record Maintained
139.02 Established Grades      
139.01   PURPOSE AND DEFINITION.
   This chapter is designed to meet the requirements of the Code of Iowa for
the establishment of street grades. As used herein, “grade” means the
longitudinal reference lines, as established by ordinance of the Council, which
designate the elevation at which a street or sidewalk is to be built.
139.02   ESTABLISHED GRADES.
   The grades of all streets, alleys, and sidewalks, which have been heretofore
established by ordinance, are hereby confirmed, ratified, and established as
official grades.
139.03   RECORD MAINTAINED.
   The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning such grades upon request.
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted, establishing street or sidewalk grades and remain
in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted, establishing street or sidewalk grades and remain
in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED           ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
73.5          March 2, 1965                   
73.5(A)       June 7, 1966                    
73.53         March 12, 1969                  
73-7-30       July 30, 1973                   
10-22-79-2    October 22, 1979                
10-1-84-1     October 1, 1984                 
2-88 #1 (18)  February 15, 1988               
9-88 #1 (34)  September 6, 1988               
10-88 #1 (38) October 3, 1988                 
5-93 #1 (120) May 3, 1993                     
4-96 #1 (170) April 15, 1996                  
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
 
CHAPTER 140
NAMING OF STREETS
 
140.01 Naming New Streets      140.04 Official Street Name Map
140.02 Changing Name of Street 140.05 Revision of Street Name Map
140.03 Recording Street Names
 
140.01   NAMING NEW STREETS.
   New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:
   1.   Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are
natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the
existing street.
   2.   Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a
subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
   3.   Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred
to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
140.02   CHANGING NAME OF STREET.
   The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street.
140.03   RECORDING STREET NAMES.
   Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk
shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor, and County
Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
140.04   OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP.
   Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map,
which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify
that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section
140.04 of the Code of Ordinances of Altoona, Iowa.”
140.05   REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP.
   If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in
street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map
promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry on the
Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the City
Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map:
(brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by
the Clerk.
CHAPTER 141
RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
 
141.01 Purpose              141.04 Franchise or License for Private or
                            Commercial Use
141.02 Administration       141.05 Appeal
141.03 Right-of-Way Permits  
 
141.01   PURPOSE.
   The City’s street and alley rights-of-way are owned or held by the City
primarily for the purpose of pedestrian and vehicular passage and for the
City’s provision of essential public safety services, including police, fire,
and emergency medical response services; and public health services, including
sanitary sewer, water, and storm drainage services. The City recognizes that it
holds the rights-of-way within its geographical boundaries as an asset in trust
for its citizens. The City has invested millions of dollars in public funds to
acquire, build, and maintain the right-of-way. Some organizations, by placing
their equipment in the right-of-way and charging the citizens of the City for
goods and services, are using for private gain this property held by the City
for the public good. Although such services are often necessary or convenient
for the citizens, such persons receive revenue or profit through their use of
public property. This chapter provides for the recovery of out-of-pocket and
projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way. Finally, this
chapter provides for uniform procedures and standards for the franchising and
licensing of rights-of-way for private or commercial use.
141.02   ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Engineer shall be the principal City official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way; of right-of-way permits; of the
franchising and licensing of the use of rights-of-way; and of all sections of
this Code and related City ordinances. The City Engineer may delegate any or
all of their duties under this chapter.
141.03   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS.
   1.   When working in public rights-of-way, permittees under this section
shall not unreasonably interfere with the safety, health, and convenience of
the public in the public’s use thereof for ordinary travel, nor shall they
interfere with public safety or public health services provided by the City to
its residents by means of the public rights-of-way.
   2.   Permittees shall acquire no right or interest in the right-of-way
allowing the continued use of the right-of-way for such purpose.
   3.   Permits Required.
      A.   Excavation Permit. An excavation permit shall be required for every
person who excavates in the right-of-way.
      B.   Obstruction Permit. An obstruction permit shall be required for
every person who undertakes activities in the right-of-way which will result in
the obstruction of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
      C.   Irrigation System Permit. Underground irrigation systems are allowed
in right-of-way with the understanding that it is at the abutting property
owner’s risk and any repair of the irrigation system caused by maintenance of
utilities will be the responsibility of and at the abutting property owner’s
expense.
   4.   No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date
specified in the permit unless they have been issued a new permit.
   5.   Permit Applications. Before any permit required by this chapter shall
be issued, an application shall be made to the City Engineer. A permit
application will be accepted only if all of the following conditions have been
met and the permit applicant has:
      A.   Fulfilled all obligations related to prior permits, including, but
not limited to, the restoration of the right-of-way, and payment to the City of
all money due for the following:
         (1)   Prior obstruction or excavation permits;
         (2)   Any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City as a result of
the applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any
emergency actions taken by the City in connection therewith;
         (3)   Restoration of the right-of-way by the City or the City’s
contractor;
         (4)   System management fees; and
         (5)   Fines assessed to the applicant.
      B.   Submitted a completed permit application form, which includes:
         (1)   All required attachments, and
         (2)   Scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed
project and the location of all existing and proposed equipment, and which
states or identifies the following:
            a.   The place, extent, and purpose of the contemplated work
including the identity of and location in the right-of-way at which any
excavation is to be made.
            b.   The time when the work is to be commenced and the time it is
to be completed.
            c.   For whom and in connection with what abutting property, if
any, the work is to be performed.
            d.   To what street main, if any, the sewer, water, or gas
connection is to be made or to what electric or telephone line, if any, the
electric or telephone connection is to be made.
            e.   The name and contact information of the person or contractor
who will do the work, and the person who will be in charge.
   6.   Plans and Specifications. Plans and specifications shall be filed with
an application for a permit to make an excavation involving the construction or
installation of equipment within the right-of-way. Plans and specifications
shall be in sufficient detail to identify the exact type of equipment to be
constructed or installed in the right-of-way, and the horizontal and vertical
location of such equipment within the right-of-way, with respect to right-of-
way or property lines and established monuments. Detailed plans and
specifications shall not be required for individual excavations, such as
individual water, sewer, gas, electric, or telephone connections to a building.
A simple sketch on the application form provided by the City, including the
dimensions of the proposed excavation in reference to permanent landmarks,
shall be provided for individual excavations.
   7.   Insurance Certificate. Applications for obstruction and excavation
permits shall be accompanied by an insurance certificate or to have one on file
with the department as required by this chapter. Applications for excavation
permits, and obstruction permits shall be accompanied by a surety or
performance and maintenance bond, unless such bond has been previously filed
with the department and is still in effect.
   8.   Indemnification. All applications for a permit under this chapter shall
contain a stipulation that the applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the
City from any and all costs, expenses, or liability for damages or injuries to
persons or property or liability of any kind whatsoever arising from or growing
out of any excavation or trench or surface restoration for which the permit is
issued.
   9.   Administrative Penalties. The City Engineer is authorized to impose
administrative penalties upon persons who commit the following violations of
this chapter:
      A.   Failure to obtain permit;
      B.   Failure to provide required notification of emergency trenching or
excavations;
      C.   Failure to provide required traffic control devices;
      D.   Failure to restore as required;
      E.   Failure to properly secure steel plates;
      F.   Failure to provide required notification for inspection by plumbing
inspector;
      G.   Failure of restoration within the maintenance period;
      H.   Failure to restore street cuts within the period provided in the
permit;
      I.   Failure to comply with permit conditions;
      J.   Failure to comply with orders issued by the City Engineer;
      K.   Failure to complete work within the time provided in the permit, or
within a time extension of the permit granted by the City Engineer;
      L.   Failure to provide factually accurate, truthful, or complete
information in making application for a permit; or
      M.   Working, storing equipment or materials, or parking vehicles outside
the permit area.
   The administrative penalty for each violation shall be as provided in the
schedule of administrative penalties adopted by the Council by resolution.
Notice of violation, with the applicable penalty for such violation noted
thereon, shall be issued by the City Engineer to the violator. Penalties shall
be paid in full within 30 days of the issuance of the notice.
   10.   Permit Fees.
      A.   Schedule of Fees. To recover the costs incurred by the department in
managing the right-of-way, a schedule of fees shall be developed. The permit
fees to be paid in each instance shall be determined by the City Engineer,
shall be updated as needed prior to each construction season, and shall be
approved by the Council by resolution.
      B.   Fees Accumulated in Separate Fund. All fees collected under this
chapter shall be accumulated in a separate fund.
      C.   Fees Doubled During Probation. All permit fees shall be doubled
during a probationary period.
      D.   Refund after Revocation of Permit. Permit fees, which were paid in
connection with a permit which the City Engineer has revoked for a breach, are
not refundable.
   11.   Refusal to Issue Permit. The City Engineer may refuse to issue the
permits provided for in this chapter to any former permit holder who has
intentionally violated the sections of this Code relating to excavations in or
obstruction of any public right-of-way or who has failed to conform to the
requirements of any previously issued permit or who has violated the orders or
instructions of City officials issued pursuant to this chapter.
   12.   On-Site Exhibit of Permit; Contractor Identification Signage.
      A.   One copy of the permit required by this chapter shall be kept and
exhibited at every work site for which an excavation permit has been issued for
a period of five days or more.
      B.   Persons performing work pursuant to an excavation permit shall
display their name and telephone number on all motor vehicles and equipment,
including tractors, trailers, and wheeled equipment capable of being driven or
towed on the street. This shall not apply to personal or privately owned
vehicles used solely to transport workers to a job site or to rental vehicles
or equipment utilized in performing the work, if the name and telephone number
of the rental company appears on the vehicles or equipment. This information
shall be exhibited in at least two locations on the vehicle and shall be either
a temporary magnetic or permanent decal or painted lettering of a type and
size, and with a contrasting color, rendering it legible from a distance of not
less than 50 feet.
   13.   Restoration Required. The work to be done under an excavation permit
issued pursuant to this chapter and the restoration of the right-of-way as
required in this section must be completed within the dates specified in the
permit. In addition to its own work, the permittee must restore or pay for the
restoration of the general area of the work, and the surrounding areas,
including the paving, its foundations and any special features, to its proper
and required condition in accordance with the City’s utility accommodation and
street restoration specifications, unless the City Engineer deems other or
additional specifications must be utilized in order to secure proper
restoration. Further, the permittee shall inspect the area of the work and use
reasonable care to maintain the same condition for 48 months thereafter. If
special features in the right-of-way at a proposed excavation site, including,
but not limited to, special sidewalk surfaces, heated sidewalks, underground
vaults, areaways, and landscaping, cannot be preserved or protected, the City
must be notified prior to the applicant beginning work.
   14.   Performance and Maintenance Bond.
      A.   An applicant for an excavation permit shall, at the time of
application for an excavation permit, post a performance bond in an amount
determined by the City Engineer to be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring
the right-of-way to its proper and required condition pursuant to the City’s
utility accommodation and street restoration specifications and in accordance
with the current restoration cost schedule established by resolution of the
Council. If, at the conclusion of the 48-month period after completion of the
restoration of the right-of-way, the department determines that the right-of-
way has been properly restored, the surety on the performance bond shall be
released.
      B.   Bond Condition. The bond shall be conditioned upon:
         (1)   The faithful performance of the right-of-way restoration work
required under this chapter, or payment of the restoration costs incurred by
the City; and
         (2)   The faithful performance of the terms of the permit, the
provisions of this chapter, and any other requirements provided by law.
   If the applicant fails or neglects to properly restore the right-of-way to
its proper condition within the time for completion set forth in the permit, or
within a reasonable time after notice by the City Engineer of such failure or
neglect, or fails to pay the restoration costs incurred by the City or fails or
neglects to properly maintain the right-of-way to its proper condition within a
reasonable time after notice by the City Engineer of such failure or neglect,
or fails to pay the maintenance costs incurred by the City, the right-of-way
shall be restored or maintained by the City and the costs thereof, as certified
by the City Engineer, shall be promptly paid by the applicant or bonding
company as the case may be.
      C.   Bond for Obstruction Permit. If the City Engineer determines, in
their sole discretion, that an obstruction permit applicant’s proposed use of
the right-of-way poses a risk of damage to the right-of-way, the City Engineer
may require such applicant to post a surety bond before the obstruction permit
is issued. Such bond, if required, shall be placed on file with and approved by
the City Engineer; shall be in the minimum amount of $5,000.00 or such other
amount determined by the City Engineer to be sufficient to cover the
anticipated cost of damage to the right-of-way; and shall be conditioned to
ensure removal of the obstruction and restoration of the right-of-way and all
public improvements thereon by or before the expiration date of such
obstruction permit or such extended time as may be granted by the City
Engineer.
   15.   Permittee’s Other Obligations.
      A.   Except in an emergency and with the approval of the City Engineer,
no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
      B.   A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural
free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be
interfered with.
      C.   Work under a permit shall be conducted within the permit area, and
work vehicles, equipment, and materials shall be stored within the permit area.
The loading or unloading of trucks adjacent to a permit area is prohibited
unless specifically authorized by the permit.
      D.   Contractor shall notify property owner(s) abutting the right-of-way
in the area designated in the permit at least 24-hours in advance of the start
of the work notifying them of the projected start date, type of work, who the
work is for, and the contractor business name and phone number.
   16.   Denial of Permit.
      A.   Mandatory Denial. Except in an emergency, no right-of-way permit
will be issued:
         (1)   To any person who is not in full compliance with the
requirements of this chapter;
         (2)   To any person who has outstanding debt owed to the City;
         (3)   To any person as to whom there exists grounds for the revocation
of a permit; and
         (4)   If the issuance of a permit for the particular date or time
would cause a conflict or interfere with an exhibition, celebration, festival,
or any other event.
      B.   Permissive Denial. The City Engineer may deny a permit in order to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare; to prevent interference with
the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way; or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its users.
      C.   No person shall leave or keep open any excavation or vault on, in,
or under any right-of-way. All excavations and vaults shall be protected in
accordance with the City’s utility accommodation and street restoration
specifications.
   17.   Inspection.
      A.   When the work under any permit issued pursuant to this chapter is
completed, the permittee shall notify the City Engineer.
      B.   The permittee shall make the work site available to the department
inspector and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the work.
      C.   At the time of inspection, the department inspector may order the
immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life,
health, safety, or well-being of the public.
   18.   Work Done Without Permit.
      A.   Emergency Situations. Each registrant under this chapter shall
immediately notify the City Engineer of any event regarding its equipment which
it considers to be an emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever
actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. Within two business
days after the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the
necessary right-of-way permits, and pay the fees associated therewith. If a
storm, flood, or other City-wide emergency event causes system-wide damages to
the equipment of a utility service company, requiring emergency repairs without
obtaining the necessary right-of-way permits, the Council may, upon request by
the company sustaining such damage, waive or modify the requirement that
permits be obtained after the making of emergency repairs in response to such
event. If the City Engineer becomes aware of an emergency regarding a
registrant’s equipment, the department may attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected or potentially affected by the
emergency. In any event, the department may take whatever action it deems
necessary in order to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be
borne by the registrant whose equipment occasioned the emergency.
      B.   Nonemergency Situations. Except in an emergency, any person who
obstructs or excavates a right-of-way without a permit must subsequently obtain
a permit, pay double the normal fee for such permit, pay double all the other
fees required by this Code, deposit with the department the fees necessary to
correct any damage to the right-of-way.
   19.   Revocation.
      A.   Permittees hold right-of-way permits as a privilege and not as a
right. The City reserves the right, as provided in this section, to revoke any
right-of-way permit, without fee refund, for a substantial breach of the terms
and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation or any condition
of the permit. A substantial breach by the permittee shall include, but shall
not be limited to, the following:
         (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way
permit;
         (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the
right-of-way permit or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or
deceit upon the City or its citizens;
         (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
         (4)   The failure to maintain the required bonds or insurance;
         (5)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; or
         (6)   The failure to correct a condition indicated as directed by the
inspector.
      B.   If the City Engineer determines that the permittee has committed a
substantial breach of a term of condition of any statute, ordinance, rule,
regulation, or any condition of the permit, the City Engineer shall make a
written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit.
Further, a substantial breach, as stated in this subsection, will allow the
City Engineer, at their discretion, to place additional or revised conditions
on the permit.
      C.   Within 24 hours of receiving notification of the breach, the
permittee shall contact the City Engineer with a plan, acceptable to the City
Engineer, for its correction. The permittee’s failure to so contact the City
Engineer or the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan or the
permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan shall be cause
for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, the permittee’s failure to so
contact the City Engineer, or the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable
plan, or permittee’s failure to implement the approved plan shall automatically
place the permittee on probation for one full year. From time to time, the City
Engineer may establish a list of permit conditions which, if breached, will
automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but
not limited to, working out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-
way grossly outside of the permit.
      D.   If a permittee, while on probation, commits a breach as outlined in
this section, the permittee’s permit will automatically be revoked, and the
permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for
emergency repairs.
      E.   If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the City
for the City’s reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of
collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees, incurred in connection with such
revocation.
   20.   Traffic Control Devices, Lighting,and Plating.
      A.   The public shall be protected at all excavations or trenches or open
vaults in the right-of-way by the placement of proper traffic control devices,
lighting, and plating as specified in the State Manual On Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and Applicable Provisions of SUDAS.
      B.   Every person making such an excavation or trench shall maintain any
and all protection required under Paragraph A until the trench or excavation
has been refilled and the street, pavement, sidewalk, or curb has been restored
to its proper condition as provided in the City’s utility accommodation and
street restoration specifications.
141.04   FRANCHISE OR LICENSE FOR PRIVATE OR COMMERCIAL USE.
   1.   Franchise or License Required.
      A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall occupy
or use public right-of-way on a City-wide basis for the purpose of providing
utility services to private customers without first obtaining a franchise from
the City as provided and required by Section 364.2 of the Code of Iowa, unless
such utility service is provided by a governmental entity having jurisdiction
and authority to provide such service within the City.
      B.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall occupy
or use any portion of the right-of-way for the purpose of operating or
conducting a private business, on other than a temporary basis as provided in
an obstruction permit or excavation permit, without first obtaining a license
from the City.
      C.   The City shall not grant, issue, or enter into any franchise or
license that grants or allows exclusive use or occupancy of the right-of-way.
Any person seeking a franchise or license for use of City right-of-way shall
make application for a franchise or license with the City Engineer.
      D.   An application for a franchise or license for occupancy or use of a
right-of-way shall be filed with the City Engineer on a form provided by the
City and shall include all registration information required to be submitted.
   2.   Grant of Franchise; Persons Eligible.
      A.   Under this section, franchises will be granted in accordance with
the procedures provided therefor in Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa. The terms
and conditions of a franchise shall be subject to negotiation between the
franchise applicant and the City and shall be incorporated into the form of an
ordinance. A franchise shall not be considered to have been granted by the City
unless and until the form and provisions of the franchise ordinance have been
approved and adopted by the Council, the grant of the franchise has been
approved by the City electorate at an election, and the franchise has been duly
recorded, all as required by Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa. The proposal to
grant a franchise shall not be submitted at an election until the Council has
duly passed and approved the ordinance containing the proposed franchise.
      B.   A franchise will be granted only when the following conditions are
met:
         (1)   The franchise applicant provides or proposes to provide a
utility service to all of the City residents or to all of the residents within
a given area of the City; or
         (2)   The franchise applicant provides or proposes to provide utility
service within the City or within a given part thereof and is by law required
to provide universal service within its service area; and
         (3)   The franchise applicant proposes that it be authorized to
utilize any and all street and alley rights-of-way within the City or within a
given part thereof for the purpose of providing such service; or
         (4)   The Council determines that the franchise applicant will
ultimately require authorization to utilize any and all street and alley
rights-of-way within the City or within a given part thereof for the purpose of
providing such service; and
         (5)   The franchise applicant has obtained a certificate of public
convenience and necessity from the State Utilities Board for the provision of
that service, if required, and has met all other legal requirements to provide
the utility service.
      C.   Persons providing utility services, except local exchange telephone
services, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection
derives:
         (1)   Which are not franchised by the City; and
         (2)   Which possess a certificate of public convenience and necessity
from the Iowa Utilities Board for the provision of that service, if required;
or
         (3)   Which provide utility service to all or a substantial proportion
of the residents of the City, or to all or a substantial proportion of the
residents of a given part of the City; and
         (4)   Which utilize all or a substantial proportion of the street or
alley rights-of-way within the City, or within a given part of the City, for
the purpose of providing such service;
shall be required to obtain a franchise for the continued provision of that
utility service and for the continued use and occupancy of City street rights-
of-way for that purpose.
   3.   Persons Eligible for Issuance of License.
      A.   The following persons shall not be eligible for the grant of a
franchise, but shall instead be eligible for the issuance of a license for the
use of the right-of-way at the discretion of the City Engineer:
         (1)   A person who, on the effective date of the ordinance from which
this section derives, provides or proposes to provide utility services to all
residents within the City or to all residents within a given part thereof but
who intends to utilize, for that purpose only, certain street or alley rights-
of-way constituting only a small portion of the street or alley rights-of-way
within the City or within that part of the City; or
         (2)   A person who the City determines can provide such service by
utilizing only certain street or alley rights-of-way constituting only a small
portion of the street or alley rights-of-way within the City or within a given
part of the City.
         (3)   The owner of two or more properties which abut a street or alley
right-of-way on either side thereof and which properties are zoned for multi-
family, commercial, or industrial use, who desires to use such street or alley
right-of-way to provide a private service connection between two or more
buildings or facilities located on such properties.
         (4)   The owner of two or more properties within the boundaries of the
City, which properties are used collectively as a campus for residential,
business, or educational purposes, who desires to use the streets or alleys
connecting said properties to provide a private service connection not to
exceed a four-block radius or 10,000 equivalent linear feet between two or more
buildings or facilities located on such properties.
         (5)   A person who provides or proposes to provide wholesale services
or support to its customers or clients who use the person’s equipment and
facilities within the City right-of-way. Upon request by such person for
license, or for license renewal or license amendment increasing the equivalent
linear footage of the person’s equipment within the right-of-way existing on
the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives by 10
percent or greater, the City Engineer shall review the then-anticipated cost of
relocation and removal of the person’s proposed equipment and restoration of
the City right-of-way due to said relocation or removal, and prior to issuing
such license, renewal, or amendment, the City Engineer may, in their sole
discretion, require such person to make payment to the City of an upfront
deposit payment or to post a performance and maintenance bond in the amount.
Nothing set forth herein relieves such person of their obligation to
additionally pay applicable fees, or to remove or relocate its equipment
following its license term or renewals thereof following City Engineer order,
or to otherwise comply with all provisions of this Code applicable to such
person’s use of the City right-of-way.
         (6)   A person who provides or proposes to provide a private service
connection that does not cross a street or alley right-of-way between two or
more buildings or facilities on either side thereof in accordance with
Paragraph A(3), or that exceeds a four-block radius or 10,000 equivalent linear
feet, and who, in the discretion of the City Engineer, fulfills all of the
following criteria:
            a.   Owns a minimum of one property used for non-residential
purposes within the boundaries of the City, as determined by the records of the
County Assessor or Auditor within which county the property is located, for the
duration of the initial license term and renewals thereof; and
            b.   Provides a broad-based public benefit to the City and its
residents in the form of economic activity, or job creation, or the promotion
of the health, safety, or welfare of the City’s residents; and
            c.   Does or will own the proposed equipment within the right-of-
way, and whose proposed use of the right-of-way has a minimal current impact
and minimal anticipated future impact on such right-of-way, and of the use
thereof by the City or other parties allowed by the City pursuant to this
chapter.
      B.   Appeals of the City Engineer’s decisions regarding eligibility for
the issuance of a license for the use of the right-of-way may be made pursuant
to this Code.
   4.   Authority to Issue License; Form of License and Term.
      A.   Licenses required by this section shall be issued by the City
Engineer. The City Engineer shall review each application and shall issue each
license which they determine to be in compliance with the requirements of this
section and any other applicable legal requirements. In issuing a license, the
City Engineer may require a change in the proposed location of the licensee’s
equipment where necessary to avoid interference with other equipment placed
within the public right-of-way.
      B.   Licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be in writing, shall
be executed by the licensee, and shall not take effect until approved by the
City Attorney. The form of licenses to be issued pursuant to this section shall
be uniform, but shall be subject to periodic review and modification.
   5.   Limit on Term of Franchises; Limit on Initial or Renewal Term of
Licenses.
      A.   No franchise for use of the public right-of-way shall be granted for
a term in excess of 25 years.
      B.   No license for use of the public right-of-way issued by the City
Engineer shall be issued or renewed for a term in excess of five years.
   6.   Compensation Required; Franchise and License Fees.
      A.   All new franchises granted by the City shall allow for the
collection of an annual franchise fee.
      B.   A license fee shall, to the extent allowed by the constitution and
laws of the State, be assessed on all new licenses for use or occupancy of the
right-of-way upon and after the Council’s approval by resolution of a schedule
of license fees for use of City rights-of-way. The schedule of fees for use of
City rights-of-way shall reflect the diminution in the functional utility of
the right-of-way for use by the City and shall be based upon such factors as
the value or rental value of private property abutting the right-of-way to be
used and the licensee’s avoided cost in using the City right-of-way as opposed
to establishing a private right-of-way for the licensed use upon abutting
private property. The schedule of fees for use of City rights-of-way shall
establish such fees in terms of per-linear-foot charges for the right-of-way
used, and assuming a use width of not more than 10 feet, with the schedule
reflecting the per-foot value of such right-of-way in identified segments of
the City.
      C.   In addition to being required to pay franchise or license fees,
franchisees and licensees may, to the extent allowed by Section 480A.1 of the
Code of Iowa, et seq., be required to provide in-kind services as compensation
for such use, including, but not limited to:
         (1)   The installation by the franchisee or licensee of City equipment
in the trenches excavated by or in the duct banks constructed by the franchisee
or licensee; or
         (2)   Access to such trenches or ducts so that the City can install
its equipment therein.
   Franchisees and licensees who provide such services as utility services, as
defined in this chapter, may, to the extent allowed by Section 480A.1 of the
Code of Iowa, et seq., also be required to provide access at no cost to the
services provided by the franchisee or licensee at a location to be designated
by the City, or the equivalent value of the service to be provided at such
location.
      D.   Franchise and license fees shall be paid at the Clerk’s office. The
acceptance of any such fee payment by the City shall not be construed as an
acknowledgment that the amount paid is the correct amount due, nor shall such
acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the City may
have for additional sums due and payable.
      E.   The licensee or lessee shall pay interest at the rate of 10 percent
per year on any overdue license fee calculated from the due date of the fee.
      F.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the liability of
a franchisee or licensee for all applicable federal, State, and local taxes.
      G.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Council
from exercising the right of the City to change the amount of any of the fees
required by this section.
   7.   Application for Issuance of a License. A person desiring to obtain a
license as required in this section shall make application for a license for
such use and occupancy as provided in this chapter, and shall pay an
application fee for initial issuance of the license. The application fee for
initial issuance of a license and any future changes thereto shall be effective
upon its inclusion in a schedule of fees adopted by the Council by resolution.
The application for initial issuance of a license shall be filed with the City
Engineer not less than 60 days prior to the proposed effective date of the
license and shall be filed upon a form provided by the City for that purpose.
The application shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
      A.   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
      B.   The name, address, and telephone number of a responsible person whom
the City may notify or contact at any time or in case of emergency concerning
the equipment or utility system.
      C.   A statement of the purpose for the equipment or system proposed for
installation in the public right-of-way, the type of service it will provide,
and the intended customers which it will serve.
      D.   Any additional information which the City Engineer, in their
discretion, may require.
   8.   Issuance and Renewal of Licenses; License Revocation and Cancellation.
      A.   Prior to the initial issuance of a license for use or occupancy of
public right-of-way, the City Engineer shall conduct a review of the licensee’s
background to determine the licensee’s ability to meet the requirements stated
in this section. If, on the basis of such review, the City Engineer determines
that it would not be appropriate to issue the license, the City Engineer shall
give notice of intent not to issue the license as provided in this section.
      B.   To obtain renewal of a license, the licensee shall file an
application with the City Engineer on the form provided by the City and pay an
application fee for renewal of the license. The application fee and any future
changes thereto shall be effective upon its inclusion in a schedule of fees
adopted by the Council by resolution. The renewal application shall be filed
with the City Engineer not less than 180 days prior to the expiration of the
existing license or any renewal term of the license. Upon receipt of the
application, the City Engineer shall conduct a review of the licensee and the
licensee’s prior use of the public right-of-way to determine the licensee’s
continued compliance with the requirements. If, on the basis of such review,
the City Engineer determines that the licensee and the licensee’s prior use of
the public right-of-way comply with all requirements stated in this section,
the City Engineer may renew the license for an additional term of up to five
years. If on the basis of such review the City Engineer determines that the
licensee and the licensee’s use of public right-of-way do not comply with one
or more of the requirements stated in this section, the City Engineer shall
give notice of intent not to renew the license as provided in this section. If
a licensee holds multiple licenses for use or occupancy of various rights-of-
way within the City for the same or similar purpose, the licensee shall be
required to renew all such licenses under a single license at such time as the
earliest issued license expires.
      C.   In determining the length of the term of a license, the City
Engineer shall take into consideration the likelihood that the City will
require the use of the licensed right-of-way for municipal purposes or that
such use of the licensed right-of-way will unduly burden the City or the public
in its use of the licensed right-of-way during the proposed term of the
license. A license shall not be issued or renewed if the City Engineer
determines that any of the following conditions exist in the right-of-way
proposed for licensing:
         (1)   There is insufficient space in the right-of-way to accommodate
the proposed use, given the other existing uses thereof;
         (2)   The proposed private utility service connection would interfere
with or conflict with existing or planned City equipment or utility equipment
located or to be located in the right-of-way;
         (3)   Such use is incompatible with adjacent public or private uses of
that right-of-way;
         (4)   Such use would involve an unacceptably high frequency of repair
or maintenance to the private utility service equipment thereby requiring
excessive excavation in or obstruction of the right-of-way; or
         (5)   The construction or installation of such private utility service
equipment would interfere with a public improvement undertaken or to be
undertaken by the City or with an economic development project in which the
City has an interest or investment.
      D.   If, during the term of any license, the City Engineer determines
that the license should be revoked due to the licensee's failure to comply with
any of the requirements stated in this section, the City Engineer shall give
notice of intent to revoke such license.
      E.   The following shall constitute grounds for refusal to issue or renew
a license, or for revocation of a license for use or occupancy of public right-
of-way. The licensee’s failure to observe or comply with any of the following:
         (1)   The licensee’s use or prior use of public right-of-way has been
conducted in full and timely compliance with all laws and regulations
applicable thereto, and the licensee has complied fully and in a timely manner
with the requirements of any previously issued license, and with the orders or
instructions of City officials issued pursuant to this chapter; or
         (2)   The licensee is current in the payment of license fees, if
applicable, and the licensee has made such payments fully and when due.
         (3)   The licensee has made a misleading statement or a material
misrepresentation in connection with an application for initial issuance or
renewal of a license, in connection with its use of public right-of-way.
      F.   The City Engineer shall give notice of intent to cancel such license
as provided in this section if, during the term of any license, the City
Engineer determines that:
         (1)   The licensee’s continued use of the public right-of-way will
unduly burden the City or the public in its use of that property;
         (2)   The public right-of-way for which the license was issued will be
required for municipal purposes during the term of the license;
         (3)   The licensee’s equipment, at a particular location, will
interfere with:
            a.   A present or future City use of the right-of-way;
            b.   A public improvement undertaken or to be undertaken by the
City;
            c.   An economic development project in which the City has an
interest or investment; or
            d.   The public’s safety or convenience in using the right-of-way
for ordinary travel.
         (4)   The public health, safety, and welfare requires it; or
         (5)   The continued existence of the license is not in the City’s best
interests.
      G.   Notice of intent not to issue a license for use of the public right-
of-way shall be given to the applicant, either by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or by actual service or delivery thereof, which notice shall
be given not more than 30 days after submission of the application. Notice of
intent not to renew a license for use of the public right-of-way shall be given
to the licensee, either by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
actual service or delivery thereof, which notice shall be given not more than
90 days after submission of the application. Notice of intent to revoke or
cancel a license shall also be given to the licensee. The notice shall set
forth the grounds for refusal to issue or renew or for revocation or
cancellation and shall inform the applicant or licensee of the right to an
appeal hearing upon request. At the hearing, the applicant or licensee shall
have the burden of establishing that the grounds asserted in the notice do not
exist.
      H.   Upon the effective date of revocation or cancellation as provided in
the City Engineer’s notice thereof, or upon the effective date specified in the
City Engineer’s written decision upon the licensee’s appeal, the licensee shall
be required to cease its use and occupancy of the right-of-way or to remove or
relocate its equipment therefrom, as provided in the notice or decision.
Equipment not removed or relocated from the right-of-way as required in such
notice or order shall be considered a nuisance and may be removed, relocated,
or taken possession of by the City, at the licensee’s expense. Except in
emergency circumstances, the requirement to relocate, remove, or cease use of
equipment shall be suspended during the pendency of any appeal taken by a
licensee.
      I.   If a license is refused or cancelled upon the basis that the City
property licensed or proposed for licensing is or will be required for
municipal purposes, the applicant or licensee shall not be entitled to appeal.
However, in that event, the licensee shall be entitled to a partial refund of
the annual fee already paid, such refund to be computed on the basis of 1/12 of
the required annual fee multiplied by the number of unexpired whole months of
the year remaining in the license term. In all other cases where a license is
not issued or renewed or is revoked, no refund of any portion of the required
annual fee shall be paid to the licensee.
      J.   Notwithstanding the notice and hearing requirements of this section,
the City Engineer may, in emergency circumstances, order the immediate
relocation or removal of equipment from the right-of-way and may, upon the
licensee’s failure to comply with such order, immediately remove, relocate, or
take possession of such equipment at the licensee’s expense.
   9.   Failure to Secure, Renew or Comply.
      A.   Any person who fails to secure a franchise or license required under
this section or any franchisee or licensee who fails to comply with the
requirements of this section shall, upon notification of such violation by the
City Engineer, immediately act either to abate the violation or to cease its
use and occupancy of the right-of-way and remove its equipment or system from
the right-of-way.
      B.   The City reserves the right either to remove or to disconnect and
render inoperative any equipment or system in the right-of-way under franchise
or license which is used or maintained contrary to this chapter; provided,
however, that the City will give written notice of its intent to take such
action, including the date upon which such action will be taken, to the
affected franchisee or licensee not less than seven days prior to taking such
action.
   10.   Amendment to License. If a licensee with a current license issued
pursuant to this section proposes to expand, reduce, relocate, or modify any
portion of its equipment or system within public right-of-way, the licensee
shall file an application for an amendment to the current license with the City
Engineer, shall pay the administrative application fee and pay a deposit or
post a bond, if required. An application for an amendment to a current license
shall include relevant new information of the type required in connection with
the initial application for a license. If approved, the amended license shall
be issued by the City Engineer in the same manner as the original license.
   11.   Duties of Licensee.
      A.   No license required under this section or amendment to such license
shall be issued for any equipment or system until the required fees have been
paid and until a complete application has been filed with and approved by the
City Engineer.
      B.   The licensee’s equipment or system shall be installed or constructed
in accordance with applicable industry standards, the City’s utility
accommodation and street restoration specifications, and the terms and
conditions imposed by the City.
      C.   If it becomes necessary to excavate or obstruct any public right-of-
way in connection with the installation, construction, reconstruction, repair,
operation, disconnection, or removal of a licensee’s equipment or system, the
licensee shall first obtain a permit from the City.
      D.   The licensee shall maintain its equipment and all parts of its
system in good condition, order, and repair.
      E.   The licensee shall be responsible for repairing or reimbursing other
licensed or franchised utilities or other persons or entities lawfully using
the right-of-way for any damage to their property caused by negligence of the
licensee or its agents, employees, or contractors in connection with the
installation, construction, reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection,
or removal of the licensee’s equipment or system.
      F.   No license required under this section shall be issued to authorize
placement of a utility system in any space which is required for public use.
   12.   Relocation or Removal of Equipment; Payment of City Costs Due to
Improper Location of Equipment.
      A.   Under this chapter, the City Engineer shall order the removal or
relocation of equipment, as they deem appropriate, if the City Engineer
determines at any time that:
         (1)   A registrant’s or permittee’s continued use of the public right-
of-way will unduly burden the City or the public in its use of that property;
         (2)   The public right-of-way which the registrant or permittee is
using or occupying will be required for municipal purposes;
         (3)   The registrant’s or permittee’s equipment at a particular
location will interfere with:
            a.   A present or future City use of the right-of-way;
            b.   A public improvement undertaken or to be undertaken by the
City;
            c.   An economic development project in which the City has an
interest or investment; or
            d.   The public’s safety or convenience in using the right-of-way
for ordinary travel; or
         (4)   The public health, safety, and welfare requires it.
      B.   Franchisees and licensees under this chapter shall promptly and, at
their own expense, with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently
remove their equipment, or relocate their equipment within the right-of-way,
whenever the City Engineer orders such removal or relocation, and shall, at
their sole expense, restore the right-of-way to its proper and required
condition.
   13.   Damage to Other Equipment.
      A.   When any City department performs work in the right-of-way and finds
it necessary to maintain, support, or move a permittee’s, franchisee’s, or
licensee’s equipment in order to protect it, the costs associated therewith
will be billed to that person and must be paid within 30 days from the date of
billing. In such event, the City Engineer or City department performing such
work shall notify the affected registrant, permittee, franchisee, licensee, or
lessee, informing such person of the action it intends to take with respect to
such equipment and affording such person the opportunity to review and comment
on the action proposed to be taken. If circumstances permit it, the City
Engineer or City department performing the work may allow the affected
registrant, permittee, franchisee, or licensee to take the action necessary to
maintain, support, or move its equipment.
      B.   Each registrant, permittee, franchisee, or licensee shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any equipment in the right-of-way which
it or its equipment damages. Each registrant, permittee, franchisee, or
licensee shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the
equipment of another registrant, permittee, franchisee, or licensee occurring
during the City’s response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant’s
equipment.
   14.   Abandoned and Unused Equipment.
      A.   Under this chapter, a franchisee or licensee who has determined to
discontinue its operations in the City, in whole or in part, or who has
discontinued use of part or all of its equipment in the right-of-way, must
either:
         (1)   Provide information satisfactory to the City Engineer that its
obligations for its equipment in the right-of-way have been lawfully assumed by
another franchisee or licensee; or
         (2)   Submit to the City Engineer a proposal and instruments for
transferring ownership of its equipment to the City. If a franchisee or
licensee proceeds under this subsection, the City may, at its option:
            a.   Assume ownership of and responsibility for the equipment; or
            b.   Refuse transfer of ownership to the City and require the
registrant, at its own expense, to remove the equipment.
      B.   A registrant, franchisee, or licensee who fails to comply with this
section and whose equipment remains unused for a period of two years shall be
deemed to have abandoned such equipment and the equipment shall be deemed to be
abandoned. Abandoned equipment is deemed to be a nuisance. The City may, with
respect to abandoned equipment which is deemed a nuisance, exercise any
remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to:
         (1)   Bringing an action for nuisance abatement in which the City may
seek the abatement of the nuisance or authority to take possession of the
equipment; or
         (2)   Requiring removal of the equipment by the registrant,
franchisee, or licensee.
      C.   Any franchisee or licensee who has unused equipment in any right-of-
way shall remove it from the right-of-way during the next scheduled excavation,
unless this requirement is waived by the City Engineer.
      D.   A franchisee or licensee who abandons or ceases use of its equipment
as provided in this section and whose proposal to transfer such equipment to
the City is accepted by the City shall, nonetheless, be allowed to remove wires
or cables from underground conduits and to remove movable equipment from
underground vaults or handholes, if the City Engineer determines that such
removal can be accomplished without damaging such conduits or vaults, and
provided such removal can be accomplished without extensive excavation or long-
term obstruction of the right-of-way. Such removal shall be accomplished
pursuant to appropriate right-of-way permits, which may include conditions
regarding the manner of removal and schedule for removal.
   15.   Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers. The City, by issuing of a
right-of-way permit, franchise, or a license under this chapter, does not
surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and
rights which it has or which may be vested in the City under the State
constitution, State law, and the City Charter to regulate the use of the right-
of-way by such persons. All such persons, by acceptance of a right-of-way
permit, franchise, or license are deemed and shall be held to agree that all
lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as
are or may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the City, shall be in
full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the City at any
time. All such persons are further deemed to acknowledge that their rights are
subject to the regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt and enforce
general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and are
deemed to have agreed to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances
enacted by the City pursuant to such powers.
   16.   Existing Franchises. If a conflict of language occurs between the
provisions of this chapter and an existing franchise agreement, the conflict
shall be resolved by honoring the terms of the franchise until it expires.
   17.   Construction of Chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
an acquiescence in or ratification of the occupancy or use of any public right-
of-way in the City by any person occupying the right-of-way without legal
right, nor shall this chapter be construed as conferring the right to occupy or
use any public right-of-way within the City upon any such person illegally or
without authority occupying the right-of-way.
141.05   APPEAL.
   Administrative decisions by City staff and enforcement actions of the
enforcement officer may be appealed by the applicant to the Council pursuant to
the following rules:
   1.   The appeal must be filed in writing with the City Administrator within
20 business days of the decision or enforcement action.
   2.   The written appeal shall specify in detail the action appealed from,
the errors allegedly made by the enforcement officer giving rise to the appeal,
a written summary of all oral and written testimony the applicant intends to
introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all witnesses
the applicant intends to call, copies of all documents the applicant intends to
introduce at the hearing, and the relief requested.
   3.   The enforcement officer shall specify, in writing, the reasons for the
enforcement action, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the
enforcement officer intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names
and addresses of all witnesses the enforcement officer intends to call, and
copies of all documents the enforcement officer intends to introduce at the
hearing.
   4.   The City Administrator shall notify the applicant and the enforcement
officer by ordinary mail, and shall give public notice in accordance with
Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa, of the date, time, and place for the regular or
special meeting of the Council at which the hearing on the appeal shall occur.
The hearing shall be scheduled for a date not less than four or more than 20
days after the filing of the appeal. The rules of evidence and procedure, and
the standard of proof to be applied, shall be the same as provided by Chapter
17A of the Code of Iowa. The applicant may be represented by counsel at the
applicant’s expense. The enforcement officer may be represented by the City
Attorney or by an attorney designated by the Council at City expense. The
decision of the Council shall be rendered in writing and may be appealed to the
Iowa District Court.
CHAPTER 143
STORMWATER UTILITY
 
143.01 Purpose                                         143.05 Prohibited Acts
143.02 Definitions                                     143.06 Right of Entry
143.03 Scope and Responsibility for Stormwater Utility 143.07 Enforcement
143.04 Public Utilities Superintendent                  
 
143.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a stormwater utility which shall
be responsible for stormwater management within the corporate boundaries of the
City and shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation,
use, and enhancement of stormwater management systems and facilities.
143.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Commercial” or “Industrial” means any developed land whereon
commercial, retail, and office, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage
buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots,
public and private school buildings, churches, hospitals, and convalescent
centers have been constructed.
   2.   “Customers of the stormwater utility” means and includes all persons,
properties, and entities served by or benefiting from the utility’s
acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public
stormwater management system and facilities.
   3.   “Developed land” means land that has been altered from its natural
state by construction or installation of more than 500 square feet of
“impervious surface area” as defined in this section.
   4.   “Duplex dwelling” means a building containing only two dwelling units
and designed for and occupied exclusively by not more than two families. In the
application of stormwater service charge rates, duplex dwelling properties
shall be treated as two single-family dwellings.
   5.   “Dwelling unit” means a singular unit or apartment providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
   6.   “Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU)” means the average impervious
coverage of a detached dwelling unit property in the City as determined by the
City, and shall be used as the basis for determining stormwater service
charges. Four thousand square feet of impervious surface area shall be one
equivalent unit.
   7.   “Impervious surface area” means those areas which prevent or impede the
infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it enters in natural conditions
prior to development. Common impervious surface areas include, but are not
limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, patios, parking lots, storage
areas, compacted gravel surfaces, and other surfaces which prevent or impede
the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to
development.
   8.   “Multiple-family dwelling” means a building or portion thereof
containing three or more dwelling units designed for or occupied by three or
more families. In the application of stormwater service charge rates, each
multiple-family dwelling unit shall be treated as one single-family dwelling.
   9.   “Pollutant” means anything that causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents;
oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard
wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution; pesticides,
herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal
coliform bacteria and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal
wastes; waste and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
   10.   “Service charge” means the periodic rate, fee, or charge applicable to
a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the service
provided by the City stormwater utility. Service charges are based on
measurable parameters which influence the stormwater utility’s cost of
providing services and facilities, with the most important factor being the
amount of impervious surface area on each parcel of developed property. The
service charge shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the
Council.
   11.   “Single-family dwelling” means a building containing only one dwelling
unit and designed for and occupied exclusively for residence purposes by only
one family.
   12.   “Stormwater management systems and facilities” means the issue of
drainage management (flooding) and environmental quality (pollution, erosion,
and sedimentation) of receiving rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, and ponds
through improvements, maintenance, regulation, and funding of plants,
structures, and property used in the collection, retention, detention, and
treatment of stormwater or surface water drainage.
   13.   “Substantial completion” means the date when the construction has been
completed and the City has acknowledged that the construction has been
completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications through the
issuance of a temporary Certificate of Occupancy or permanent Certificate of
Occupancy.
   14.   “Townhome dwelling” means a dwelling unit which is detached or
attached horizontally, and not vertically to one or more other dwelling units,
wherein the land or lot beneath each dwelling may be individually owned in
common by a townhome association. In the application of stormwater service
charge rates, each townhome dwelling shall be treated as one single-family
dwelling.
   15.   “Undeveloped land” means land in its unaltered natural state or which
has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response
comparable to land in an unaltered state shall be deemed undeveloped.
“Undeveloped land” shall have less than 500 square feet of pavement, asphalt,
or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface
area that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to
collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which
would occur when the land was in an unaltered natural state.
143.03   SCOPE AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR STORMWATER UTILITY.
   The City stormwater utility consists of all rivers, streams, creeks,
branches, lakes, ponds, drainageways, channels, ditches, swales, storm sewer,
culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, dams, head walls, and other structures,
natural or manmade, within the corporate boundaries of the City which control
or convey stormwater through which the City intentionally diverts surface
waters from its public streets and properties. The City owns or has legal
access for purposes of operation, maintenance, and improvement to those
segments of this system which:
   1.   Are located within public streets, rights-of-ways, and easements;
   2.   Are subject to easement or other permanent provisions for adequate
access for operation, maintenance, and improvement of systems or facilities; or
   3.   Are located on public lands to which the City has adequate access for
operation, maintenance, and improvement of systems or facilities.
Operation, maintenance, and improvement of stormwater systems and facilities
which are located on private property or public property not owned by the City
and for which there has been no public dedication of such systems and
facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner
or its occupant.
143.04   PUBLIC UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Public Utilities Superintendent has the following powers and duties
related to the City stormwater utility:
   1.   Operation and Maintenance. Operation and maintenance of the stormwater
management systems and facilities.
   2.   Inspections and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to
assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   3.   Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all stormwater
management systems and facilities.
   4.   Policies. Recommend to the Council policies to be adopted and enforced
to implement the provisions of this chapter.
143.05   PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
   1.   Damage Stormwater Management Systems and Facilitates. Maliciously,
willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper
with any structure, pipe, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the
stormwater management systems or facilities.
   2.   Illicit Discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise
discharge or cause to throw, drain, run, or allow to seep or otherwise be
discharged into the City stormwater management system and facilities,
including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants,
other than stormwater.
   3.   Manholes. Open or enter any manhole, structure, or intake of the
stormwater system, except by authority of the Public Works Superintendent.
   4.   Connection. Connection of any private stormwater system to the City’s
stormwater management system and facilities, except by authority of the Public
Works Superintendent.
143.06   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Public Works Superintendent and other authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing all private stormwater discharges, directly or
indirectly, entering into any public stormwater management system or facility,
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
143.07   ENFORCEMENT.
   The following enforcement provisions shall apply to violations this chapter:
   1.   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil
action including an action for injunctive relief. In any civil enforcement
action, administrative or judicial, the City shall be entitled to recover its
attorneys’ fees and costs from a person who is determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.
   2.   Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced as a
municipal infraction within the meaning of Section 364.22 of the Code of Iowa,
pursuant to Chapter 3.
   3.   Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be undertaken by the
enforcement officer upon the advice and consent of the City Attorney.
CHAPTER 144
STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGES
 
144.01 Stormwater Service Charges Required 144.05 Exemptions From Charges
144.02 Effective Date of Service Charges   144.06 Billing for Service
144.03 Basic Rate                          144.07 Annual Revision of Rates
144.04 Rate Appeals                         
 
144.01   STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED.
   Every customer whose premises are served by a connection with the stormwater
management system and facilities of the City, either directly or indirectly,
shall pay to the City stormwater service charges hereinafter established and
specified for the purpose of contributing towards the costs of construction,
maintenance, and operation of the stormwater management system and facilities.
144.02   EFFECTIVE DATE OF SERVICE CHARGES.
   Stormwater service charges shall accrue beginning January 1, 2011, and shall
be billed monthly thereafter to all customers.
144.03   BASIC RATE.
   1.   Except as hereinafter noted, each customer whose property lies within
the corporate limits of the City shall pay to the City, through its collection
agent, the City’s Water Department, at the same time payment for City water is
made, the following charges per equivalent residential unit associated with the
customer’s property (an “ERU” means the median average impervious coverage of a
detached dwelling unit property in the City, which has been determined by the
City to be 4,000 square feet of impervious surface area):
      A.   Undeveloped. A flat storm sewer availability charge at the rate of
$0.00 per month, regardless of the amount of consumption by such customer.
      B.   Residential. A storm sewer availability charge, regardless of the
amount of the consumption by such customer, will be adopted by resolution of
the Council.
      C.   Commercial or Industrial. A storm sewer availability charge will be
adopted by resolution of the Council.
   2.   The number of ERU’s on each property shall be calculated by the Public
Utilities Superintendent based on the most recent aerial photography available
to the City or impervious surface data from an approved site plan for the
property.
144.04   RATE APPEALS.
   Any customer who believes the provisions of this chapter have been applied
in error may appeal in the following manner:
   1.   Filing of Appeal. An appeal must be filed in writing with the City
Administrator. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include
a survey prepared by a registered State land surveyor or professional engineer
containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area,
and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of
the property to rainfall events.
   2.   Technical Review. Using the information provided by the appellant, the
City Administrator shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the
property and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days.
   3.   Adjustment of Charge. In response to an appeal, the City Administrator
may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in
conformance with the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
   4.   Appeal of Adverse Decision. A decision of the City Administrator which
is adverse to an appellant may be further appealed to the Council within 30
days of receipt of notice of the adverse decision. Notice of the appeal shall
be served on the Council by the appellant, stating the grounds for the appeal.
The Council shall schedule a public hearing within 30 days. All decisions of
the Council shall be served on the appellant by registered mail, sent to the
billing address of the appellant.
   5.   Council Decisions Final. All decisions of the Council shall be final,
subject to any appeal rights available under current State Law.
144.05   EXEMPTIONS FROM CHARGES.
   Exemptions from charges are those permitted as follows:
   1.   City, State, and federal roads, bridges, highways, streets, rights-of-
way, sidewalks, and pathways.
   2.   Parks, buildings, facilities, and open spaces, including, but not
limited to, parking lots or facilities, owned or operated by the City.
   3.   Railroad right-of-way (tracks).
   4.   A subdivided lot until a substantially completed structure has been
built on the lot.
144.06   BILLING FOR SERVICE.
   Billing and payment for stormwater services shall be in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Payments of Bills. All stormwater service charges are due and payable
under the same terms and conditions provided for payment of a combined service
account as contained in Section
92.04. Stormwater service may be discontinued or disconnected in accordance
with the provisions contained in in Section
92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
   2.   Lien for Nonpayment. Except as provided for in Section
92.07, the owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall
be jointly and severally liable for sewer service charges to the premises.
Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien
upon the property or premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   3.   The provision for collection provided herein shall be in addition to
any rights or remedies that the City may have under the laws of the State or
this Code.
144.07   ANNUAL REVISION OF RATES.
   The City will review the stormwater service charges at least yearly and
revise the stormwater service charges as necessary to ensure that such charges
as herein established and specified generate adequate revenues to pay the costs
of maintenance and operation (including replacement and debt service) of a
stormwater management system and facilities and that the stormwater service
charges continue to provide for the proportional distribution of maintenance
and operation costs (including replacement costs and debt service) for a
stormwater management system and facilities among the users and user classes.
The liability of a stormwater service user to pay for charges as provided in
this chapter shall not be contingent, however, upon any such review or
revision.
CHAPTER 145
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
 
145.01 Definitions                    145.08 Electrical Distribution System
145.02 Permits                        145.09 Service Buildings and Other
                                      Facilities
145.03 Licenses                       145.10 Refuse Handling
145.04 Inspection                     145.11 Fuel Supply and Storage
145.05 Environmental, Open Space, and 145.12 Fire Protection
Access Requirements
145.06 Water Supply                   145.13 Miscellaneous
145.07 Sewage Disposal                145.14 Special Penalties
 
145.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Dependent vehicle” means a recreational vehicle unit which is
dependent upon a service building for toilet and lavatory facilities.
   2.   “License” means a written license issued by the City allowing a person
to operate and maintain a recreational vehicle park under the provisions of
this chapter and regulations issued hereunder.
   3.   “Permit” means a written permit issued by the City permitting the
construction, alteration, and extension of a recreational vehicle park under
the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder.
   4.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicular type unit primarily designed
as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, or travel use, which
either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle.
The basic entities are: camping trailer, motor home, travel trailer, and truck
camper.
      A.   Camping trailer is a vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and
constructed with collapsible partial side walls which fold for towing by
another vehicle and unfold at the camp site to provide temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use.
      B.   Motor home is a vehicular unit built on a self-propelled motor
vehicle chassis, primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, or travel use.
      C.   Travel trailer is a vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels of
such a size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when
drawn by a motorized vehicle; primarily designed and constructed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use; and of a
body width of no more than eight feet and a body length of no more than 32 feet
when factory equipped for the road.
      D.   Truck camper is a portable unit, designed to be loaded onto, or
affixed to the bed or chassis of a truck, constructed to provide temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use. Truck campers are of
two basic types as defined below:
         (1)   Slide-in camper - a portable unit designed to be loaded onto and
unloaded from the bed of a pick-up truck, constructed to provide temporary
living quarters for recreational, travel, or camping use.
         (2)   Chassis-mount camper - a portable unit designed to be affixed to
a truck chassis, and constructed to provide temporary living quarters for
recreational, travel, or camping use.
   5.   “Self-contained vehicle” means a recreational vehicle unit which can
operate independent of connections to sewer, water, and electric systems. It
contains a water-flushed toilet, lavatory, shower, and kitchen sink, all of
which are connected to water storage and sewage holding tanks located within
the recreational vehicle unit.
145.02   PERMITS.
   It is unlawful for any person to construct, alter, or extend any
recreational vehicle park within the City limits unless the owner holds a valid
permit issued by the City. All applications for permits shall be made to the
City and shall contain the following information:
   1.   Name and address of applicant.
   2.   Interest of the applicant in the recreational vehicle park.
   3.   Location and legal description of the recreational vehicle park.
   4.   Complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed park area
showing:
      A.   The area and dimensions of the tract of land;
      B.   The number, location, and size of all recreational vehicle spaces;
      C.   The location and width of roadways and walkways;
      D.   The location of service buildings, sanitary stations, and any other
proposed structures;
      E.   The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes;
      F.   Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse and sewage
disposal facilities;
      G.   Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be
constructed within the recreational vehicle park;
      H.   The location and details of lighting and electrical systems.
   5.   Such other information as the City shall require to reasonably evaluate
the application.
After a permit has been issued by the City and after the plans and
specifications for the proposed park area are approved by resolution of the
Council, construction may proceed.
145.03   LICENSES.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate any recreational vehicle park
within the limits of the City unless said person holds a valid license issued
annually by the City in the name of the person for the specific recreational
vehicle park. Every person holding a license shall give notice, in writing, to
the City within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away, or
otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any recreational vehicle park.
Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the
ownership or control of such recreational vehicle park.
145.04   INSPECTION.
   It is the duty of the owners or occupants of recreational vehicle parks and
vehicles contained therein, or of the person in charge thereof, to give the
City officials free access to such premises at reasonable times for the purpose
of inspection. It is the duty of every occupant of a recreational vehicle park
to give the owner thereof, or any agent or employees, access to any part of
such recreational vehicle park or its premises at reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with this chapter and regulations issued hereunder or with any
lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
145.05   ENVIRONMENTAL, OPEN SPACE, AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   General Requirements. Condition of soil, ground water level, drainage,
and topography shall not create hazards to the property or to the health or
safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke,
noise, odors, or other adverse influences and no portion subject to
unpredictable or sudden flooding, subsidence, or erosion shall be used for any
purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards.
   2.   Soil and Ground Cover Requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in all
parts of every park area shall be paved or covered with stone screenings, or
other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of
preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust.
   3.   Density Requirement. The density shall not exceed 20 vehicle spaces per
acre of gross site area.
   4.   Required Recreation Area. In all recreational vehicle park areas there
shall be at least one recreation area which shall be easily accessible from all
vehicle spaces. The size of such recreation area shall be not less than eight
percent of the gross site area, not including setbacks.
   5.   Park Street System and Layout.
      A.   General Requirements. All park areas shall be provided with safe and
convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets. Surfacing of the park
street system shall be two-inch asphaltic concrete mat laid over four-inch
gravel. All streets shall be maintained in good, usable, smooth condition. Upon
approval of the Council, a one-year extension to hard-surface the streets may
be granted and may be applied for again until circumstances change or until
request to Council is denied.
      B.   Access. Access to recreational vehicle park areas shall be designed
to minimize congestion and hazards at their entrances or exits and allow free
movement of traffic on adjacent streets. All traffic into or out of the park
areas shall be through such entrances and exits. Access to vehicle spaces shall
be from internal streets only.
      C.   Internal Streets. Surfaced streets shall be of adequate width to
accommodate anticipated traffic and, in any case, shall meet the following
minimum requirements:
         (1)   One-way, no parking         15 feet.
         (2)   One-way, parking on one side only   20 feet.
         (3)   Two-way, no parking         24 feet.
         (4)   Two-way, parking on one side only   32 feet.
         (5)   Two-way, parking on both sides      40 feet.
      D.   Off-street Parking and Maneuvering Space. Each recreational vehicle
park shall provide sufficient parking and maneuvering space so that the
parking, loading, or maneuvering of vehicles incidental to parking shall not
necessitate the use of any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way or any
private grounds not part of the park.
      E.   Minimum Requirements for Yards and Lot Sizes.
         (1)   Front Yard. Same as district, or 50 feet, whichever is greater.
This requirement shall apply to any and all roads or streets upon which the
recreational vehicle park abuts.
         (2)   Side yard - 35 feet.
         (3)   Rear yard - 35 feet.
         (4)   Minimum area - 1½ acres.
         (5)   Maximum density - 20 unit spaces per gross acre of park site.
The rear or side yards shall be screened from adjacent property access by
planting screen not less than 10 feet in width or by an unclimbable fence wall.
      F.   Requirements for Recreational Vehicle Spaces.
         (1)   Minimum space size - 20 feet by 55 feet.
         (2)   Minimum space area - 1,100 square feet.
         (3)   Off-drive parking - One parking space for and within the area of
each recreational vehicle space.
         (4)   Minimum front yard - 10 feet.
         (5)   Minimum rear yard - Five feet.
         (6)   Minimum side yard - Five feet.
         (7)   Recreational vehicle separation - The minimum distance between
any two recreational vehicles shall be not less than 10 feet. Any accessory
structures such as attached awnings, carports, or individual storage facilities
shall, for the purpose of this separation requirement, be considered to be part
of the recreational vehicle.
      G.   Site Plan Requirements.
         (1)   A site plan of the park site shall be required for review and
consideration of a “special use” permit.
         (2)   The site plan shall be prepared at a scale of not less than 1
inch = 100 feet.
         (3)   All provisions to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be
clearly illustrated.
         (4)   All existing drainage and public utility facilities shall be
shown; and proposed methods of stormwater removal and waste distribution shall
be stated on the plan. Detailed requirements shall be approved by the City
prior to the issuance of a special permit.
         (5)   Final recreational vehicle park development shall be in
accordance with the approved site plan.
145.06   WATER SUPPLY.
   1.   General Requirements. Connection shall be made to the City water system
and its supply used exclusively. The connection to the City water main should
be made through a compound meter supplied by the park owner and placed in an
accessible location. Compound meters shall be sized to fit the main used in the
park area.
   2.   Water Distribution System. The water supply system of the recreational
vehicle park shall be piped to all buildings and other facilities requiring
water. All water piping fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the City Public Works Specifications.
   3.   Water Stations. Each recreational vehicle park shall be provided with
one or more easily accessible water supply outlets for filling recreational
vehicle water tanks. Such water supply outlets shall consist of at least a
water hydrant and the necessary appurtenances and shall be protected against
the hazards of backflow and back-siphonage.
   4.   Individual Water Connections. If facilities for individual water
service connections are provided, the following requirements shall apply:
      A.   Riser pipes provided for individual water service connections shall
be so located and constructed that they will not be damaged by the parking of
recreational vehicles.
      B.   Water riser pipes shall extend at least four inches above ground
elevation. The pipe size shall be three-quarter inch.
      C.   If it is intended to use water service connections in the
wintertime, water services shall be provided with a sanitary freezeless water
connector similar to the “Woodford Thermaline.”
      D.   If the water system is not to be used in the wintertime, provision
shall be made for completely draining the entire water system by providing a
drain bib in the meter manhole on the service side of the meter. Provision
shall be made to drain the manhole. Other methods of draining the pipelines
will be considered upon the submittal of complete design details.
      E.   For those installations not to be used in the winter, valves shall
be provided near the outlet of each water service connection. They shall be
turned off and the outlets capped or plugged when not in use.
145.07   SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   1.   General Requirements. An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be
provided in all recreational vehicle parks for conveying of all sewage. Such
system shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the
City Public Works Specifications.
   2.   Sanitary Stations.
      A.   A sanitary station shall be provided as required by the City.
      B.   Each recreational vehicle park shall be provided with a sanitary
station in the ratio of one for every 100 spaces or fractional part thereof.
      C.   Sanitary stations shall be screened from other activities by visual
barriers such as fences, walls, or natural growth and shall be separated from
any parking space by a distance of at least 50 feet.
   3.   Individual Sewer Connections. If facilities for individual sewer
connections are provided, the following requirements shall apply:
      A.   The sewer riser pipe shall have at least a four-inch diameter, shall
be trapped below the ground surface and shall be so located on the parking
space that the sewer connection to the recreational vehicle drain outlet will
approximate a vertical position.
      B.   All materials used for sewer connections shall be corrosive
resistant nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface shall be smooth.
      C.   Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a
vehicle does not occupy the space. Surface drainage shall be away from the
riser.
   4.   Sink Wastes. No liquid wastes from sinks shall be discharged onto or
allowed to accumulate on the ground surface.
145.08   ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
   If an electrical wiring system is provided, it shall consist of approved
fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances, which shall be installed and maintained
in accordance with applicable codes and regulations of local utility contractor
and currently adopted State Electrical Code.
145.09   SERVICE BUILDINGS AND OTHER FACILITIES.
   The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings and other
service facilities such as management offices, repair shops, and storage areas;
sanitary facilities; laundry facilities; indoor recreation areas; and
commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the exclusive use of
trailer occupants:
   1.   Service Building Sanitary Requirements. A central service building
containing the necessary toilet and other plumbing fixtures specified shall be
provided in recreational vehicle parks which provide spaces for dependent
vehicles. Service buildings shall be conveniently located within a radius of
approximately 300 feet to the spaces to be served.
   2.   Other Service Facilities. When a recreational vehicle park requiring a
service building is operated in connection with a resort or other business
establishment, the number of sanitary facilities for such business
establishment shall be in excess of those required by the schedule for vehicle
spaces and shall be based on the total number of persons using such facilities.
   3.   Structural Requirements for Buildings. All portions of the structure
shall be properly protected from damage by ordinary use and by decay,
corrosion, termites, and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be
of such materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or
penetration of moisture and weather. All rooms containing sanitary or laundry
facilities shall:
      A.   Have sound-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and
female sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions around showers, bathtubs,
lavatories, and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense,
nonabsorbent, waterproof material, or be covered with moisture resistant
material.
      B.   Have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the
outdoors. The minimum aggregate gross area of windows for each required room
shall be not less than 10 percent of floor area served by them.
      C.   Have at least one window which can be easily opened or a mechanical
device which will adequately ventilate the room.
   4.   Additional Requirements.
      A.   Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with
self-closing doors. The shower stalls shall be of the individual type. The
rooms shall be screened to prevent direct view of the interior when the
exterior doors are open.
      B.   Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows:
         (1)   General seeing tasks - five foot-candles.
         (2)   Laundry room work area - 40 foot-candles.
         (3)   Toilet room, in front of mirrors - 40 foot-candles.
      C.   Hot and cold water shall be furnished in every lavatory, sink,
bathtub, shower, and laundry fixture, and cold water shall be furnished to
every water closet and urinal.
   5.   Barbecue Pits, Fireplaces, and Stoves. Cooking shelters, barbecue pits,
fireplaces, and wood-burning stoves shall be located, constructed, maintained,
and used as to minimize fire hazard and smoke nuisance both on the property on
which used and on neighboring property. No open fire shall be permitted except
in facilities provided. No open fire shall be used and no material burned which
emits dense smoke or objectionable odors.
145.10   REFUSE HANDLING.
   The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in a recreational vehicle
park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage,
insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, or air pollution. All refuse
shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodent proof containers, which shall
be located not more than 100 feet from any vehicle space. Containers shall be
provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. Refuse
collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such container
stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to
minimize spillage and container deterioration and facilitate cleaning around
them. All refuse and garbage shall be collected at least once daily, using
available municipal, or private agencies.
145.11   FUEL SUPPLY AND STORAGE.
   Fuel supply and storage shall be limited to containers, tanks, and cylinders
mounted and used on individual recreational vehicles. Fuel supply to service
buildings shall be public utility gas or electricity, or if such is not
available, a special permit may be allowed for L.P. gas.
145.12   FIRE PROTECTION.
   The recreational vehicle park shall be subject to the rules and regulations
of the Fire Department. Recreational vehicle parks shall be kept free of
litter, rubbish, and other flammable materials. Portable fire extinguishers of
a type approved by the Fire Department shall be kept in service buildings and
at all locations designated by the Fire Department, and shall be maintained in
good operating condition. Fires shall be made only in stoves and other
equipment intended for such purposes. Fire hydrants shall be provided, per the
latest edition of the Uniform Fire Code, at the time of construction.
145.13   MISCELLANEOUS.
   1.   Supervision. The person to whom a license is issued shall at all times
operate the recreational vehicle park in compliance with this chapter and shall
provide adequate supervision to maintain the recreational vehicle park area,
its facilities, and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary
condition at all times.
   2.   Duration of Stay. An occupant of a vehicle space located in a
recreational vehicle park shall not remain in the space or park for more than
90 consecutive days nor more than 180 days in a calendar year.
   3.   Registration of Occupants. Every owner or operator of recreational
vehicle parks shall maintain a register containing a record of all vehicles and
occupants. Such register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting
the recreational vehicle park and shall be preserved for a period of one
calendar year after the year’s log is completed. Such register shall contain:
      A.   The names and permanent addresses of all vehicle occupants.
      B.   The make, model, and license number of the trailer and tow vehicles;
and
      C.   The dates of arrival and departure of a vehicle or its occupants.
145.14   SPECIAL PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be in violation
of this Code of Ordinances, and each day’s failure of compliance with any such
provision shall constitute a separate violation.
CHAPTER 146
STORMWATER CONTROL
 
146.01 Purpose         146.05 Constructions
146.02 Applicability   146.06 Maintenance
146.03 Definitions     146.07 Easements
146.04 Design Criteria 146.08 Procedure
 
146.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures to control the flow
of stormwater from developing areas so as to maintain the rate of the flow in
natural or manmade channels equal to the rate of flow from those areas in their
undeveloped state, so as to provide for the safety, health, and well-being of
those living within the developing area as well as those downstream who will be
affected by its development.
146.02   APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are applicable to:
   1.   All new residential, commercial, and industrial developments one acre
or larger.
   2.   Any new development, less than one acre, where the percentage of the
impervious area of the lot is 50 percent or greater.
   3.   Any new development, less than one acre, which, in the opinion of the
City Engineer, lacks an adequate outlet for the passage of stormwaters.
146.03   DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise,
the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section.
   1.   “By-pass channel” means a channel formed in the topography of the
earth’s surface to carry stormwater runoff through a specific area.
   2.   “Control structure” means a structure designed to control the flow of
stormwater runoff that passes through it during a specific length of time.
   3.   “Development” means the improvement of the land from its natural state
to one providing for residential, industrial, or commercial use.
   4.   “Dry bottom stormwater storage area” means a facility designed to be
normally dry and contain water only when excess stormwater runoff occurs.
   5.   “Excess stormwater” means that portion of stormwater runoff which
exceeds the transportation capacity of storm sewers or natural drainage
channels serving a specific watershed.
   6.   “Natural drainage” means channels formed by the existing surface
topography prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
   7.   “Safe storm drainage capacity” means the flow of stormwater runoff that
can be transported by a channel or conduit without causing a rise of the water
surface over the conduit or adjacent to the channel.
   8.   “Stormwater runoff” means the flow of water resulting from
precipitation which is not absorbed by the soil or plant material.
   9.   “Stormwater runoff release rate” means the rate at which stormwater
runoff is released from dominant to subservient land.
   10.   “Stormwater storage areas” means areas designed to store excess
stormwater.
   11.   “Tributary watershed” means all of the area that contributes
stormwater runoff to a given point.
   12.   “Wet bottom stormwater storage area” means a facility designed to be
maintained as a pond or free water surface and which has the capacity to
contain excess stormwater runoff.
   13.   “‘X’-year storm” means the average recurrence intervals within which a
rainfall of given intensity and duration will be equaled or exceeded only once.
A 100-year storm would have an intensity of rainfall which would, on the
average, be equaled or exceeded only once in 100 years. This does not imply
that it will occur in 100 years, or having occurred, will not happen again for
100 years.
146.04   DESIGN CRITERIA.
   1.   Preparation and Certification. The design of stormwater control or
detention facilities shall be prepared and certified by a Registered Engineer,
Architect, or Landscape Architect familiar with stormwater control or
detention. Design calculations shall be made available to the City Engineer.
   2.   Release Rate. The release rate of stormwater from any detention basin
required under this chapter shall not exceed the stormwater runoff rate from
the drainage area as a totally grassed site during a five-year frequency storm.
Applicants may claim a higher natural rate of runoff if documented by detailed
computations to show that higher capacity exists in the natural outlets serving
the area. However, only the “safe storm drainage capacity” of the conduit or
channel may be included in these calculations. Design of the floodway system
shall also take into consideration control of stormwater velocity to prevent
erosion or other damage to the facility which will restrict its primary use.
Depths of flow shall be consistent with the “safe storm drainage capacity” of
the facility and detention or channel configurations shall be totally under
City control.
   3.   Detention Requirements. The required volume of stormwater detention
shall be that necessary to handle the runoff of a 100-year rainfall, for any
and all durations from the drainage area tributary to the stormwater storage
area based on full development of said tributary area, less the volume
discharge during the same duration at the approved release rate. The stormwater
release rate shall be considered when calculating the stormwater storage
capacity and the control structure shall be designed to maintain a relatively
uniform rate regardless of the depth of stormwater in the storm area. Thus, the
“Required Detention Storage” (RDS) will be that found to be the most critical
resulting from the inflow from the runoff of a fully developed tributary area
from a 100-year storm and outflow of the five-year storm with the same area in
its urbanized or natural state, totally grassed. Also, see Section
146.04(2), Release Rate. Detention storage may be provided as a “dry bottom” or
“wet bottom” storm area.
      A.   Dry bottom stormwater storage areas shall be designed to serve a
secondary purpose for recreation, open space, or other types of uses that will
not be adversely affected by intermittent flooding.
         (1)   A method of carrying the low flow through these areas shall be
provided in addition to a system of drains to prevent soggy areas. Both shall
be provided with an outlet to a natural channel or storm sewer with adequate
capacity as described in Section
146.04(4), By-Pass Channel. Dry bottom stormwater storage areas should be
designed to drain completely within 24 hours after a storm.
         (2)   Outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as
possible and shall require little or no attention for proper operation. Each
stormwater storage area shall be provided with a method of emergency overflow
in the event that a storm in excess of the 100-year frequency storm occurs.
This emergency overflow facility shall be designed to function without
attention and shall become part of the “natural” or surface channel system
described in Section
146.04(4). Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all design
features.
         (3)   Both outlet control structure and emergency overflow facilities
shall be designed and constructed to fully protect the public health, safety,
and welfare. Existing downstream hazards (garages, houses) must be considered.
Stormwater runoff velocities shall be kept at a minimum and turbulent
conditions at an outlet control structure will not be permitted without
complete protection for the public safety. The use of fences shall be kept to a
minimum and used only as a last resort when no other method is feasible. All
impounding structures within the City designed to be over 10 feet in height or
designed to store more than five ac-ft. must be approved by the Department of
Natural Resources (DNR). Complete engineering plans must be submitted to DNR
for their review.
         (4)   Paved surfaces that are to serve as stormwater storage areas and
rooftop storage shall be designed and permanent-type control inlets and
retaining or parapet walls to contain runoff on the surface. Emergency overflow
areas shall be provided.
      B.   Wet bottom stormwater storage areas shall be designed with all of
the items required for dry bottom stormwater storage areas, except that the
provisions of Section
146.04(3)(A)(1) shall not be required. However, the following additional
conditions shall be complied with:
         (1)   Water surface area shall not exceed 1/15 of the tributary
drainage area.
         (2)   Facilities shall be provided to lower the pond elevation by
gravity flow for cleaning purposes and shoreline maintenance. Shoreline
protection shall be provided to prevent erosion from wave action.
         (3)   Minimum normal water depth shall be four feet. If fish are to be
maintained, some portion of the pond area should be a minimum of 10 feet deep.
         (4)   Control structures for stormwater release shall be designed to
operate at full capacity with only a minor increase in water surface level.
Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to the City Engineer to substantiate
all design features.
         (5)   Only that portion of the detention area above the normal water
level shall be used in calculating the storage capacity. Wet bottom stormwater
storage areas shall be designed to provide a storage duration not exceeding 24
hours after a storm.
   4.   By-Pass Channel. A “natural” or surface channel system shall be
designed with adequate capacity to convey through the development the
stormwater runoff from all tributary upstream areas. This “by-pass” channel
shall be designed to carry the peak rate of runoff from a 100-year storm,
assuming all storm sewers are blocked and the upstream areas fully developed.
146.05   CONSTRUCTIONS.
   1.   Where development of a property presents the threat of flooding or
damage by flash runoff to downstream residents, the facilities for stormwater
runoff control shall be construed as a part of the first phase of construction
of that project.
   2.   The construction of the stormwater control system shall be accomplished
as part of the cost of land development. If the amount of storage capacity can
be increased to provide benefit to the City, negotiations for public
participation in the cost of development shall be initiated.
   3.   All flood control items such as earthen embankments, conduits, outlet
structures, flood control structures, spillways, by-pass channels, etc., shall
be built as permanent facilities and all materials and their manner of
construction shall be assembled to accomplish as much permanency as is
possible.
   4.   Detention ponds shall be designed and landscaped to enhance the overall
site design whenever possible. Underground detention may be required on sites
that are being intensely developed or have unique site constraints. Large
ditches or ponds in the front of the site shall be discouraged and approved
only as a last resort. All detention facilities shall be shown on the site
plan.
146.06   MAINTENANCE.
   All plans submitted for stormwater detention systems shall describe an
adequate procedure of normal maintenance for the detention system. Any failure
of the stormwater detention system, due to inadequate normal or capital
maintenance, shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which
the detention system is located. It shall also be the property owner’s
responsibility to remedy any negligence in maintenance that resulted in the
failure of the system. The submittal of plans for such a system or the purchase
of property on which such system is located shall be deemed as acceptance of
responsibility for normal and capital maintenance of the system.
146.07   EASEMENTS.
   Drainage easements shall be provided for all conduits and those by-pass
channels where the 100-year runoff exceeds one cubic foot per second.
146.08   PROCEDURE.
   1.   Plans, specifications, and all calculations for stormwater runoff
control shall be submitted for review and approval prior to the approval of a
final plat (in the case of a subdivision or planned unit development) or prior
to approval of a site plan (in case of commercial or industrial construction).
   2.   No Certificate of Occupancy for any building in the development will be
issued until the storm detention facilities are constructed, inspected, and
approved.
CHAPTER 147
ILLICIT DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM
 
147.01 Findings         147.06 Suspension of Access to the City’s Storm Sewer
                        System
147.02 Illicit           
Discharges Prohibited   147.07 Watercourse Protection
147.03 Illicit          147.08 Enforcement
Connections Prohibited
147.04 Industrial       147.09 Appeal
Discharges
147.05 Illicit
Discharge Detection and  
Reporting; Cost
Recovery
 
147.01   FINDINGS.
   1.   The U.S. EPA’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
Permit Program (Program) administered by the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources (IDNR) requires that cities meeting certain demographic and
environmental impact criteria obtain from the IDNR an NPDES permit for the
discharge of stormwater from a Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) (MS4
Permit). The City is subject to the Program and is required to obtain, and has
obtained, an MS4 Permit; the City’s MS4 Permit is on file at the office of the
Clerk and is available for public inspection during regular office hours.
   2.   As a condition of the City’s MS4 Permit, the City is obliged to adopt
and enforce an Illicit Discharge To Storm Sewer System Ordinance.
   3.   No State or federal funds have been made available to assist the City
in administering and enforcing the Program. Accordingly, the City shall fund
its operations under this chapter entirely by charges imposed on the owners of
properties which are made subject to the Program by virtue of State and federal
law, or other sources of funding established by a separate ordinance.
   4.   Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings specified in the
Program.
147.02   ILLICIT DISCHARGES PROHIBITED.
   1.   For purposes of this chapter, a “responsible party” is one or more
persons that control or are in possession of or own property. Responsible
parties shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with this
chapter and jointly and severally liable for any illicit discharge from the
property controlled, possessed, or owned. For purposes of this chapter,
“property” includes, but is not limited to, real estate, fixtures, facilities,
and premises of any kind located upon, under, or above the real estate.
   2.   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to relieve a responsible party
subject to an IDNR-issued Industrial Discharge Permit or any other federal,
State, or City permit, statute, ordinance, or rule from any obligation imposed
by such permit, statute, ordinance, or rule if any such obligation is greater
than any obligation imposed by this chapter.
   3.   Any discharge into the City’s storm sewer system prohibited by the
City’s MS4 Permit, the terms of which are hereby incorporated by reference,
shall be deemed an “illicit discharge” in violation of this chapter.
   4.   Sediment pollution originating from excessive erosion rates on a
construction site not otherwise subject to the City’s COSESCO ordinance or
sediment pollution entering a municipal storm sewer that causes a water quality
violation as determined by the IDNR shall be deemed an illicit discharge in
violation of this chapter.
147.03   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   1.   For purposes of this chapter, an “illicit connection” to the City’s
storm sewer system is any physical connection or other topographical or other
condition, natural or artificial, which is not specifically authorized by
ordinance or written rule of the City, which causes or facilitates, directly or
indirectly, an illicit discharge.
   2.   The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of any
illicit connection shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   3.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
147.04   INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES.
   1.   Any responsible party subject an industrial NPDES discharge permit
issued by the IDNR shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
   2.   Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the enforcement officer prior to discharges to the storm sewer
system authorized by said permit.
147.05   ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND REPORTING; COST RECOVERY.
   1.   All detection activities permitted under this chapter shall be
conducted by the Utility Director hereinbefore and after referred to as the
“enforcement officer.”
   2.   The City shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect
consequences to persons or property of an illicit discharge, or circumstances
which may cause an illicit discharge, undetected by the City.
   3.   Every responsible party has an absolute duty to monitor conditions on
property owned or controlled by them, to prevent all illicit discharges, and to
report to the enforcement officer illicit discharges which the responsible
party knows or should have known to have occurred. Failure to comply with any
provision of this chapter is a violation of this chapter.
      A.   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any
responsible party has information of any known or suspected illicit discharge,
the responsible party shall immediately take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, and cleanup of such discharge at the responsible
party’s sole cost.
      B.   If the illicit discharge consists of hazardous materials, the
responsible party shall also immediately notify emergency response agencies of
the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
      C.   If the illicit discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an
on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
      D.   A report of an illicit discharge shall be made in person or by phone
or facsimile or email to the enforcement officer immediately but, in any event,
within 24 hours of the illicit discharge; notifications in person or by phone
shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed or emailed to the
enforcement officer within 24 hours of the personal or phone notice.
   4.   Any person or entity shall also report to the City any illicit
discharge or circumstances which such person or entity reasonably believes pose
a risk of an illicit discharge.
   5.   Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous subsections, or
otherwise coming into possession of information indicating an actual or
imminent illicit discharge, the enforcement officer shall conduct an inspection
of the site as soon as reasonably possible and thereafter shall provide to the
responsible party, and any third-party reporter, a written report of the
conditions which may cause or which have already caused an illicit discharge.
The responsible party shall immediately commence corrective action or
remediation and shall complete such corrective action or remediation within 24
hours.
   6.   The enforcement officer shall be permitted to enter and inspect
property subject to regulation under this section as often as is necessary to
determine compliance with this section. If a responsible party has security
measures that require identification and clearance before entry to its property
or premises, the responsible party shall make the necessary arrangements to
allow access by the enforcement officer. By way of specification but not
limitation:
      A.   A responsible party shall allow the enforcement officer ready access
to all parts of the property for purposes of inspection, sampling, examination,
and copying of records related to a suspected, actual, or imminent illicit
discharge, and for the performance of any additional duties as defined by State
and federal law.
      B.   The enforcement officer shall have the right to set up on any
property such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the enforcement
officer to conduct monitoring or sampling related to a suspected, actual, or
imminent illicit discharge.
      C.   The enforcement officer shall have the right to require any
responsible party, at responsible party’s sole expense, to install monitoring
equipment and deliver monitoring data or reports to the enforcement officer as
the enforcement officer directs. The sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
responsible party at responsible party’s sole expense. All devices shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
      D.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
property to be inspected or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
responsible party at the written or oral order of the enforcement officer and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
responsible party.
      E.   An unreasonable delay in allowing the enforcement officer access to
a property is a violation of this chapter.
      F.   If the enforcement officer has been refused access to any part of
the property from an illicit connection or illicit discharge to a municipal
storm sewer is occurring, suspected, or imminent, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect or sample as part of a routine inspection and
sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare
of the community, then the enforcement officer may seek issuance of a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
   7.   If it is determined that an illicit discharge is imminent or has
occurred, the actual administrative costs incurred by the City in the
enforcement of this chapter shall be recovered from the responsible party. The
enforcement officer shall submit an invoice to the responsible party reflecting
the actual costs and wages and expenses incurred by the City for the
enforcement activities undertaken. Failure to pay charges invoiced under this
chapter within 30 days of billing shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
147.06   SUSPENSION OF ACCESS TO THE CITY’S STORM SEWER SYSTEM.
   1.   Emergency Suspension. The enforcement officer may, without prior
notice, suspend storm sewer system access to a property when such emergency
suspension is necessary to stop an ongoing or imminent illicit discharge. If
the responsible party fails to immediately comply with an emergency suspension
order, the enforcement officer shall take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize the illicit discharge. All costs of such action shall be
recovered from the responsible party for the property identified as the source
of the illicit discharge.
   2.   Non-emergency Suspension. If the enforcement officer detects or is
informed of circumstances which could cause an illicit discharge but such
illicit discharge is not ongoing or imminent, and if the suspension of storm
sewer system access would reasonably be expected to prevent or reduce the
potential illicit discharge, the enforcement officer shall notify the
responsible party of the proposed suspension of storm sewer system access and
the time and date of such suspension. Notice to one responsible party for the
property shall be sufficient notice to all. Remediation of the circumstances
shall avoid a violation of this chapter, provided that no illicit discharge
occurs. In the alternative, the responsible party may request a meeting with
the enforcement officer for the purpose of presenting information which the
responsible party believes will show that remediation is unnecessary, and if
the enforcement officer finds such information is satisfactory, the enforcement
officer may rescind or modify the notice of suspension. If the enforcement
officer finds such information unsatisfactory, the enforcement officer shall
issue a final written order of suspension including the date and time of
suspension and such order may be appealed as provided herein. Any physical
action to reinstate storm sewer system access to property subject to such order
prior to obtaining a court order of relief shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter. An order of suspension shall not preclude charging the responsible
party with a municipal infraction as provided herein or taking any other
enforcement action permitted by statute or ordinance.
147.07   WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property below the elevation of the 100-year flood free of trash, debris,
grass clippings, or other organic wastes and other obstacles that would
pollute, contaminate, or significantly alter the quality of water flowing
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
147.08   ENFORCEMENT.
   1.   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil
action including an action for injunctive relief. In any civil enforcement
action, administrative or judicial, the City shall be entitled to recover its
attorneys’ fees and costs from a person who is determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.
   2.   Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced as a
municipal infraction within the meaning of Section 364.22 of the Code of Iowa,
pursuant to the City’s municipal infraction ordinance.
   3.   Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be undertaken by the
enforcement officer upon the advice and consent of the City Attorney.
147.09   APPEAL.
   Administrative decisions by City staff and enforcement actions of the
enforcement officer may be appealed by the applicant to the Council pursuant to
the following rules:
   1.   The appeal must be filed in writing with the Clerk within five business
days of the decision or enforcement action.
   2.   The written appeal shall specify in detail the action appealed from,
the errors allegedly made by the enforcement officer giving rise to the appeal,
a written summary of all oral and written testimony the applicant intends to
introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all witnesses
the applicant intends to call, copies of all documents the applicant intends to
introduce at the hearing, and the relief requested.
   3.   The enforcement officer shall specify, in writing, the reasons for the
enforcement action, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the
enforcement officer intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names
and addresses of all witnesses the enforcement officer intends to call, and
copies of all documents the enforcement officer intends to introduce at the
hearing.
   4.   The Clerk shall notify the applicant and the enforcement officer by
ordinary mail, and shall give public notice in accordance with Chapter 21 of
the Code of Iowa, of the date, time, and place for the regular or special
meeting of the Council at which the hearing on the appeal shall occur. The
hearing shall be scheduled for a date not less than four or more than 20 days
after the filing of the appeal. The rules of evidence and procedure, and the
standard of proof to be applied, shall be the same as provided by Chapter 17A
of the Code of Iowa. The applicant may be represented by counsel at the
applicant’s expense. The enforcement officer may be represented by the City
Attorney or by an attorney designated by the Council at City expense. The
decision of the Council shall be rendered in writing and may be appealed to the
Iowa District Court.
CHAPTER 148
CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
 
148.01 Findings              148.05 Monitoring Procedures
148.02 Application Procedure 148.06 Enforcement
148.03 Inspection Procedures 148.07 Performance Bond
148.04 Stop Work Order       148.08 Appeal
 
148.01   FINDINGS.
   1.   The U.S. EPA’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit program (Program) administered by the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources (IDNR) requires that cities meeting certain demographic and
environmental impact criteria obtain from the IDNR an NPDES permit for the
discharge of stormwater from a Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) (MS4
Permit). The City is subject to the Program and is required to obtain, and has
obtained, an MS4 Permit; the City’s MS4 Permit is on file at the office of the
Clerk and is available for public inspection during regular office hours.
   2.   The Program requires certain individuals engaged in construction
activities (applicant or applicants) to submit an application to the IDNR for a
State NPDES General Permit #2. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter,
every applicant bears final and complete responsibility for compliance with a
State NPDES General Permit #2 and a City COSESCO Permit and any other
requirement of State or federal law or administrative rule.
   3.   As a condition of the City’s MS4 Permit, the City is obliged to
undertake responsibility for administration and enforcement of the Program by
adopting a Construction Site Erosion and Sediment Control (COSESCO) Ordinance
designed to achieve the following objectives:
      A.   Any person, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
State agency, or political subdivision (“applicant”) required by law or
administrative rule to apply to the IDNR for a State NPDES General Permit #2
shall also be required to obtain from the City a Construction Site Erosion and
Sediment Control Permit (City COSESCO Permit) in addition to and not in lieu of
the State NPDES General Permit #2; and
      B.   The City shall have responsibility for inspection, monitoring, and
enforcement procedures to promote applicants’ compliance with State NPDES
General Permits #2 and City COSESCO Permits.
   4.   No State or federal funds have been made available to assist the City
in administering and enforcing the Program. Accordingly, the City shall fund
its application, inspection, monitoring, and enforcement responsibilities
entirely by fees imposed on the owners of properties which are made subject to
the Program by virtue of State and federal law, or other sources of funding
established by a separate ordinance.
   5.   Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings specified in the
Program.
148.02   APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   1.   All persons required by law or administrative rule to obtain a State
NPDES General Permit #2 from the IDNR are required to obtain a City COSESCO
Permit.
   2.   Applications for City COSESCO Permits shall be made on forms approved
by the City that may be obtained from the Building Department.
   3.   An applicant for a City COSESCO Permit shall pay fees as follows:
      A.   A fee at the time of application in the amount of $150.00 plus
$20.00 per acre for sites over one acre.
      B.   For each inspection required by this chapter, the applicant shall
pay an inspection fee in the amount of $55.00 per hour.
      C.   Failure of the applicant to pay an inspection fee within 30 days of
billing shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   4.   An applicant in possession of a State NPDES General Permit #2 issued by
the IDNR shall immediately submit to the City one copy of the materials
described below as a basis for the City to determine whether to issue a City
COSESCO Permit, if submitted by paper.
      A.   Applicant’s plans, specifications, and supporting materials
previously submitted to the IDNR in support of applicant’s application for the
State NPDES General Permit #2;
      B.   Applicant’s authorizations issued pursuant to applicant’s State
NPDES General Permit #2; and
      C.   A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) prepared in
accordance with this chapter.
   5.   Every SWPPP submitted to the City in support of an application for a
City COSESCO Permit:
      A.   Shall comply with all current minimum mandatory requirements for
SWPPPs promulgated by the IDNR in connection with issuance of a State NPDES
General Permit #2; and
      B.   Shall, if the applicant is required by law to file a Joint
Application Form, Protecting State Waters, Iowa Department of Natural
Resources, and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, comply with all mandatory minimum
requirements pertaining to such applications; and
      C.   Shall comply with all other applicable State or federal permit
requirements in existence at the time of application; and
      D.   Shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the State
or landscape architect or a professional in erosion and sediment control or a
representative of the local Soil and Water Conservation District, credentialed
in a manner acceptable to the City; and
      E.   Shall include within the SWPPP a signed and dated certification by
the NPDES General Permit #2 permit holder that the SWPPP complies with all
requirements of this chapter and the applicant’s NPDES General Permit #2.
   6.   Issuance by the City of a City COSESCO Permit shall be a condition
precedent for the issuance of preliminary plat, site plan, or City building
permit approval.
   7.   For so long as a construction site is subject to a State NPDES General
Permit #2 or a City COSESCO Permit, the applicant shall provide the City with
current information as follows:
      A.   The name, address, and telephone number of the person on-site
designated by the owner who is knowledgeable and experienced in erosion and
sediment control and who will oversee compliance with the State NPDES General
Permit #2 and the City COSESCO Permit;
      B.   The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the contractors or
subcontractors that will implement each erosion and sediment control measure
identified in the SWPPP.
      C.   Applicant’s failure to provide current information shall constitute
a violation of this chapter.
   8.   Developers can transfer State NPDES General Permit #2 and the City
COSESCO Permit responsibility to homebuilders, new lot owners, contractors, and
subcontractors. A copy of the transfer document shall be provided to the City.
Absent such written confirmation of transfer of obligations, the developer
remains responsible for compliance on any lot that has been sold.
   9.   Homebuilders, new lot owners, contractors and subcontractors which are
co-permittees under an existing SWPPP shall provide written documentation
indicating they are co-permittees including signatures by both the co-permittee
and developer.
   10.   Upon receipt of an application for a City COSESCO Permit, the City
shall either find that the application complies with this chapter and issue a
City COSESCO Permit in accordance with this chapter, or that the application
fails to comply with this chapter, in which case the City shall provide a bill
of particulars identifying non-compliant elements of the application.
   11.   Prior to the issuance of the building permit, the lot owner shall
provide written certification regarding their responsibility for sediment and
erosion control on the property as outlined in General Permit #2 and the SWPPP.
148.03   INSPECTION PROCEDURES.
   1.   All inspections required under this chapter shall be conducted by the
Utility Director, hereinafter referred to as the “enforcement officer.”
Inspections by the enforcement officer may be scheduled, or unannounced.
   2.   Any applicant that is subject to the terms of the City COSESCO shall
allow the City or an authorized representative of the City, upon the
presentation of proper identification, to enter upon applicant’s private
property for inspection purposes.
   3.   Applicant shall notify the City when all measures required by
applicant’s SWPPP have been accomplished on-site, whereupon the City shall
conduct an initial inspection for the purpose of determining compliance with
this chapter, and shall within a reasonable time thereafter report to the
applicant either that compliance appears to have been achieved, or that
compliance has not been achieved, in which case the City shall provide a bill
of particulars identifying the conditions of noncompliance. The applicant shall
immediately commence corrective action and shall complete such corrective
action within 48 hours of receiving the City’s bill of particulars. For good
cause shown, the City may extend the deadline for taking corrective action.
Failure to take corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
   4.   Construction shall not occur on the site at any time when the City has
identified conditions of noncompliance.
   5.   Construction activities undertaken by an applicant prior to resolution
of all discrepancies specified in the bill of particulars shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
   6.   The City shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect
consequences to the applicant or to third parties for non-compliant conditions
undetected by inspection.
148.04   STOP WORK ORDER.
   1.   Authority. Whenever the enforcement officer finds any work regulated by
this chapter being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of
this chapter or dangerous or unsafe, the enforcement officer is authorized to
issue a stop work order.
   2.   Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to
the owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person
doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall
immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order,
and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.
   3.   Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as the person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject
to penalties as stated in this chapter.
148.05   MONITORING PROCEDURES.
   1.   At a minimum, the enforcement officer will perform quarterly
inspections. The quarterly inspections will be performed until the City
receives a copy of the Notice of Discontinuation by the IDNR for NPDES General
Permit #2.
   2.   Any third party may also report to the City site conditions which the
third party reasonably believes pose a risk of stormwater discharge in a manner
inconsistent with applicant’s SWPPP, State NPDES General Permit #2, or City
COSESCO Permit. Permit holders found in noncompliance will be charged at a rate
of $55.00 per hour for the additional inspection. If the permit holder is found
in compliance, the inspection fee will be waived.
   3.   Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous subsections, the
enforcement officer shall conduct an inspection of the site as soon as
reasonably possible and thereafter shall provide the applicant with a bill of
particulars identifying the conditions of noncompliance. The applicant shall
immediately commence corrective action and shall complete such corrective
action within 48 hours of receiving the City’s bill of particulars. For good
cause shown, the City may extend the deadline for completing corrective action.
Failure to take corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a
violation of this chapter, whereupon the enforcement officer shall immediately
commence enforcement actions specified in Section 148.06.
   4.   Unless a report is made to the enforcement officer pursuant to the
previous subsections, the enforcement officer shall conduct at least one
unannounced inspection during the course of construction to monitor compliance
with the State NPDES General Permit #2 and the City COSESCO Permit. If the
inspection discloses any significant noncompliance, the enforcement officer
shall provide the applicant with a bill of particulars identifying the
conditions of noncompliance. The applicant shall immediately commence
corrective action and shall complete such corrective action within 48 hours of
receiving the City’s bill of particulars. For good cause shown, the City may
extend the deadline for completing corrective action. Failure to take
corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this
chapter, whereupon the enforcement officer shall immediately commence
enforcement actions specified in Section 148.06.
   5.   The City shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect
consequences to the applicant or to third-parties for noncompliant conditions
undetected by inspection.
148.06   ENFORCEMENT.
   1.   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil
action, including an action for injunctive relief. In any civil enforcement
action, administrative or judicial, the City shall be entitled to recover its
attorneys’ fees and costs from a person who is determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.
   2.   Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced as a
municipal infraction within the meaning of Section 364.22 of the Code of Iowa,
pursuant to the City’s municipal infraction ordinance.
   3.   Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be undertaken by the
enforcement officer upon the advice and consent of the City Attorney.
148.07   PERFORMANCE BOND.
   1.   In addition to the application for a City COSESCO Permit, the applicant
may be required to post security for compliance with all requirements imposed
by the State NPDES General Permit #2 and the City COSESCO Permit in such an
amount as the City may deem necessary.
   2.   If the final plat is approved prior to the installation of public
improvements, in accordance with Chapter 175.05.5A of the Code of Iowa, a
performance bond shall be required to cover the costs of the sediment and
erosion control measures for the plat.
   3.   Acceptable forms of Performance Security include the following:
      A.   Performance Bonds;
      B.   Surety Bonds
   4.   The application form signed by the applicant for a City COSESCO Permit
shall include the following commitment by the applicant: “In addition to the
performance security posted with this application, the undersigned applicant
hereby agrees to defend, indemnify, and hold the City harmless from any and all
claims, damages, or suits arising directly or indirectly out of any act of
commission or omission by the applicant, or any employee, agent, assign, or
contractor or subcontractor of the applicant, in connection with applicant’s
State NPDES General Permit #2 or City COSESCO Permit.
   5.   Upon filing and acknowledgement of the Notice of Discontinuation by the
IDNR for NDPES General Permit #2 and a final inspection by the City, the bond
or any remaining funds shall be returned.
148.08   APPEAL.
   Administrative decisions by City staff and enforcement actions of the
enforcement officer may be appealed by the applicant to the Council pursuant to
the following rules:
   1.   The appeal must be filed in writing with the Clerk within 20 business
days of the decision or enforcement action.
   2.   The written appeal shall specify in detail the action appealed from,
the errors allegedly made by the enforcement officer giving rise to the appeal,
a written summary of all oral and written testimony the applicant intends to
introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all witnesses
the applicant intends to call, copies of all documents the applicant intends to
introduce at the hearing, and the relief requested.
   3.   The enforcement officer shall specify in writing the reasons for the
enforcement action, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the
enforcement officer intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names
and addresses of all witnesses the enforcement officer intends to call, and
copies of all documents the enforcement officer intends to introduce at the
hearing.
   4.   The Clerk shall notify the applicant and the enforcement officer by
ordinary mail, and shall give public notice in accordance with Chapter 21 of
the Code of Iowa, of the date, time, and place for the regular or special
meeting of the Council at which the hearing on the appeal shall occur. The
hearing shall be scheduled for a date not less than four or more than 20 days
after the filing of the appeal. The rules of evidence and procedure, and the
standard of proof to be applied, shall be the same as provided by Chapter 17A
of the Code of Iowa. The applicant may be represented by counsel at the
applicant’s expense. The enforcement officer may be represented by the City
Attorney or by an attorney designated by the Council at City expense. The
decision of the Council shall be rendered in writing and may be appealed to the
Iowa District Court.
CHAPTER 149
POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
 
149.01 Title                                   149.07 Maintenance
149.02 Purpose                                 149.08 Inspections
149.03 Warning                                 149.09 Corrective Action by City
149.04 Interpretation                          149.10 Responsibility
149.05 Definitions                             149.11 Violations
149.06 Post Construction Stormwater Management 149.12 Appeal
Plan
 
149.01   TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “City of Altoona Post Construction
Stormwater Management Ordinance,” may be cited as such, and will be referred to
herein as “this chapter.”
149.02   PURPOSE.
   1.   The U.S. EPA’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit program (Program) administered by the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources (IDNR) requires that cities meeting certain demographic and
environmental impact criteria obtain from the IDNR and NPDES permit for the
discharge of stormwater from a Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) (MS4
Permit). The City is subject to the Program and is required to obtain, and has
obtained, an MS4 Permit. The City’s MS4 Permit is on file at the office of the
Clerk and is available for public inspection during regular office hours.
   2.   The purpose of this chapter is to comply with the MS4 Permit
requirements and establish a set of water quality and quantity policies
applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable guidance for the
regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water
resources from degradation. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from
land development and other construction activities in order to control and
minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream
channel erosion, and non-point source pollution associated with stormwater
runoff, is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and
safety.
149.03   WARNING.
   No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed,
or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter, as indicating the safety of or
quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor
inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises
or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in the risk
associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a
premises has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in any way,
constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises.
149.04   INTERPRETATION.
   The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take
precedence over any other language contained in this chapter.
149.05   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Applicant” means person, firm, or entity applying for a permit or
development approval to develop, grade, or construct any improvement within the
corporate limits of the City.
   2.   “Approval” means formal, written consent by the Council, or authorized
representative of the City.
   3.   “Best Management Practices (BMPs)” means schedules of activities
prohibitions of practice, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States.
Common BMPs are described in the Iowa Stormwater Management Manual and SUDAS.
      The BMPs covered by are not meant to be a comprehensive list of
acceptable BMPs.
   4.   “Drainage, detention, or overland flowage easement” means a legal right
granted by a property owner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for
stormwater management.
   5.   “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System” is the program for
issuing, modifying, revoking, terminating, monitoring, and enforcing permits
under the Clean Water Act (Sections 301, 318, 402, and 405) and United States
Code of Federal Regulations Title 33, Sections 1317, 1328, 1342, and 1345.
   6.   “Post Construction Stormwater Management Plan” means a set of plans and
specifications approved by the Council during the approval of the Site Plan,
Construction Drawing, or Plat that defines the system of BMPs that are to be
constructed and maintained on the site.
   7.   “Property” means land located in the City, whether or not improved with
buildings or other structures.
   8.   “Property owner” means a person who, alone or with another person or
other persons, holds the legal title to property; except, however, where
property has been sold on contract to a person who has the present right to
possess the property and the contract has been filed for record in the office
of the County Recorder, the person so purchasing the property, whether alone or
with another person or other persons, is the “property owner” and the person
retaining bare legal title to the property as security for the balance of the
purchase price.
   9.   “Regional detention facility” means a wet or dry detention basin(s)
which are designed to accept stormwater runoff from two or more sites that are
required to obtain an NPDES General Permit #2 and that otherwise complies with
all City, State, or federal permit requirements as they apply to stormwater
management requirements for those sites.
   10.   “Stormwater” means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface
runoff and drainage.
   11.   “Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)” means a plan as defined
in the Iowa NPDES Stormwater General Permit.
   12.   “SUDAS” means the current Standard Urban Design and Specifications
Manual, as locally amended, that specifies the stormwater guidelines and
stormwater controls deemed by SUDAS to meet the goals of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agencies NPDES permit program administered by the IDNR.
149.06   POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   1.   Every property owner or applicant required to have coverage under NPDES
General Permit #2, shall design, install, and maintain Post Construction
Stormwater Management Plan (PCSWMP) facilities as approved by the Council
during the Site Plan, Construction Drawing, or Platting process.
   2.   A State licensed professional engineer or landscape architect shall
design PCSWMP facilities in conformance with the guidelines established in the
Iowa Stormwater Management Manual and SUDAS. PCSWMP facilities shall be
designed with appropriate BMPs, such as detention and retention basins, grass
swales, buffer strips, bio-retention, and other similar types of infiltration
basins and riparian areas, that will convey drainage through the property to
one or more treatment areas such that no development shall cause downstream
property owners, water courses, channels, or conduits to receive stormwater
runoff from the proposed development site at a peak flow rate greater than that
allowed by the standards in effect at the time of approval of the development.
   3.   In order to ensure that the PCSWMP facilities are constructed in
accordance with the approved design, the property owner or applicant shall
provide to the City an as-built plan detailing dimensions and elevations as
well as certification that the approved facilities were installed and working
properly. The as-built plan shall be completed by a State licensed professional
engineer or landscape architect and submitted to the City prior to the
acceptance of any public improvements or issuance of any Certificate of
Occupancy.
   4.   At the discretion of the City, the property owner or applicant may
satisfy the PCSWMP requirements by ensuring the conveyance of stormwater
discharge from the property to a regional detention facility.
149.07   MAINTENANCE.
   It shall be the property owner’s duty to ensure that the site is
periodically inspected and maintained in accordance with the approved PCSWMP.
   Periodic inspections shall be completed as needed and in no case less than
one time per year. Inspections shall be documented and shall be retained by the
property owner for at least three years. Copies of the inspection documentation
shall be made available to the City upon request.
149.08   INSPECTIONS.
   1.   The City shall be permitted to enter and inspect any property with
PCSWMP facilities subject to this regulation as often and as necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter.
   2.   The City may conduct site visits at any time to determine compliance
with the approved PCSWMP.
   Additionally, the City may request that a property owner verify, through the
preparation of an as-built plan completed by a State licensed professional
engineer or landscape architect, that the PCSWMP facilities contain appropriate
capacities and operational characteristics as originally designed and approved.
   3.   In the event that a site is found not to be in compliance with the
PCSWMP, the City will communicate, in writing, with the property owner a list
of deficiencies that identifies the area or incident of noncompliance. The
property owner shall have 14 days from the date of notice to provide a written
response outlining the steps and implementation timelines for corrective
action. The property owner shall have 30 days from the date of notice to
complete the corrective action necessary to bring the site back into compliance
with the approved PCSWMP.
   4.   Following the review of the property owner’s written response, if
extenuating circumstances exist which makes implementation of the necessary
corrective action difficult to complete within the specified time period, the
City may grant, at its sole discretion, a reasonable extension of time to
complete the corrective action. Failure of the property owner to allow access
to the property, provide a written response or undertake corrective action
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
149.09   CORRECTIVE ACTION BY CITY.
   If the property owner fails to take corrective action, following notice
prescribed for the service of civil process by the Iowa Rules of Civil
Procedure, the City may do so by its own crews or by persons under its hire and
assess against the property owner the City’s cost therefore. Said costs shall
include the salaries and benefits earned by City employees during such
corrective action, a charge for City machinery used and such other costs and
expenses as the City actually incurred. To the extent allowed by State law,
such costs and expenses may be assessed against the property owner and
collected in the same manner as a property tax.
149.10   RESPONSIBILITY.
   The failure of City officials to observe or foresee hazardous or unsightly
conditions, or to impose other or additional conditions or requirements, or to
deny or revoke permits or approvals, or to stop work in violation of this
chapter shall not relieve the property owners of the consequences of their
actions or inactions or result in the City, its officers, or agents being
liable therefore or on account thereof. Notwithstanding any provision of this
chapter, every applicant bears final and complete responsibility for compliance
with the NPDES General Permit #2 and any other requirements of State or federal
law or administrative rule.
149.11   VIOLATIONS.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil action
including an action for injunctive relief. In any civil enforcement action,
administrative or judicial, the City shall be entitled to recover its
attorneys’ fees and costs from a person who is determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter. Violation of any
provision of this chapter may also be enforced as a municipal infraction within
the meaning of Section 364.22 of the Code of Iowa, pursuant to the City’s
municipal infraction ordinance. Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be
undertaken by the enforcement officer upon the advice and consent of the City
Attorney.
149.12   APPEAL.
   Administrative decisions by City staff and enforcement actions of the
enforcement officer may be appealed by the applicant to the Council pursuant to
the following rules:
   1.   The appeal must be filed in writing with the Clerk within 20 business
days of the decision or enforcement action.
   2.   The written appeal shall specify in detail the action appealed from,
the errors allegedly made by the enforcement officer giving rise to the appeal,
a written summary of all oral and written testimony the applicant intends to
introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all witnesses
the applicant intends to call, copies of all documents the applicant intends to
introduce at the hearing, and the relief requested.
   3.   The enforcement officer shall specify in writing the reasons for the
enforcement action, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the
enforcement officer intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names
and addresses of all witnesses the enforcement officer intends to call, and
copies of all documents the enforcement officer intends to introduce at the
hearing.
   4.   The Clerk shall notify the applicant and the enforcement officer by
ordinary mail, and shall give public notice in accordance with Chapter 21 of
the Code of Iowa, of the date, time, and place for the regular or special
meeting of the Council at which the hearing on the appeal shall occur. The
hearing shall be scheduled for a date not less than four nor more than 20 days
after the filing of the appeal. The rules of evidence and procedure, and the
standard of proof to be applied, shall be the same as provided by Chapter 17A
of the Code of Iowa. The applicant may be represented by counsel at the
applicant’s expense. The enforcement officer may be represented by the City
Attorney or by an attorney designated by the Council at City expense.
The decision of the Council shall be rendered in writing and may be appealed to
the Iowa District Court.
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
 
150.01 Definitions        150.03 Building Numbering Plan
150.02 Owner Requirements
 
150.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
   2.   “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision
thereof.
150.02   OWNER REQUIREMENTS.
   Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:
   1.   Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to
the principal building from the Building Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(d))
   2.   Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed
and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous
place to the street. The number shall be in figures not less than three inches
in height for a residential premises and not less than six inches in height for
all other buildings and of a contrasting color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(d))
   3.   Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein
provided, or fails to do so for a period of 30 days after being notified in
writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the assigned number
on the principal building and assess the costs against the property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
150.03   BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN.
   The Building Department shall be responsible for preparing and maintaining a
building numbering map.
CHAPTER 151
TREES
 
151.01 Definition                      151.05 Disease Control
151.02 Planting Restrictions           151.06 Inspection and Removal
151.03 Duty To Trim Trees              151.07 Intersections - Trimming Required
151.04 Trimming Trees To Be Supervised 151.08 Trees Within Lot Line
 
151.01   DEFINITION.
   For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street, avenue, or
highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and
the curb line or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue, or
highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually
traveled by vehicular traffic.
151.02   PLANTING RESTRICTIONS.
   No tree shall be planted in any parking or street except in accordance with
the provisions of the latest published versions of the Urban Design Standards
for Public Improvements and the Urban Standard Specifications for Public
Improvements.
151.03   DUTY TO TRIM TREES.
   The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees on, or
overhanging the street, trimmed so that all branches will be at least 14 feet
above the surface of the street and eight feet above the sidewalks. If the
abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve notice on
the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken within five
days. If such action is not taken within that time, the City may perform the
required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(c) and (e))
151.04   TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED.
   Except as allowed in Section
151.03, it is unlawful for any person to trim or cut any tree in a street or
public place unless the work is done under the supervision of the City.
151.05   DISEASE CONTROL.
   Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub that may harbor serious insect
or disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
151.06   INSPECTION AND REMOVAL.
   The Council shall inspect or cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in
the City reported or suspected to be dead, diseased, or damaged, and such trees
and shrubs shall be subject to the following:
   1.   City Property. If it is determined that any such condition exists on
any public property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line of
private property, the Council may cause such condition to be corrected by
treatment or removal. The Council may also order the removal of any trees on
the streets of the City which interfere with the making of improvements or with
travel thereon. In no case shall the property owner be required to remove
diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way.
   2.   Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty that
any such condition exists on private property and that danger to other trees or
to adjoining property or passing motorists or pedestrians is imminent, the
Council shall notify by certified mail the owner, occupant, or person in charge
of such property to correct such condition by treatment or removal within 14
days of said notification. If such owner, occupant, or person in charge of said
property fails to comply within 14 days of receipt of notice, the Council may
cause the condition to be corrected and the cost assessed against the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(c), (3)(b), and (3)(h))
151.07   INTERSECTIONS - TRIMMING REQUIRED.
   At intersections, all trees and shrubbery shall be so trimmed and pruned as
to give clear vision to all vehicular traffic approaching from any direction.
151.08   TREES WITHIN LOT LINE.
   Any trees on private property or within a lot line which overhang any
sidewalk, alley, street, or public place, and which, in so overhanging,
endangers life or property, may be cut or trimmed by the City and the cost
thereof assessed to the adjoining property after first giving the property
owner upon which trees are situated 10 days’ notice to cut or trim said
overhanging branches, and the property owner’s failure to comply with said
notice. If there is immediate danger of injury by reason of overhanging
branches, City may cut or trim said branches without notice to the property
owner.
CHAPTER 152
MAILBOXES
 
152.01 Purpose                 152.06 Exemptions
152.02 Definitions             152.07 Costs of Installation
152.03 Design Restrictions     152.08 Installation
152.04 Location                152.09 Placement
152.05 Visibility; Obstruction
 
152.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to eliminate parking problems on streets and
to improve the ability of City crews to remove snow from streets and to
maintain streets.
152.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Cluster-style” means a style whereby mailboxes are assembled and
grouped together on a single area of land so that they are together and are
regarded as one unit. Cluster boxes must be City and postal approval
manufactured cluster-style mailboxes.
   2.   “Mailbox” means any device containing, intended, or used for the
collection of mail.
152.03   DESIGN RESTRICTIONS.
   All housing developments which are situated on any cul-de-sac style street,
avenue, or other roadway shall have cluster-style mailboxes. The style, size,
and manufacturer of the mailbox shall be approved by the United States Postal
Service. The United States Postal Service shall provide specifications for the
installation of the required concrete pad.
152.04   LOCATION.
   Cluster-style mailboxes serving housing developments situated on streets,
avenues, or other roadways shall be located between the sidewalk and curb, and,
if at all possible, within 100 feet of the entry into the cul-de-sac style
street, avenue, or other roadway. The location of the cluster-style mailboxes
shall not exceed 600 feet from any real property line. The location is to be
approved by the postal office and Planning and Zoning Commission.
152.05   VISIBILITY; OBSTRUCTION.
   All cluster-style mailboxes must be erected:
   1.   Away from the intersection of any street and in no case closer than 25
feet of the intersection in order to prevent obstruction of free and clear
vision; and
   2.   Away from any location where, by reason of the position of, shape, or
color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any
authorized traffic sign, signal, or device.
No driveway or street access shall be constructed within five feet of the
cluster-style mailboxes.
152.06   EXEMPTIONS.
   Any housing development constructed and already receiving mail service
before the enactment of the regulations contained in this chapter (Dec. 19,
1994) is not required to comply with these standards.
152.07   COSTS OF INSTALLATION.
   Cost of installation, including, but not limited to, box units, concrete
pad, and shelter, shall be borne by the developer, and subsequent maintenance
shall be carried out by the post office.
152.08   INSTALLATION.
   All cluster-style mailboxes required to serve the plat shall be installed
before the final plat is approved by the Council. In the case where the final
plat is approved with a performance bond, that bond shall cover the mailboxes
and the installation shall occur prior to any Occupancy Permit being issued for
a home in the plat. Mailboxes shall be installed prior to any Occupancy Permit
being issued for any other building requiring cluster-style mailboxes.
152.09   PLACEMENT.
   The placement of cluster-style mailboxes shall be reviewed by the City and
the United States Postal Service.
CHAPTER 155
BUILDING CODE
155.01 Adoption of Building Code          155.09 Exterior Building Wall
                                          Construction
155.02 Deletions                          155.10 Permanent Occupancy of Public
                                          Property
155.03 Amendments and Additions           155.11 Covering or Concealing Work
155.04 Premise Identification             155.12 Removal of Covering
155.05 Residential Wood Floor Cantilevers 155.13 Correcting Defective Work
155.06 Licensing for Electrical,
Plumbing, and Mechanical Contractors and  155.14 Board of Appeals
Installers
155.07 Demolition of Buildings and        155.15 Violations
Structures
155.08 Obstruction Permit; Bond and       155.16 Elevators in R Occupancies
Insurance
 
155.01   ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
   This chapter shall consist of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition,
International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix Chapters F and
M, and the International Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition, as published by
the International Code Council which volume is incorporated herein by this
reference as fully as though set forth herein in its entirety, excepting only
such portions as are hereinafter stated to be deleted therefrom; and such
additional provisions as are hereinafter set forth. This chapter and all
provisions incorporated herein by reference or otherwise, shall be known as the
“Altoona Building Code,” may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein
as such and as “this code.”
155.02   DELETIONS.
   The following are hereby deleted from the International Building Code
(hereinafter known as the IBC), International Residential Code (hereinafter
known as the IRC), and International Existing Building Code (hereinafter known
as the IEBC) and are of no force or effect herein:
   1.   Section 105.1.1 and 105.1.2 (IBC and IEBC).
   2.   Section 113 (IBC).
   3.   Section 112 (IEBC).
   4.   Section R112 (IRC).
   5.   Section R302.13 (IRC).
   6.   Section R319 (IRC) and Section 502 (IBC).
155.03   AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS.
   The remaining sections in this chapter are and represent amendments and
additions to the requirements contained in the International Building Code
(hereinafter known as the IBC), International Residential Code (hereinafter
known as the IRC), and International Existing Building Code (hereinafter known
as the IEBC), and where their requirements conflict with those of the
International Building Code, International Residential Code, and International
Existing Building Code, the requirements of this chapter shall prevail. The
sections listed below shall be construed in the context of the enumerated
chapter or chapters of the IBC, IRC, and IEBC.
   1.   Section R101.2 (IRC) Exceptions to Scope.
   2.   Section 101.4 (IBC) Referenced Codes.
   3.   Section 103 (IBC and IEBC) and Section R103 (IRC) Department
Established.
   4.   Section 105.2 (IBC and IEBC) and Section R105.2 (IRC) Work Exempt from
Permit.
   5.   Section 105.5 (IBC and IEBC) and Section R105.5 (IRC) Expiration.
   6.   Section 109 (IBC), Section 108 (IEBC), and Section R108 (IRC) Fees.
   7.   Section 111.1 (IBC) and Section R110.1 (IRC) Certificates of Occupancy.
   8.   Section R111 (IRC) Service Utilities.
   9.   Section 202 (IBC) and Section R202 (IRC) Definitions.
   10.   Table R301.2(1) Climate and Geographical Table.
   11.   Section R301.6 (IRC) and Section 1608.2 (IBC) Snow Load.
   12.   Section R302.1 (IRC) Exterior Walls.
   13.   Section R302.6 (IRC) Dwelling and Garage Fire Separation.
   14.   Section 302.7 (IEBC) Fire Protection.
   15.   Section R303.3 (IRC) Bathrooms.
   16.   Section R303.9 (IRC) Required Heating.
   17.   Section R305 (IRC) Ceiling Height .
   18.   Section 308.5.4 (IBC) Daycare Facilities.
   19.   Section R309.5 (IRC) Fire Sprinklers.
   20.   Section R310.1 (IRC) Emergency Escape and Rescue Opening Required.
   21.   Section 310.4.1 (IBC) Care Facilities Within a Dwelling.
   22.   Section R310.1 (IRC) and Section 1030.3 (IBC) Requirements for Egress
Window Landings.
   23.   Section R310.5 (IRC) Emergency Escape Windows under Decks and Porches.
   24.   Section R311.3.2 (IRC) Floor Elevations for Other Exterior Doors.
   25.   Section 311.7.5.1 (IRC) Risers.
   26.   Section R311.7.8.2 (IRC) Handrail Continuity.
   27.   Section R313.1 (IRC) Townhouse Sprinkler Systems.
   28.   Section R313.2 (IRC) One- and Two-Family Sprinkler Systems.
   29.   Section R326 (IRC) Residential Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs.
   30.   Table R403.1 (IRC) and Table 1809.7 (IBC) Foundations for Stud Bearing
Walls.
   31.   Section R403.1.4.1 (IRC) Frost Protection for Decks.
   32.   Section 1809.5 (IBC) and Section R403.1.4.1 (IRC) Frost Protection for
Accessory Structures.
   33.   Section R404.1 (IRC) Concrete and Masonry Foundation Walls.
   34.   Section R404.1.3.2.3 (IRC) Foundation Walls for Conventional Light
Frame Construction.
   35.   Section R404.4 (IRC) and 1807.2 (IBC) Retaining Walls.
   36.   Section 406.3.2.1 (IBC) Dwelling Unit Separation.
   37.   Section 423.4 (IBC) Storm Shelters.
   38.   Section 903.2.3 (IBC) Group E Daycare Facilities.
   39.   Section 903.2.6 (IBC) Group I.
   40.   Section 903.2.8.4 (IBC) Care Facilities.
   41.   Section 903.2.11.1.3 (IBC) Basements.
   42.   Section 903.3.1.2.3 (IBC) Attics in Multi-Family Structures.
   43.   Section 907.2.10 (IBC) Single and Multiple Station Smoke Alarms.
   44.   Section 905.3.1 #1 – Height.
   45.   Section 905.3 (IBC) Excessive Distance.
   46.   Section 907.1 (IBC) Fire Alarm Control Panels.
   47.   Section 907.2.10 (IBC) Single and Multiple Station Smoke Alarms.
   48.   Section 907.6.4 (IBC) Zones.
   49.   Section 907.6.6 (IBC) Monitoring.
   50.   Section 1008.3.3 (IBC) Rooms and Spaces.
   51.   Section 1009.2 (IBC) Continuity and Components.
   52.   Section 1010 (IBC) Doors R-2.
   53.   Section 1010.1.6.1 (IBC) Frost Protection.
   54.   Section 1013.1.1 (IBC) Additional Exit Signage.
   55.   Section 1014.4 (IBC) Handrail Continuity.
   56.   Section 1015.9 (IBC) Retaining Walls.
   57.   Section 1028.5.1 (IBC) Hard Surfaces.
   58.   Section 1029.5 (IBC) Window Well Drainage.
   59.   Chapter 11 (IRC) and Chapter 13 (IBC) Energy Provisions.
   60.   Section 1106 (IEBC) Storm Shelters.
   61.   Section 1207.2 (IBC) Minimum Ceiling Heights.
   62.   Section M1502.4.2 (IRC) Duct Installation.
   63.   Section 1609.2 (IBC) Ground Snow Load.
   64.   Section P2603.5 (IRC) Water Service Depth.
   65.   Section P2719.1 (IRC) Floor Drains.
   66.   Section P2801.1 (IRC) Water Heater Floor Drain.
   67.   Section 2902.6 (IBC) Small Occupancies.
   68.   Section P2903.7 (IRC) Minimum Water Service Pipe Size.
   69.   Section P2904.1.1 (IRC) Required Sprinkler Locations.
   70.   Section P3005.4.2 (IRC) Building Sewer.
   71.   Section P3008.1 (IRC) Backwater Valves.
   72.   Section P3303 (IRC) Secondary Storm Sewer.
   73.   Section 3401.4 (IRC) Additions and Alterations.
   74.   Section E4201.2 (IRC) Definitions.
   75.   Section 3109 (IBC) Swimming Pools.
      1.   Scope. Section R101.2 Exception of the IRC shall be deleted and
replaced with the following:
         Exception. The following shall be permitted to be constructed in
accordance with this code.
         1.   Live or work units within detached one- and two-family dwellings
and townhouses that comply with the requirements of Section 419 of the
International Building Code.
         2.   Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer guestrooms
         3.   A care facility with eight or fewer persons receiving custodial
care within a dwelling unit.
         4.   A group daycare home or a family daycare home for 12 or fewer
children receiving care that are within a dwelling unit.
         5.   An intermediate care facility located within a dwelling unit
providing care on a 24-hour basis for three or more, but less than eight
persons.
      2.   Referenced Codes. Section 101.4 Referenced Codes of the IBC shall be
amended as follows:
         Section 101.4.1 Gas shall be amended by adding the following section:
         Section 101.4.1.1 Conflict. Where the requirements of the IFGC
conflict with the provisions of the Iowa Administrative Code 661- Chapter 221
Fuel Gas Piping, or 661- Chapter 226 Liquefied Petroleum Gas, the Iowa
Administrative Code shall be followed.
         Section 101.4.3 Plumbing shall be amended by adding the following:
         The Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the State of Iowa is
recognized as an alternative method of compliance for the installation of
plumbing systems.
         The reference to the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall
be deleted, and replaced with Polk County Health Department.
      3.   Department Established; Director Appointed. Section 103 of the IBC
and IEBC, and R103 of the IRC is deleted and replaced with the following:
      Section 103 Department of Building Safety. There is hereby established in
the City the Department of Building Safety, which shall be under the direction
and supervision of the Building and Zoning Official. The Building Official
shall be responsible to the Community Development Director for the enforcement
of the Building Codes, and such other ordinances as shall assign the Building
Official that function, and shall perform such other duties as may be required
by the Community Development Director or by any classification plan adopted by
the City. The Building Official shall have the authority to appoint staff
members and delegate duties to those staff members. The Building Official shall
submit a report to the Community Development Director not less than once a
year, covering the work of the department during the preceding period and shall
incorporate in that report a summary of recommendations as to desirable
amendments to this Code. The Building Official shall keep a permanent, accurate
account of all fees and other moneys collected and received under this Code,
the names of the persons upon whose account the same were paid, the date and
amount thereof, together with the location of the building or premises to which
they relate. The titles Director of Building, Building and Zoning Official, and
Building Official, as used herein, are synonymous and may be used
interchangeably.
      4.   Work Exempt From Permit. Subsection 105.2 Building: of the IBC and
IEBC, and R105.2 Building: of the IRC shall be amended by deleting the
sections, and replacing with the following:
      A building permit shall not be required for the following. Exemption from
the permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization
for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this
Code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
      Building:
         1.   One-story detached accessory structures used as tool or storage
sheds and similar uses, provided the projected floor area does not exceed 40
square feet in area and complies with all applicable zoning requirements. Such
building must be located at least three feet from any property line or the
easement width and six feet into the rear yard from any principle structure in
an A-1, R-1, R-2, R-4, and one- and two-family dwellings in an R-3 and R-
5 Zoning District. Setbacks for all other Zoned Districts shall comply with the
applicable zoning regulations as adopted by the Code of Ordinances.
         2.   Movable and non-fixed cases, racks, fixtures, counters, and
partitions not over five feet nine inches high.
         3.   Retaining walls which are not over four feet in height, measured
from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a
surcharge or impounding Class I, II, or IIIA liquids.
         4.   Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does
not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height or diameter or width does not
exceed two to one.
         5.   Residential Wading Pools.
         6.   Swings, playhouses, and other playground equipment.
         7.   Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches above adjacent
grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an
accessible route.
         8.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops,
and similar finish work.
         9.   Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage sets and
scenery.
         10.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not require
additional support for IRC structures, Group R, and U occupancies when
projecting not more than 54 inches.
         11.   Amusement Rides (for the purposes of this exemption, accessory
structures serving amusement rides and other structures located within the
confines of an amusement ride theme park are not considered an amusement ride).
         12.   Mobile or manufactured residential buildings (not including the
structural support systems and associated structures such as decks, exterior
landings and stairs) which are:
            A.   Located in an authorized mobile home park or similar
development, and
            B.   Installed in a manner complying with the State Building Code,
said installation to be certified in the manner specified by the State Building
Code Commissioner.
         13.   Minor maintenance and repair work that is deemed by the Building
Official not to affect structural strength, safety, fire resistance, or
sanitation, provided that no such work shall be performed in a manner contrary
to any provisions of this Code or any other laws.
      Unless otherwise exempted, separate plumbing, electrical, and mechanical
permits will be required when appropriate for the above exempted items.
Exemption from the permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to
grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of the Code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
      5.   Expiration. Subsection 105.5 of the IBC and IEBC, and R105.5 of the
IRC shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
         105.5 Expiration. Every permit, except a demolition permit, issued by
the Building Official under the provision of the Building Code shall expire
under any one of the following conditions:
         1.   Failure to begin work authorized within 180 days after issuance
of the permit.
         2.   Suspension or abandonment of work for 120 days after commencement
of the work. Time of occurrence of suspension or abandonment of work shall be
computed from the date of the most recent inspection since which no progress
has been made.
         3.   Failure to complete work on a structure designed for residential
uses within one year after issuance of a permit.
         4.   Failure to complete work on a structure designed for commercial
or industrial uses within two years after issuance of a permit. For permits
with a valuation exceeding $10,000,000.00 work shall be completed within three
years after issuance of a permit.
   Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the
time within which they may commence or continue work. The Building Official is
authorized to grant, in writing, for periods not more than 180 days each, two
extensions. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated. Any of the extensions may be further extended by action of the
Council. In all cases, when a renewal is granted, the structure for which the
permit is required shall comply with code requirements in effect at the time
the permit is renewed.
      6.   Fees. Section 109 of the IBC, Section 108 of the IEBC, and Section
R108 of the IRC are deleted and replaced with the following:
      Fees
         1.   Permit Fees:
            A.   A fee for each Building Permit shall be paid to the Building
Official in the amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees as adopted by the
Council. Building Permit fees are figured on valuation. Valuation is figured by
totaling square footage according to type of building or value of project. The
amounts used to determine the valuation shall be set by the Building Official
as determined necessary but not to exceed more than once in 12-month period,
typically beginning in January or February of each year. No Building Permits
shall be issued to any person who has fees outstanding as required by this Code
or any other laws or ordinances of the City.
            B.   The determination of value or valuation under any of the
provisions of the Building Code shall be made by the Building Official. The
valuation to be used in computing the permit and plan-check fees shall be the
total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as
all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems, and any other permanent
work or permanent equipment. A fee for each Building Permit shall be paid to
the Building Official in the amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees as
adopted by the Council.
            C.   If a permit is issued for a specific amount of work and, upon
inspection, it is determined that more work was performed than was authorized
by the permit, the permittee shall amend the permit or obtain another permit to
include all additional work and shall pay a new base fee and any unit fees as
described in Paragraph A above.
            D.   Permits and Fees for mechanical, plumbing, and electrical work
shall meet the requirements of Chapters 156, 157, or 158 respectively.
         2.   Additional permit fees are as follows:
            A.   Plan Check Fees. Plan Check Fees shall be in the amount set
forth in the Schedule of Fees as adopted by the Council.
            B.   Sidewalks and Approaches. Sidewalks and approaches shall be
constructed with all new buildings. All approaches must be minimum six inches
thick concrete from street to property line. Fees for sidewalks and approaches
shall be in the amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees as adopted by the
Council.
            C.   Foundations. The fee for a permit to construct only a
foundation shall be 150 percent of the fee in the amount set forth in the
Schedule of Fees as adopted by the Council. For purposes of this determination,
the valuation of the foundation shall be considered to be 10 percent of the
total building valuation.
            D.   Accessibility Review Fee. A fee in the amount set forth in the
Schedule of Fees as adopted by the Council shall be charged for the review of
plans in accordance with Sec 661-16.303 of the Iowa Administrative Code and
Chapter 11 of the IBC for handicap accessibility provisions. The review fee
shall not be required for construction for and associated with one- and two-
family dwellings and for projects with an assessed value of construction of
less than $2,000.00.
            E.   Thermal Efficiency Standards. In addition to other fees
required in this section, a fee in the amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees
as adopted by the Council shall be paid to the Building Official for the review
of plans and inspection of construction for compliance with the thermal
efficiency standards of the State Building Code.
            F.   Double Fee. Except in emergency situations, as determined by
the Building Official, where work for which a Building Permit is required by
this Code is started or proceeded with by any person prior to obtaining a
required permit, the fees in the amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees as
adopted by the Council shall be doubled. The payment of such double fee shall
not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this Code
in the execution of the work or from any other penalties prescribed herein. No
additional permits of any type shall be issued to any person who owes the City
the double fee described in this subsection. However, no double fee shall be
imposed upon any person who starts without a permit if:
            The work is started on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, or during
any other day when the Building Department is not normally open for business,
and the person secures the proper permit on the next Building Department
working day.
            G.   Refunds. If, within 30 days of the date of issuance, the
holder of a Building Permit decides not to commence the work described in said
permit, said person may, upon application to the Building Official, be refunded
that portion of the permit fee which is in excess of the permit refund fee in
as set forth in the Schedule of Fees as adopted by the Council.
            H.   Fees for Permit Renewals. Shall be based on the percentage of
valuation of remaining work to be performed provided the plans are not changed.
If the plans are changed enough to warrant a review, then the permit fee shall
be half the cost of the original fee, plus any fees as set forth in
Subparagraph J.
            *Exception. Or the hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is
greater. This cost shall include supervision, overhead, hourly wages, and
fringe benefits of the employees involved.
            I.   Reinspections. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each
inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is
called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. This
section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time
a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this Code, but
as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready
for such inspection or reinspection. Reinspection fees may be assessed when the
approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to
provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating
from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. To obtain a
reinspection, the applicant shall pay the reinspection fee as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees as adopted by the Council. In instances where reinspection
fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed
until the required fees have been paid.
            J.   Other Inspections and Fees. See the schedule of fees as
adopted by Council.
      Persons performing work for the federal Government, the State, the
County, or City may obtain permits for such work without paying the permit fees
described herein; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be
construed to exempt payment of permit fees by persons performing work under the
direction of the City in connection with the abatement of any public law.
      An expired permit may not be reissued without a permit fee except by
resolution of the Council.
      7.   Certificates of Occupancy. Section 111.1 of the IBC and Section
R110.1 of the IRC is amended by adding the following:
      On all new construction, all necessary drives, public sidewalks, and
approaches are to be installed before a Permanent Certificate of Occupancy is
issued. For the issuance of a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy due to winter
conditions for structures built under the IRC, a concrete driveway from the
street to the garage, a private sidewalk consisting of an impervious surface
connecting the driveway to the main entrance, and Code compliant stairways and
landings to the main entrance shall be installed. All public concrete sidewalks
placed over sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water ditches shall have not less
than two number four re-rods 20 feet long. All public sidewalks and approaches
shall also meet the requirements of the Statewide Urban Design and
Specifications and Chapter 175 as well as Chapters 136 and 137 of the Municipal
Code as adopted by the City.
      8.   Service Utilities. IRC Section R111 shall be amended by adding
Subsection R111.4.
      R111.4 Service Lines. All electrical lines not exceeding 15,000 volts and
all telephone and cablevision service lines, as well as other utility lines
serving any new building or structure, including signs and billboards,
requiring permanent electrical service shall be placed underground unless a
waiver from such is approved by the Building and Engineering Departments. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to existing buildings or additions
to such buildings (unless said addition requires the utility service provider
to upgrade the entire system from the transformer to the structure). Nothing in
this section shall be deemed to apply to temporary service when defined as such
by the utility provider.
      9.   Definitions. Section 202 IBC and IEBC, and section R202 IRC shall be
amended by including the following definitions:
      “Barrier” means a non-climbable fence, wall, building wall, or other
approved structure, or combination thereof, which completely surrounds the
swimming pool, residential swimming pool, wading pool, hot tub, or spa, and
obstructs access to the same. The barrier shall be equipped with self-closing
and self-latching pedestrian gates.
      “Bedroom” means any room designed for and potentially used for sleeping
purposes at the present time or in the future. Bedrooms shall meet all the
minimum provisions of this Code to include an emergency escape and rescue
opening, and a permanently powered dual sensor smoke alarm device with battery
backup. For the purpose of this chapter “bedrooms and sleeping rooms shall be
synonymous with each other.”
      “Fire area” means the aggregate floor area enclosed and bounded by fire
walls, fire barriers, exterior walls, or a rated horizontal assembly.
      “Residential swimming pool” means a water-filled enclosure accessory to a
one- or two-family dwelling or townhouse structure, that is portable or
permanently constructed, intended for swimming or recreational bathing that has
the ability to contain water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth. This
includes in-ground, aboveground, and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and
spas.
      “Residential wading pool” means a water-filled enclosure accessory to a
one- or two-family dwelling or townhouse structure, that is portable or
permanently constructed, intended for swimming or recreational bathing that
does not have the ability to contain water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in
depth. This includes in-ground, aboveground, and on-ground swimming pools, hot
tubs, and spas.
      “Speculative building” means a strip mall, warehouse, or other structure
where the final occupancy group of the building is not known at the time of
permitting.
      “Swimming pool” means a water-filled enclosure that is portable or
permanently constructed, intended for swimming or recreational bathing that has
the ability to contain water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth, and is not
defined as a residential swimming pool. This includes in-ground, aboveground,
and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas.
      “Wading pool” means a water-filled enclosure that is portable or
permanently constructed, intended for swimming or recreational bathing that
does not have the ability to contain water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in
depth, and is not defined as a residential wading pool. This includes in-
ground, aboveground, and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas.
      10.   Climate and Geographical Criteria. Amend IRC Table R301.2(1) to
read as follows:
TABLE 301.2(1) CLIMATE AND GEOGRAPHICAL CRITERIA
 
Ground Wind Design       Seismic  Subject to Damage From   Winter         Flood Hazards          Air      Mean
Snow   Speed Topographic Design              Frost         Design Ice                            Freezing Annual
Load   MPH   Effects     Category Weathering line  Termite Temp   Barrier NFIP Acceptance Zone C Index    Temp
                                             Depth                Req’d
30 PSF 90    NO          A        Severe     42” Mod/    -5F    Yes     10-Nov-82 – No local 1833     48.6
                                                   Heavy                  amendments.
 
      11.   Snow Load. For purposes of determining snow loads as required in
Section 1608.2 of the IBC and Section R301.6 of the IRC, the minimum ground
snow load for design purposes shall be 30 pounds per square foot. Subsequent
increases or decreases shall be allowed as otherwise provided in this Code,
except that the minimum allowable flat roof snow load may be reduced to not
less than 80 percent of the ground snow load.
      12.   Exterior Walls. Section R302.1 IRC shall be amended by retaining
the exceptions, but replacing section 302.1 and Table 302.1(2) with the
following:
R302.1 Exterior Walls. Construction, projections, openings, and penetrations of
exterior walls of dwellings shall comply with Table R302.1(1); Accessory
structures or dwellings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system
installed in accordance with Section P2904 shall comply with Table 302.1(2),
amended as follows:
TABLE 302.1(2)
EXTERIOR WALLS - ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND DWELLINGS WITH FIRE SPRINKLERS
Exterior Wall Element Minimum Fire-Resistance Rating Minimum Fire Separation
                                                     Distance
Exterior Wall Element Minimum Fire-Resistance Minimum Fire Separation Distance
                      Rating
                                              1-hour tested in
                                              accordance with ASMT E
                      Dwelling with Fire      119, or UL 263, or
                      Sprinklers Resistance   Section 703.3 of the     < 3 feet
                      Rating                  International Building
                                              Code with exposure from
                                              the outside
                                              1-hour tested in
Building Walls                                accordance with ASMT E
                      Accessory Structures    119, or UL 263, or
                      Fire Resistance Rating  Section 703.3 of the     < 3 feet
                                              International Building
                                              Code with exposure from
                                              the inside
                      Not Fire Resistance     0-hours                  > 3 feet
                      Rated
                      Not Allowed             N/A                      < 2 feet
                      Dwelling With Fire      1 hour on the underside,
                      Sprinklers Fire         heavy timber, or fire    > 2 foot
                      Resistance Rated        retardant treated wood.
Building Projections  Accessory Structures    0 hours                  > 2 foot
                      Fire Resistance Rating
                      Non-Fire Resistance     0 hours                  > 3 foot
                      Rated
Openings in Walls     Not Allowed             N/A                      < 3 feet
                      Unlimited               0-hour                   > 3 foot
                                              Comply with Section      < 3 feet
Penetrations          All                     R302.4
                                              None Required            > 3 feet
 
      13.   Dwelling Garage Fire Separation. Section R302.6 and Table R302.6
(IRC) shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
      The garage shall be completely separated from the dwelling unit by 5/
8 inches type X gypsum board applied to the adjoining walls and the garage
ceiling. Any structural element supporting a garage roof ceiling or floor
ceiling assembly above shall be enclosed with 5/8 inches type X gypsum board.
Openings in garage walls shall comply with section R302.5.
      14.   Fire Protection. Section 302 of the IEBC shall be amended by adding
the following subsection:
      302.7 Fire Protection. Existing buildings containing R-1 or R-
2 occupancies shall be made to comply with the International Building Code
Section 903.2.8 during reconstruction after fire damage to 20 percent of
existing dwelling or sleeping units, not including smoke or water damage or
other damage from firefighting operations.
      15.   Bathrooms. Section R303.3 (IRC) shall be deleted and replaced with
the following:
      Section R303.3 Bathrooms. Bathrooms shall be provided with a mechanical
ventilation system. The minimum ventilation rates shall be 50 cfm for
intermittent ventilation or 20 cfm for continuous ventilation. Ventilation air
from the space shall be exhausted directly to the outside.
      Exception. Toilet rooms containing only a water closet or lavatory may be
provided with a recirculating fan.
      16.   Required Heating. Section R303.10 (IRC) shall be amended by adding
the following exception:
      Exception. Sunrooms are not required to be provided heating or cooling
facilities, however, the existing building in which the sunroom is attached is
required to maintain its thermal envelope.
      17.   Ceiling Height. Section R305 (IRC) shall be amended by adding the
following section:
      R305.1.2 Existing basements. Existing basements with either a non-
finished or finished ceiling height of less than the heights as required by
sections R305.1 or R305.1.1 are considered non-conforming. The finishing of
basements that are considered non-conforming is allowed as long as the non-
conforming height isn’t decreased more than the minimal measurement allowed in
order to apply a finished ceiling of gypsum board or acoustical ceiling tiles.
Basements not meeting the minimum height requirements of section R305.1 or
305.1.1 shall only install recessed fixtures, except smoke detectors, and no
ceiling mounted fans shall be allowed.
      18.   Daycare Facilities. Section 308.5.4 (IBC) shall be deleted and
replaced with the following:
      308.5.4 Eight or Fewer Persons Receiving Care in a Dwelling Unit. A
facility such as the above within a dwelling unit and having eight or fewer
persons receiving custodial care shall be classified as a group R-3 occupancy
or shall comply with the International Residential Code.
   Exceptions:
         1.   A group daycare home or a family daycare home for 12 or fewer
children receiving care that are within a dwelling unit are permitted to comply
with the International Residential Code.
         2.   A care facility located within a dwelling unit providing care on
a 24-hour basis for three or more, but less than eight persons.
      19.   Fire Sprinklers. Section R309.5 shall be amended by replacing the
word “shall” in the first sentence with the word “may”
      20.   Emergency Escape and Rescue Opening Required. Section R310.1 shall
be amended by deleting Exception #2
      21.   Care Facilities within a Dwelling. Section 310.4.1 (IBC) shall be
amended by deleting the section and replacing with the following:
         310.4.1 Care Facilities within a Dwelling. Care facilities for eight
or fewer persons receiving care that are within a single-family dwelling are
permitted to comply with the International Residential Code.
      22.   Requirements for Egress Window Landings. Section R310.2.2 (IRC) and
Section 1030.3 (IBC) shall be amended by adding the following to the end of the
sections to state as follows:
      Where a landing is provided for egress windows in new and existing
construction of Group R occupancies or one- and two-family dwellings when the
maximum height requirement cannot be met as stated in Section 1030.3 or Section
R310.2.2 shall have a minimum width of 36 inches, a minimum depth of 12 inches
and a maximum height of 24 inches. The landing shall be permanently affixed to
the floor below or the wall under the window it serves.
      23.   Emergency Escape Windows Under Decks and Porches. Section 310.2.4
(IRC) shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
         310.2.4 Emergency Escape and Rescue Openings Under Decks and Porches.
Emergency escape and rescue openings installed under decks and porches shall be
fully openable and provide a path not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in width and
height to a yard or court. Cantilevered areas of all construction elements
shall meet the requirements of this section as stated for decks and porches.
      24.   Floor Elevations for Other Exterior Doors. Section R311.3.2 (IRC)
exception shall be amended by deleting and replacing with the following:
      A landing is not required where a stairway of four or fewer risers is
located on the exterior side of the door, provided the door does not swing over
the stairway.
      25.   Risers. Section R311.7.5.1 (IRC) shall be amended by adding
exception #3 as follows:
         3.   The dimension of the top and bottom riser of a stair may vary up
to one-inch (25.4 mm) from the other stairway riser dimension; however, in no
case shall the riser height exceed seven and three-quarter inches.
      26.   Handrail Continuity. The following shall be added at the end of
Section R311.7.8.4:
         “Handrails within a Dwelling Unit, one- and two-family, or Townhouse
Dwelling, shall be permitted to be interrupted at one location in a straight
stair when the rail terminates into a wall or ledge, is offset, and immediately
continues.
      27.   Townhouse Sprinkler Systems. Section R313.1 Townhouse automatic
fire sprinkler systems shall be amended by deleting and replacing with the
following:
         313.1 Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. An automatic
residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses.
      Exceptions:
         1.   An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be
required where additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses that do
not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed.
         2.   Townhouse structures that contain eight or less dwelling units.
         3.   Townhouse structures less than 18,000 square feet floor space,
exclusive of any garages.
      28.   One- and Two-Family Sprinkler Systems. Section R313.2 one- and two-
family dwellings automatic fire systems shall be amended by deleting and
replacing with the following:
         313.2 One- and two-family dwelling automatic fire sprinkler systems.
An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in one-and two-family
dwellings.
      Exceptions:
         1.   An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be
required where additions or alterations are made to existing buildings that are
not already provided with an automatic residential fire sprinkler system.
         2.   One- and two-family dwellings containing less than 8,000 square
feet of floor space per fire area, excluding attached garages or unenclosed
areas.
      29.   Residential Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs. Section R326 shall
be amended by deleting the section and replacing with the following:
      R326.1 General. The design and construction of residential pools and spas
shall comply with IBC Section 3109.3.1 as amended by this ordinance, and the
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC). Where any conflict arises
between the ISPSC and IBC Section 3109.3.1, Section 3109.3.1 shall prevail.
      30.   Foundations for Stud Bearing Walls. The following table is
substituted for Table 1809.7 of the IBC and Table R403.1 of the IRC:
Table 1809.7/Table R403.1 Foundations For Stud Bearing Walls
 
                                                             Minimum Depth of
                                  Minimum Width Thickness of Foundation Below
Number of Thickness of Foundation of Footings   Footings     Natural Surface
Stories   Walls                   (inches)*     (inches)     of Ground and
                                                             Finish Grade
                                                             (inches)
          Unit
          Concrete Masonry
1         8        8              12            8            42
2         8        8              16            8            42
3         10       10             18            12           42
Footings shall contain continuous reinforcement of 2 – ½ inch diameter rebar
throughout. Placement of reinforcement and concrete shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 19 of the International Building Code.
 
      31.   Frost Protection for Decks. Section R403.1.4.1 shall be amended by
deleting exception #3 and replacing with the following:
         3.   Decks less than 30 inches above grade (measured at any point
within 36 inches horizontally to the edge of any side), and not supported by a
dwelling, shall not require footings that extend below the frost line.
      32.   Frost Protection for Accessory Structures. Section 1809.5 of the
IBC and Section R403.1.4.1 of the IRC shall be amended by deleting the
exception in the IBC and deleting exceptions #1 and #2 in the IRC, and
replacing with the following:
         Exceptions:
         1.   The Building Official may approve slab-on-grade foundation
designs for wood or metal frame residential accessory structures over 160
square feet to not exceeding 1,024 square feet, without additional engineering,
providing the design meets all of the following:
            A.   Foundations supporting wood shall extend at least six inches
above the adjacent finish grade. The grade shall be removed to a depth
sufficient enough for all vegetation to be absent and soils to be stable enough
to support the slab load, 3,000# concrete mix shall be used.
            B.   The entire perimeter of the foundation shall be provided with
a thickened portion of slab with cross-section dimensions of 12 inches minimum
width and 12 inches minimum thickness.
            C.   The slab floor shall be a minimum of four inches thick
concrete with six inches by six inches reinforcing mesh or #4 reinforcing bars
24 inches on center front-to-back and side-to-side. The thickened portion of
the slab shall also contain two #4 rebar, one near the top and one near the
bottom continuously with ends of rebar overlapping each other at least 15
inches.
            D.   Slab floor and thickened edge shall be one continuous pour,
interconnected with reinforcing.
            E.   Vertical distance from the top of the foundation floor to the
lowest point of the footing base shall not be more than 24 inches.
         2.   Structures supported on skids or post construction, with a total
area of less than 240 square feet.
      33.   Concrete and Masonry Foundation Walls. Section R404.1 shall be
amended by adding the following to the end of the existing text:
         If backfill prior to a poured in-place floor slab is desired, one of
the following methods to provide bottom lateral support shall be completed:
            (1)   A full depth (minimum one and one-half inches) nominal two
inches by four inches keyway may be formed into the footings to secure the
bottom of the foundation wall; or
            (2)   Thirty-six inches long vertical # 4 rebar may be embedded a
minimum of six inches into the footings not to exceed seven feet on center
spacing.
      34.   Foundation Walls for Conventional Light Frame Construction. Section
R404.1.3 shall be amended by adding the following section R404.1.3.2.3 and
Table R404.1.3.2.3:
         Section R404.1.3.2.3 Foundation Walls for Conventional Light Frame
Wood Construction constructed with concrete and masonry foundation walls shall
be permitted to be designed in accordance with Table R403.1.3.2.3 Foundation
Walls for Conventional Light Frame Construction
Table R404.1.3.2.3 Foundation Walls for Conventional Light Frame Construction
 
Height of Foundation Wall (Net measured from top of basement slab to top of Thickness of     Reinforcement Type and Placement Within Foundation Wall**        Reinforcement Type and Placement within Foundation Wall**    Type of
foundation wall)*                                                            Foundation Walls                                                                  (12-foot span between corners and supporting cross walls)    Mortar
Unit
Gross Net                                                                    Concrete Masonry Concrete                                                         Masonry                                                      Masonry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Type M or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S. Grout
                                                                                              3 – ½” diameter bars with placement in the top, middle, and 0.0075 square inch bar 8’ o.c. vertically in fully grouted and Mortar
8     7’8”                                                               7 ½”  8”    bottom                                                           cells. If block is 12” nominal thickness, may be           shall meet
                                                                                                                                                               unreinforced                                                 provisions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            of Chapter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            21
                                                                                      See     ½” bars and 2’ o.c. horizontally and 20” vertically o.c.                                                               Same as
9     8’8”                                                               8”     Chapter (5/8” bars 2’ o.c. horizontally and 30” vertically o.c.)   See Chapter 18                                               above
                                                                                      18
                                                                                      See
10    9’8”                                                               8”     Chapter See Chapter 18                                                   Same as above
                                                                                      18
*Concrete floor slab to be minimum four inches. If such floor slab is not provided, a specially designed means of providing lateral support at the bottom of the wall shall be required.
**All reinforcement bars shall meet ASTM A615 grade 40 and be deformed. Placement of bars shall be in center of wall and meet the provisions of 18, 19, and 21 of the IBC.
NOTE: Cast in place concrete shall have a compressive strength of 3,000 pounds at 28 days. Footings shall contain continuous reinforcement of 2 - ½” diameter rebar throughout. Placement of reinforcement and concrete shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 19 of the IBC.
NOTE: Material used for backfilling shall be carefully placed granular soil of average or high permeability and shall be drained with an approved drainage system as prescribed in Section 1805.4 of the IBC.   Where soils containing
a high percentage of clay, fine silt, or similar materials of low permeability or expansive soils are encountered or where backfill materials are not drained or an unusually high surcharge is to be placed adjacent to the wall, a
specially designed wall shall be required.
 
      35.   Retaining Walls. Section 1807.2 of the IBC, and Section R404.4 of
the IRC shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
         Retaining Walls. Retaining walls that are not laterally supported at
the top and that retain in excess of 48 inches (1,219 mm) of unbalanced fill
shall require engineered plans to ensure stability against overturning,
sliding, excessive foundation pressure, and water uplift. Multi-level retaining
wall designs where the landing area is less than eight feet from the back of
one wall to the face of the next wall, the multi-level wall system shall be
considered one wall for the purpose of this section. Retaining walls shall be
designed for a safety factor of one point five against lateral sliding and
overturning. This section shall not apply to foundation walls supporting
buildings.
      36.   Dwelling Unit Separation. Section 406.3.2.1 IBC shall be amended by
deleting and replacing with the following:
         406.3.2.1 Dwelling Unit Separation. The private garage shall be
separated from the dwelling unit and its attic area by means of minimum 5/8-
inch type “X” fire code gypsum board or equivalent throughout. Garages beneath
habitable rooms shall be separated by not less than 5/8-inch type “X” fire code
gypsum board or equivalent throughout. Door openings between a private garage
and the dwelling unit shall be equipped with either solid wood doors or solid
or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 1 3/8 inch thick, or doors in
compliance with 716.5.3. Openings from a private garage directly into a room
used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Doors shall be self-closing
and self-latching.
      37.   Storm Shelters. Section 423.4 (IBC) Group E Occupancies shall be
amended by deleting the section and replacing with the following:
         423.4 Group E Occupancies. In areas where the shelter design wind
speed for tornados is 250 MPH in accordance with Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500,
all Group E Occupancies with an occupant load of 50 or more shall have a storm
shelter constructed in accordance with Chapters 1-5 and 8 of ICC 500. Storm
shelters shall be provided with an emergency lighting system. The emergency
lighting system shall provide an average of one foot-candle (11 lux) of
illumination in occupied shelter areas, and any means of egress pathways. The
emergency lighting shall be capable of providing a duration of not less than
two hours of required illumination.
         Exceptions:
         1.   Group E daycare facilities.
         2.   Group E occupancies accessory to places of religious worship.
         3.   Buildings meeting the requirements for shelter design in ICC 500.
         4.   Accessory structures to existing Group E sites where the
occupancy classification of said structures are classified as Groups A-5 and U.
      38.   Group E Daycare Facilities. Section 903.2.3 shall be amended by
adding the following subsection:
         4.   Group E daycare facilities 5,000 square feet or more, or
containing an occupant load of 100 or more persons, including children and
staff, shall be provided with a NFPA 13 system throughout the occupancy.
      39.   Group I. Section 903.2.6 shall be amended by deleting exception #2,
and replacing with the following:
         2.   A Group I-4 daycare facility with a fire area less than 5,000
square feet and an occupant load less than 100, which is located at the level
of exit discharge, and where every room where care is provided has not fewer
than one exterior exit door, an automatic sprinkler system is not required.
      40.   Care Facilities. Subsection 903.2.8.4 (IBC) shall be amended by
deleting the section and replacing with the following:
         903.2.8.4 Care facilities. Care facilities for eight or fewer persons
receiving care that are within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply
with the International Residential Code.
      41.   Basements. Section 903.2.11.1.3 (IBC) Basements shall be deleted
and replaced with the following:
         [F] 903.2.11.1.3 Basements. Where any portion of a basement is located
more than 75 feet from openings required by Section 903.2.11.1, the basement
shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
      42.   Attics In Multi-Family Structures. Section 903.3.1.2.3 (IBC) shall
be amended by adding the following subsection #5.
         5.   Multi-family residential structures required to have a sprinkler
system installed, shall provide automatic sprinklers throughout all portions of
the attic area.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Structures are two stories or less in height.
         2.   The attic structural and roofing components are composed of non-
combustible materials
         3.   Attic areas with less than four feet height.
      43.   Alarms. Section 903.4.2 (IBC) shall be deleted and replaced with
the following:
         903.4.2 Alarms. An approved audible device listed for outdoor use with
110 candela visual signal shall be connected to every automatic sprinkler
system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water
flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size
installed in the system. Alarm devices shall be provided on the exterior of the
building in an approved location. Where a fire alarm system is installed,
actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire
alarm system.
      44.   Height. Section 905.3.1 #1 (IBC) shall be deleted and replaced with
the following:
         1.   Three or more stories above or below the level of fire department
equipment access.
      45.   Excessive Distance. Section 905.3 (IBC) shall be amended by adding
the following subsection:
         905.3.9 Excessive Distance. Where the most remote portion of a floor
or story is more than 400 feet from a hose connection or fire department access
road the Fire Code Official is authorized to require standpipes to be provided
in approved locations. Class I manual standpipes shall be allowed.
      46.   Fire Alarm Control Panels (FACP).  Section 907.1 (IBC) shall be
amended by adding the following subsection:
         Section 907.1.4 Fire Alarm Control Panels (FACP). Each building shall
have no more than one FACP.
         Installation of fire alarm panel shall not exceed six feet in height
measured from the floor to the top of the unit.
         Exception. Suppression system releasing panels are not required to
meet the height requirement or the limitation in the number of panels.
      47.   Single and Multiple Station Smoke Alarms. Section 907.2.10 (IBC)
shall be modified by inserting the following immediately following the existing
language:
         Smoke alarms in dwelling and sleeping units shall be addressable with
sounder bases and monitored by the building fire alarm system as a supervisory
signal only. Mini horns in dwelling units are not required if notification from
a building fire alarm system is through the smoke alarms with sounder bases. An
addressable system is required whenever there are eight or more signaling
devices, i.e., detectors, pull stations, flow switches, etc.
      48.   Zones. Section 907.6.4 (IBC) shall be amended by adding a new
section as follows:
         907.6.4.3 Zone and Address Location Labeling. Fire alarm panels shall
have all zones and address points plainly and permanently labeled as to their
location on the outside of the panel or on an easily readable map of the
building, if no display screen is present.
      49.   Monitoring. Section 907.6.6 (IBC) shall be deleted and replaced
with the following language:
         907.6.6 Monitoring. Fire alarm systems required by this chapter shall
be monitored by a central station approved and listed under UL 827 in
accordance with NFPA 72.
      50.   Rooms and Spaces. Section 1008.3.3 (IBC) shall be amended by
deleting item #5 and replacing with the following:
         5.   Public restrooms that contain more than one water closet or
urinal or that are required to be accessible.
      51.   Continuity and Components. Section 1009.2 (IBC) shall be amended by
adding item #11 as follows:
         11.   Components of required exterior walking surfaces shall be
concrete, asphalt, or other approved hard surface.
      52.   Building Security. Section 1010 (IBC) Doors R-2. All new R-
2 occupancies shall provide the following security measures at individual
dwelling or sleeping unit entry, egress, or access doors.
         1.   Latch or strike plates for individual dwelling and sleeping unit
entry doors and exterior doors shall be installed with construction screws, or
similar, that are three inches minimum in length, and capable of attaching
through the door frame a minimum of one and one-half inches into stud wall
framing.
         2.   Sliding patio doors at or below grade level shall have foot bolt
locks, or similar devices.
         3.   View ports capable of a 180-degree viewing angle shall be
installed in all individual dwelling and sleeping unit entry doors.
      53.   Frost Protection. Section 1010.1.6 (IBC) shall be amended by adding
a new subsection as follows:
         1010.1.6.1 Frost Protection. Exterior landings at doors required to be
at the same level by 1010.1.5 shall be provided with frost protection.
      54.   Additional Exit Signage. Section 1013.1 (IBC) shall be amended by
adding the following subsection:
         1013.1. 1 Additional Exit Signage. Additional exit signs may be
required at the discretion of the Code Official to clarify an exit or exit
access.
      55.   Handrails. Section 1014.4 Continuity shall be amended by deleting
exception number 1 and replacing with the following:
         1.   Handrails within a dwelling unit, or serving an individual
dwelling unit of groups R-2 and R-3, shall be permitted to be interrupted by a
newel post at a turn or landing. Handrails serving these occupancies shall be
allowed to be interrupted at one location in a straight stair when the rail
terminates into a wall or ledge, and is offset, and immediately continues.
      56.   Retaining Walls. Section 1015 (IBC) shall be amended by adding a
new sub-section 1015.9 as follows.
         1015.9 Retaining Walls. A guard shall be provided along retaining
walls where a finished walking surface such as a sidewalk, patio, driveway,
parking lot, or similar, are located on the top side of a retaining wall. The
guard shall be installed along any portion of the wall measuring 30 inches or
greater in height measured at any point within 36 inches horizontally to the
edge of the open side. A guard shall not be required along portions of the
retaining wall where the horizontal distance between the edge of the finished
walking surface and the face of the wall is greater than 72 inches.
      57.   Hard Surfaces. Section 1028.5 (IBC) shall be amended by adding the
following subsection:
         1028.5.1 Hard Surfaces. Components of required exterior walking
surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, or other approved hard surface.
      58.   Window Well Drainage. Section 1030.4 (IBC) shall be amended by
adding a the following subsection:
         1030.4.3 Window Well Drainage. Window wells shall be designed for
proper drainage by connecting to the buildings foundation drainage system
required by Section 1805.4.2 or by an approved alternate method.
      59.   Energy Provisions. Chapter 11 IRC and Chapter 13 IBC shall be
deleted and replaced with the following:
         Buildings shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
current edition of the International Energy Conservation Code, published by the
International Code Council, as adopted and amended by the State.
      60.   Storm Shelters. Section 1106 (IEBC) shall be amended by adding the
following exception #4.
         4.   Accessory structures to existing Group E sites where the
occupancy classification of said structures are classified as Groups A-5 and U.
      61.   Minimum Ceiling Heights. Section 1207.2 (IBC) shall be amended by
adding the following exception #5:
         5.   In existing structures, basements with either a non-finished or
finished ceiling height of less than the heights as required by Sections 1207.2
are considered non-conforming. The finishing of basements that are considered
non-conforming is allowed as long as the non-conforming height isn’t decreased
more than the minimal measurement allowed in order to apply a finished ceiling
of gypsum board or acoustical ceiling tiles, but in no case shall the height be
less than 82 inches in any portion of the finished area. Basements not meeting
the minimum height requirements of Section 1207.2 shall install recessed
fixtures only, and nothing shall project into the minimum height requirement.
      62.   Duct Installation. Section M1502.4.2 shall be amended by deleting
the section, and replacing with the following:
         M1502.4.2 Duct Installation. Exhaust ducts shall be supported at
intervals not to exceed 4 feet, (3658 mm) and shall be secured in place. The
insert end of the duct shall extend into the adjoining duct or fitting in the
direction of airflow. Exhaust duct joints shall be sealed in accordance with
Section M1601.4.1 and shall be mechanically fastened. Ducts shall not be joined
with screws or similar fasteners. Where dryer exhaust ducts are enclosed in
wall or ceiling cavities, such cavities shall be of sufficient size to allow
the installation of the duct, without changing the configuration of the duct.
         Exception. Dryer duct sections that are longer than four feet shall be
supported minimally every 6 feet.
      63.   Ground Snow Load. Section 1608.2 (IBC) shall be deleted and
replaced with the following:
         1608.2 Ground Snow Load. The ground snow load to be used in
determining the design snow load for roofs is hereby established at 30 pounds
per square foot. Subsequent increases or decreases shall be allowed as
otherwise provided by code, except that the minimum allowable flat roof snow
load may be reduced to not less than 80 percent of the ground snow load.
      64.   Depth of Water Service. Section P2603.5 IRC shall be amended by
deleting “Water service pipe shall be installed not less than 12 inches deep
and not less than six inches below the frost line” and replacing with “Water
service piping shall, whenever feasible, be no less than five feet below the
surface of the ground”.
      65.   Floor Drains. Section P2719.1 IRC shall be amended by adding the
following text to the existing section: “Unless otherwise approved by the
inspector, at least one floor drain shall be provided in each room where a
water heater is, or will be installed, and in each mechanical room. When
installed in a basement floor, such floor drain shall be at least three inches
in diameter”. Every water meter shall be within eight feet of a floor drain as
described per ordinance Section 91.04 meeting the requirements of ordinance
Section 155.48”.
      66.   Water Heater Floor Drain. Section P2801.4 IRC shall be amended by
adding the following sentence to the end of the paragraph: “Every water heater
shall be located in close proximity to a floor drain meeting the requirements
of ordinance Section 155.03 #69”.
      67.   Small Occupancies. Section 2902.6 IBC shall be amended by deleting
the section and replacing with the following:
         2902.6 Small Occupancies. Drinking fountains are not required for an
occupant load of 50 or fewer; however, a bottled water dispenser shall be
provided for occupancies with an occupant load between 16 and 49. For
occupancies less than 100, individual water bottles readily available, offered
continuously without fee, and displayed with approved signage within the public
area shall be allowed in place of drinking fountains or water dispensers.
      68.   Minimum Water Service Size. Section P2903.7 shall be amended by
deleting size of water service pipe shall be not less than 3/4 inch diameter”
and replacing with “size of water service pipe shall be not less than one inch
diameter.”
      69.   Required Sprinkler Locations. Section P2904.1.1 IRC shall be
amended by adding exception #5:
         5.   Structures complying with any exception of R313 as amended.
      70.   Building Sewer. Section P3005.4.2 IRC shall be amended by adding
the following sentence at the end of the section “The minimum diameter for a
building sewer shall be four inches.”
      71.   Backwater Valve. Section P3008.1 IRC shall be amended by adding the
following sentences at the end of the paragraph: “The requirement for the
installation of a backwater valve shall apply only when it is determined
necessary by the Building Official based on local conditions. When a valve is
required by the Building Official, it shall be a manually operated gate valve
or fullway ball valve. An automatic backwater valve may also be installed, but
is not required.
      72.   Secondary Storm Sewer. Section P3303 shall be amended by adding a
new sub-section as follows:
         P3303.1.5 Secondary Storm Sewer. The provisions for secondary storm
sewers shall comply with Section 157.08 of the City’s Code of Ordinances, for
all structures with habitable or useable space below grade.
      73.   Additions and Alterations. Section E3401.4 of the IRC shall be
amended by adding the following to the end of the paragraph:
         Additions to, alterations of, and repairs to existing electrical
equipment shall comply with this Code. Furthermore, existing electrical
equipment that is temporarily exposed or made accessible because of any
remodeling or repair of an existing structure, shall be made to comply with
this Code. In any event, the Building Official may, when any additions,
alterations, or repairs are made, order other reasonable additions or
alterations in the electrical equipment of a structure or on any premises when
a danger to life or property may result if such other additions or alterations
were not made.
      74.   Definitions. Section E4201.2 IRC shall be amended by deleting the
following definitions:
         1.   Permanently Installed Swimming, Wading, Immersion, and
Therapeutic Pools, and
         2.   Storable Swimming or Wading Pools.
      75.   Swimming Pools. Section 3109 (IBC), shall be deleted and replaced
with the following:
         3109.1 General. The design and construction of swimming pools, spas,
and hot tubs shall comply with the following, and the International Swimming
Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC). Where any conflict arises between the ISPSC and this
section, this section shall prevail.
         3109.2 Definition. The following terms are defined in Section 155.03
#9 of this code of ordinances:
         Barrier.
         Residential Swimming Pool.
         Residential Wading Pool.
         Swimming Pool.
         Wading Pool.
         3109.3 Swimming pools, Commercial Hot Tubs, and Wading Pools. Swimming
pools, commercial hot tubs, and wading pools shall comply with the requirements
of Sections 3109.4 through 3109.10 and other applicable sections of this Code.
         3109.3.1 Residential Swimming Pools and Hot Tubs. Residential swimming
pools and hot tubs shall comply with Sections 3109.4.1 through 3109.10.
         3109.4 Enclosure Height. Swimming pools, commercial hot tubs, and
wading pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence or barrier not less than
six feet (1,290 mm) measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from
the swimming pool.
         3109.4.1 Residential. Residential swimming pools and hot tubs shall be
completely enclosed by a fence or barrier not less than 48 inches (1,219 mm)
above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the
swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, the barrier
is authorized to be at ground level or mounted on top of the pool structure,
and the vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom
of the barrier shall be not greater than four inches (102 mm).
         Exception. A hot tub or spa with a safety cover complying with ASTM
F1346 shall not be subject to the barrier requirements.
         3109.5 Barrier Requirements. The vertical clearance between grade and
the bottom of the barrier shall be not greater than two inches (51 mm) measured
on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. Openings in
the fence shall not permit the passage of a four-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.
The fence or screen enclosure shall be equipped with self-closing and self-
latching gates.
         3109.6 Openings. Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a
four-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.
         3109.6.1 Solid barrier Surfaces. Solid barriers which do not have
openings shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal
construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
         3109.6.2 Closely Spaced Horizontal Members. Where the barrier is
composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops
of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1,143 mm), the horizontal
members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing
between vertical members shall be not greater than 1-3/4 inches (44 mm) in
width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing
within the cutouts shall be not greater than 1-3/4 inches (44 mm) in width.
         3109.6.3 Widely Spaced Horizontal Members. Where the barrier is
composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops
of the horizontal members is 45 inches (1,143 mm) or more, spacing between
vertical members shall be not greater than four inches (102 mm). Where there
are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts
shall be not greater than 1-3/4 inches (44 mm) in width.
         3109.6.4 Chain Link Dimensions. Mesh size for chain link fences shall
be not greater than a 2-1/4 inch square (57 mm square) unless the fence is
provided with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings
to not more than 1-3/4 inches (44mm).
         3109.6.5 Diagonal Members. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal
members, the opening formed by the diagonal members shall be not greater than
1-3/4 inches (44 mm).
         3109.7 Gates. Access doors or gates shall comply with the requirements
of Sections 3109.3 through 3109.4.1.4 and shall be equipped to accommodate a
locking device. Pedestrian access doors or gates shall open outward away from
the pool and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Doors or
gates other than pedestrian access doors or gates shall have a self-latching
device. Release mechanisms shall be in accordance with Sections 1010.1.9 and
1109.13. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located
less than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the bottom of the door or gate, the release
mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the door or gate three inches
(76 mm) or more, below the top of the door or gate, and the door or gate and
barrier shall be without openings greater than ½ inch (12.7 mm) within 18
inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism.
         3109.8 Pool structure as Barrier. Where an aboveground pool contains a
barrier mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a
ladder or steps, then the ladder or steps either shall be capable of being
secured or locked to prevent access, or the ladder or steps shall be surrounded
by a barrier which meets the requirements of Sections 3109.3 through
3109.4.1.4. Where the ladder or steps are secured or locked, any opening
created shall not allow the passage of a four-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.
         3109.9 Prohibited Locations. Barriers shall be located so as to
prohibit permanent structures, equipment, or similar objects from being used to
climb the barriers.
         3109.10 Entrapment Avoidance. Suction outlets shall be designed and
installed in accordance with ANSI/APSP-7.
155.04   PREMISE IDENTIFICATION.
   Every new and existing principal structure on a premise shall have the
address number affixed thereto. The numbers shall be six inches in height for
structures built per the provisions of the IBC with the exception that
individual dwelling units in multi-family structures are allowed numbers to be
a height of three inches. The numbers for buildings constructed per the
provisions of the IRC shall be four inches in height. The numbers shall be
visible from the public right-of-way and of contrasting color from the
principal structure. Where required by the Fire Code Official, address
identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate
emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building
address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole, or other
approved sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address numbers
may be required to be increased in height and stroke width at the direction of
the Fire Code Official. Address identification shall be maintained.
155.05   RESIDENTIAL WOOD FLOOR CANTILEVERS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 23 of the International Building
Code and Chapter 5 of the International Residential Code, the maximum floor
cantilevers of dimensional wood floor systems serving uses regulated by the
International Building Code for Group R Occupancies and residential occupancies
regulated by the International Residential Code shall not exceed a projecting
dimension equal to twice the depth of the floor joist for bearing cantilevers
and three times the depth of the joist for non-bearing cantilevers. This
provision shall not apply to engineered wood products or cantilevers designed
by a registered design professional for a specific application.
155.06   LICENSING FOR ELECTRICAL, PLUMBING, AND MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS AND
INSTALLERS.
   The provisions of Chapter 160 shall be applicable for any work performed in
regards to electrical, plumbing, and mechanical systems. In cases where an
owner-occupant of a single-family dwelling desires to install plumbing and
plumbing fixtures, heating, or comfort cooling equipment, wiring, electrical
equipment, or perform any electrical work in said person’s single-family
dwelling, said person may appear before the Building Official and show
competency to do the specific work for which said person desires a permit.
After such showing, said owner-occupant may obtain a permit by paying the
proper fee, without having to meet the provisions of Chapter 160.
155.07   DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   1.   Permit Required; Expiration.
      A.   No person shall commence the work of demolishing any building or
structure until a permit authorizing such work has been obtained from the
Building Official. Every demolition permit issued under the provisions of this
Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized
by such permit is not commenced within seven calendar days from the date of
issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is not completed within 30
calendar days of the date of issuance, unless, because of the extensiveness of
the project, the Building Official deems at the time of issuance, a longer
period for either commencement or completion should be granted.
      B.   Any permittee holding an unexpired demolition permit may request in
writing an extension of time within which the demolition work may be commenced
or completed. If such request contains good and satisfactory reasons showing
that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented timely
commencement or completion of the work, the Building Official may extend the
applicable expiration date.
      C.   The fee for such permit shall be at the same rate as the original
permit.
      D.   If a demolition permit to remove an unsafe building, or a building
that is the subject of a public nuisance action has expired, the Building
Official shall order the prompt removal of such structure, in accordance with
all requirements of this chapter. All of the costs attendant to this action,
including administrative costs, shall be either assessed against the property
or collected from the owner unless otherwise directed by the Council.
   2.   Application for Permit. Application for a permit to demolish a building
or structure shall be made to the Building Official. The applicant shall
provide the following information:
      A.   In the case of demolition by explosives, the applicant shall furnish
the information required in this subsection and shall furnish information
regarding the person who will be conducting the demolition by explosives and
shall furnish plans showing how the building or structure will be prepared for
demolition, the type and amount of explosives to be used; and a detailed plan
showing what safety precautions will be taken to protect persons and property.
      B.   A permit for the demolition of a building or structure by the use of
explosives may be issued by the Council subject to the following:
         (1)   The applicant for a permit must demonstrate to the Council the
need for demolition by explosives rather than demolition by conventional means
and must demonstrate that demolition by explosives can be safely conducted at
the specific location requested.
         (2)   The Building Official, Fire Chief, and Police Chief shall review
the application and submit their opinions to the Council concerning whether or
not the demolition can be safely conducted together with any recommendations
they may have.
         (3)   The applicant shall provide a certificate of liability insurance
for personal injuries, death, and for property damage in an amount not less
than $1,000,000.00 naming the City as an additional named insured party. The
certificate shall provide that the coverage shall not be canceled or changed
without 10 days’ prior written notice to the City. The Council may require
additional insurance coverage in instances where the hazard appears greater
than normally expected and may also in such instances require the posting of a
bond acceptable to the City in an amount commensurate with the severity of the
hazard. The bond shall provide that the applicant shall well and satisfactorily
perform the demolition. The bond shall be for the benefit of the City and any
person who is injured or damaged by the failure of the applicant to
satisfactorily perform the demolition.
         (4)   The applicant shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the
City from all losses resulting from damages or injuries caused by the applicant
or the applicant’s employees, servants, or agents arising out of the use of
explosives in demolition.
         (5)   The applicant shall pay the City in advance for reasonable
expenses that will be incurred by the City in furnishing necessary security and
police protection in the vicinity of the demolition site.
         (6)   The applicant shall observe all applicable federal, State, and
local laws in the course of the demolition including but not limited to the
following:
            a.   The applicable provisions of the Fire Prevention Code relating
to the storage, transportation, and use of explosives.
            b.   The rules and regulations of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency relating to the demolition of buildings or structures
containing asbestos materials or other hazardous air pollutants.
         (7)   The applicant shall meet all other requirements of this chapter
relating to the demolition of structures or buildings, provided, however, that
should a conflict exist between the provisions of this paragraph and other
provisions of the Code of Ordinances, the provisions of the paragraph shall be
deemed controlling.
         (8)   The applicant need not obtain an obstruction permit as provided
in Section 155.08 of this chapter to block off portions of the public property
within an appropriate distance of the demolition site provided that the
obstruction is for less than a 24-hour period and provided that the obstruction
is for security purposes in connection with the use of explosives. However, the
applicant shall be required to obtain an obstruction permit to use public
property in the cleanup operations following the detonation of explosives.
         (9)   The Council shall at any time have the authority to impose
additional requirements and safety precautions in the interest of the public
health, safety, and welfare.
   3.   Permit - Issuance, Validity, Expiration, Revocation, Fees.
      A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the issuance,
validity, expiration, and revocation of any permit to demolish a building or
structure shall be administered in accordance with Section 155.08 of this
chapter and Section 105 of the IBC and Section R105 of the IRC.
      B.   Permits fees shall be as set forth in the amount set forth in the
Schedule of Fees as adopted by the Council.
   4.   Utility Services. No permit to demolish shall be issued until it has
been established that existing utility services have been properly disconnected
and approved.
   5.   Permit - Bond Required.
      A.   Before a permit is issued to remove a building which has been
ordered removed as a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of the
International Building Code and International Residential Code, and which
period of time granted by the courts for removal or other remedial action by
the applicants or other party of interest has expired, the applicant may be
required to post a cash bond equal to the estimated costs of the removal of the
building and the disconnection of the existing utility services. If the
building is not removed by the applicant at the time the permit expires at a
time specified by the Building Official, such bond shall be forfeited and used
toward the costs of the City to remove it.
      B.   If the building is removed by the applicant prior to the time the
permit expires, such bond shall be returned to the applicant. A return of the
bond does not exempt the applicant from further assessments to the real estate
for costs which have occurred prior to the issuance of the permit.
   6.   General Requirements.
      A.   The Building Official shall have the authority to impose at any time
reasonable requirements and safety precautions in the interest of public
health, safety, and welfare which, in the opinion of the Building Official, are
commensurate with the severity of hazard, either demonstrated or anticipated,
provided that such requirements may be appealed to, and reviewed by, the Board
of Appeals at the request of the affected party.
      B.   In addition, the following provisions shall be met:
         (1)   The discharging, loading, or dumping of building materials from
any building shall be accomplished in such manner as to minimize the creation
of dust and scattering of debris. Materials shall not be dropped by gravity to
any point lying outside the building walls except through an enclosed chute,
unless such materials are dust free and the height of drop is at least equal to
the horizontal distance to the nearest property or barricade line. Where such
horizontal distance is not available and practical necessity dictates the
dropping of relatively large masses of materials, the Building Official may
approve appropriate protective measures designed to provide protection from
danger equivalent to that afforded by the otherwise required horizontal
setback, provided however, that in all cases, such materials shall be handled
in a manner approved by the Air Pollution Control Division of the County Health
Department.
         (2)   When necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare,
every demolition project shall be barricaded, fenced, lighted, and signed with
warning or directional signs in a manner approved by the Building Official. The
Building Official may also require the presence of approved security guards or
flagmen. Such barricades, fences, lights, and signs as may be deemed necessary
by the Building Official for protection of the public shall be maintained after
completion of the demolition work until such time as the site is cleaned of all
debris and all excavations, basements, and depressions in the ground are
restored to grade and rendered harmless.
         (3)   Adequate precautions shall be taken to insure that procedures or
conditions relating to the demolition work do not constitute a fire hazard. If,
in the opinion of the Fire Chief, a fire hazard exists, or is likely to exist,
the Fire Chief may order the cessation of work or require that appropriate
protective measures, approved by the Fire Chief, be taken.
         (4)   All streets, alleys, and public ways adjacent to the demolition
site shall be kept free and clear of any rubbish, refuse, and loose materials
resulting from the demolition work unless an obstruction permit for such space
has been obtained.
Upon completion of the demolition work, the site shall be left in a clean,
smooth condition. Inorganic building rubble, sand, clean earth, or other
approved fill material may be used to fill excavations, basements, and
depressions, provided that the top 12 inches shall be clean earth or its
equivalent in terms of surface smoothness, freedom from dust, and cleanliness.
If the surface is to be used for the parking of vehicles, it shall be
constructed as required in the Zoning Code.
155.08   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT; BOND AND INSURANCE.
   Obstruction permits shall meet the requirements of Chapter 141. Building
permits shall be obtained for work performed in the public right-of-way in
conjunction with building construction, demolition, alterations, repairs, and
installations.
155.09   EXTERIOR BUILDING WALL CONSTRUCTION.
   1.   Notwithstanding anything contained in Sections 602 or 705 of the IBC
and Section R302 of the IRC, an exterior wall may be constructed with openings
without complying with the requirements of such sections related to opening
protection; provided, that before a building permit is issued which permits an
exterior wall to be so constructed, the owner of the building shall furnish the
Building Official with either:
      A.   A copy of an easement or covenant running with the land applicable
throughout the existence of the proposed building in which those with interests
in the property abutting the side of the property on which said exterior wall
is to be constructed agree not to construct a wall set forth in said Sections
602, 705, or R302 which would require said exterior wall and said building on
such abutting property to have the opening protection of said Sections 602,
705, or R302 which copy shall show the book and page where such document has
been filed of record in the office of the County Recorder; or
      B.   An agreement, in a form capable of being filed of record in the
office of the County Recorder, for the benefit of those with interest in the
abutting property, by which the owner of the building and the owner of the
property on which said building is to be built, jointly and severally agree, on
behalf of themselves and their successors and assigns for so long as said
building is in existence, that, in consideration for being permitted to
building an exterior wall on said building without complying with said Sections
602, 705, or R302 at such time as a building is erected on the abutting
property within the distances to said exterior wall contained is said Sections
602, 705, or R302 then they shall modify or rebuild said exterior wall to
conform at least to the requirements of said Sections 602 and 705 applicable to
the actual separations of the building; said agreement shall be recorded at the
expense of the applicant for the building permit.
   2.   Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 602 or 705 of the IBC and
Section R302 of the IRC, an exterior wall may be constructed with openings
adjacent to a public street or alley right-of-way without complying with the
requirements of such sections related to opening protection, provided the
following conditions are each satisfied:
      A.   The setback between the exterior wall and the far side of the
adjoining public right-of-way must conform at least to the requirements of such
Sections 602, 705, or R302 applicable to the actual separation of building.
      B.   The Council has by resolution declared an intent to permanently
maintain the adjoining right-of-way as a public street or alley, and to never
permit a structure to be constructed or placed upon the right-of-way within the
required separation from the exterior wall. The resolution shall specifically
describe the affected right-of-way and shall be in a form that can be recorded
and indexed into the records of the County Recorder.
      C.   The owner of the building has furnished a copy of the Council
resolution described above, which copy shall show the book and page where such
document has been filed of record in the office of the County Recorder.
155.10   PERMANENT OCCUPANCY OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   1.   No part of any structure or any appendage thereto, except signs, shall
project beyond the property line of the building site, except as specified in
this Code, provided, however, that a structure or appendage thereto may project
beyond the property line of the building site when the applicant holds a
property interest including, but not limited to, air rights, within the area of
the project sufficient to establish a legal right to build therein or thereon.
   2.   Structures or appendages regulated by this section shall be constructed
of materials as specified in Section 705 of the IBC and section R302 of the IRC
for structures regulated by such code.
   3.   The projection of any structure or appendage shall be the distance
measured per the definition of Fire Separation Distance as noted in the IBC and
Section R302 of the IRC for structures regulated by such code.
   4.   Nothing in this Code shall prohibit the construction and use of a
structure between buildings and over or under a public way provided the
structure complies with all requirements of this code.
155.11   COVERING OR CONCEALING WORK.
   No building construction work for which a permit is required shall be
concealed in any manner from access or sight until the work has been inspected
and approved by the inspector.
155.12   REMOVAL OF COVERING.
   The inspector has the authority to remove or cause the removal of lath,
plaster, sheathing, sheetrock, insulation, or other obstruction which may
prevent the proper inspection of building construction work.
155.13   CORRECTING DEFECTIVE WORK.
   When a contractor is notified that defects exist in their work, said
contractor shall make corrections within 30 days after notification. Failure to
correct the defect within the 30 days shall result in a stop work order being
placed on the building or structure where the defective work exists.
155.14   BOARD OF APPEALS.
   In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations
made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of
this Code, there shall be and hereby created a Board of Appeals, consisting of
five members. Board of Appeals members shall be chosen and appointed based on
diversity and building construction knowledge, all of whom shall be residents
of the City. One member of said Board of Appeals at a minimum shall be a
private citizen. The Building Official shall be an ex-officio member without a
vote and shall act as secretary of the Board. The appointment of members shall
be for four-year terms, expiring on December 31, with not more than three
members’ terms expiring any one year. The Building Board of Appeals shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to Council approval, and shall serve without
compensation. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for
conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the Building Official with a duplicate copy to the appellant, and
may recommend to the Council such new legislation as is consistent therewith.
The Board shall meet at will and when there are appeals or business on file for
a hearing. Nominal appeal fee to the Building Board of Appeals shall be paid as
set forth in Section 155.03. The appeal shall be valid for one year from the
date of the Board approval to the commencement of work and to the completion of
work undertaken pursuant to the approval.
155.15   VIOLATIONS.
   See Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances.
155.16   ELEVATORS IN R OCCUPANCIES.
   Construction of new structures of Group R Occupancy containing dwelling
units located more than one story above or below the level of exit discharge,
shall be required to provide passenger elevator service to all occupied floors
in accordance with Chapter 30 of the IBC.
   1.   Exception. Structures built in compliance with the IRC.
CHAPTER 156
MECHANICAL AND GAS CODE
 
156.01 Adoption of International Code          156.05 Board of Appeals
156.02 Deletions                               156.06 Violations
156.03 Amendments and Additions                 
156.04 Licensing for Electrical, Plumbing, and  
Mechanical Contractors and Installers
 
156.01   ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL CODE.
   This chapter shall consist of the “International Mechanical Code, 2018
Edition, and the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition” as published by the
International Code Council which volume is incorporated herein by this
reference as fully as though set forth herein in its entirety, excepting only
such portions as are herein stated to be deleted there from; and such
additional provisions as are hereafter set forth. This chapter and all
provisions incorporated herein, by reference or otherwise, shall be known as
the “Altoona Mechanical and Gas Code,” may be cited as such, and will be
referred to herein as such and as “this Code.”
156.02   DELETIONS.
   The following are hereby deleted from the International Mechanical Code
(hereinafter known as the IMC) and International Fuel Gas Code (hereinafter
known as the IFGC), and are of no force or effect herein:
   1.   Section 106.4.3 and 106.4.4 IMC.
   2.   Section 106.5.3 and 106.5.4 IFGC.
   3.   Section 106.5 IMC.
   4.   Section 106.6 IFGC.
   5.   Section 108.4 IMC and IFGC.
   6.   Section 109 IMC and IFGC.
   7.   Section 402 IMC.
156.03   AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS.
   The remaining sections in this chapter are and represent amendments and
additions to the requirements contained in the International Mechanical Code
(hereinafter known as the IMC) and International Fuel Gas Code (hereinafter
known as the IFGC), and where they conflict with those of the International
Mechanical Code and International Fuel Gas Code, the requirements of this
chapter shall prevail.
   1.   Section 101.1 (IMC and IFGC) - Name of Jurisdiction.
   2.   Section 102.8.1 (IMC and IFGC) - Conflicts.
   3.   Section 103.1 (IMC and IFGC) – Department of Mechanical and Gas
Inspection.
   4.   Section 106.2 (IMC and IFGC) - Work Exempt from Permit.
   5.   Section 106.4 (IMC) and Section 106.5 (IFGC) - Permit Issuance.
   6.   Section 106.4.3 (IMC) and 106.5.3 (IFGC) – Expiration.
   7.   Section 106.5 (IMC) and 106.6 (IFGC) Permit Fees.
   8.   Section 156.10 (IMC) and Section 108.5 (IFGC) - Stop Work Orders.
   9.   Section 307.2.4.1 (IMC) – Ductless Mini-Split System Traps.
   10.   Section 1107.5.4 (IMC) – Copper Tubing Joints.
      1.   Title. Section 101.1 shall be modified by inserting (The City of
Altoona, Iowa) as name of jurisdiction.
      2.   Conflicts. Section 102.8.1 shall be amended by adding the following
to the end of the section.
         “Where the requirements of the IMC or IFGC conflict with the
provisions of the Iowa Administrative Code 661- Chapter 221 Fuel Gas Piping, or
661- Chapter 226 Liquefied Petroleum Gas, the Iowa Administrative Code shall be
followed.”
      3.   Department of Mechanical and Gas Inspection. Section 103.1 of the
IMC and IFGC shall be amended by deleting the section, and replacing with the
following:
         “There is hereby established in the City the Department of Mechanical
and Gas Inspections, which shall be under the direction and supervision of the
Building and Zoning Official. The Building Official shall be responsible to the
Community Development Director for the enforcement of the Building Codes, and
such other ordinances as shall assign the Building Official that function, and
shall perform such other duties as may be required by the Community Development
Director or by any classification plan adopted by the City. Additional
responsibilities of the Building Official shall be assigned as required per
Chapter 155.”
      4.   Permits Not Required. Section 106.2 #5 of the IMC and Section 106.2
#2 of the IFGC shall be amended by deleting said language and replacing with
the following:
         “Minor repair, cleaning, adjustment, or replacement of any heating,
ventilating, cooling, or refrigeration equipment where the total cost of the
work does not exceed $100.00. This exemption shall be deemed to include
adjustments by a gas supplier in a gas piping system due to the exchange or
relocation of a gas meter.”
         The term “portable” as set forth in Section 106.2 of the IMC and the
IFGC shall mean that which may be easily or readily carried or transported by
hand from place to place without tools or aid of devices.
      5.   Permit Issuance. Section 106.4 of the IMC and Section 106.5 of the
IFGC shall be amended by adding the following to the end of the section:
         1.   Permits Are Not Transferable. Mechanical and gas work performed
under the provisions of this chapter must be done by a contractor meeting the
licensing provisions as set forth by the Iowa Plumbing and Mechanical Systems
Board in accordance with Chapter 105 of the Code of Iowa, unless the provisions
of Section 155.13are met. A mechanical contractor licensee by the State
Plumbing and Mechanical Systems Board as a “Master” may sign and obtain a
permit for the contractor for which they are employed only when said “Master”
has provided proof of employment by said licensed mechanical contractor. Any
permit required by the provisions of this Code may be revoked by the Building
Official upon the violation of any provision of this Code.
         2.   A State licensed mechanical contractor shall be allowed only to
secure permits for themselves, or for a single firm or corporation. When a
State licensed mechanical contractor has secured such a permit, only the
employees of such contractor when meeting the provisions of Chapter 105 of the
Code of Iowa shall perform the work for which the permit was obtained.
         3.   For purposes of this section, an “employee” shall be one employed
by the contractor, firm, or corporation for a wage or salary. A contractor may
be required by the Building Official to show positive evidence as to the
employee status of workers on the job. Such evidence shall be in the form of
payroll and time records, canceled checks, or other such documents.
         4.   The contractor may also be required to show the agreement or
contract pertaining to the work being questioned as evidence that said
contractor is, in fact, the actual contractor for such work. Failure or refusal
by the contractor to make available such employee or contractual records within
24 hours from demand therefor shall be grounds for immediate revocation of any
permit for the work in question.
      6.   Expiration. Section 106.4.3 of the IMC and Section 106.5.3 of the
IFGC shall be amended by deleting said sections and replacing with the
following:
      Every permit, issued by the Building Official under the provision of the
Mechanical Code shall expire under any one of the following conditions:
         1.   Failure to begin work authorized within 180 days after issuance
of the permit.
         2.   Suspension or abandonment of work for 120 days after commencement
of the work. Time of occurrence of suspension or abandonment of work shall be
computed from the date of the most recent inspection since which no progress
has been made.
         3.   Failure to complete work on a structure designed for residential
uses within one year after issuance of a permit.
         4.   Failure to complete work on a structure designed for commercial
or industrial uses within two years after issuance of a permit. For permits
with a building valuation exceeding $10,000,000.00, work shall be completed
within three years after issuance of a permit.
      Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of
the time within which they may commence or continue work. The Building Official
is authorized to grant, in writing, for periods not more than 180 days each,
two extensions. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable
cause demonstrated. Any of the extensions may be further extended by action of
the Council. In all cases, when a renewal is granted, the structure for which
the permit is required shall comply with Code requirements in effect at the
time the permit is renewed.
      7.   Permit Fees. Section 106.5 of the IMC and Section 106.6 of the IFGC
shall be amended by deleting said sections and replacing with the following:
         1.   Permit Fees.
            A.   A fee for each mechanical permit shall be paid to the Building
Official in the amount set in the Schedule of Fees adopted by the Council. No
mechanical permits shall be issued to any person who has fees outstanding as
required by this Code or any other laws or ordinances of the City.
            B.   If a permit is issued for a specific amount of work and, upon
inspection, it is determined that more work was performed than was authorized
by the permit, the permittee shall amend the permit or obtain another permit to
include all additional work and shall pay a new base fee and any unit fees as
described in Paragraph A.
         2.   Additional permit fees are as follows:
            A.   Double Fee. Except in emergency situations, as determined by
the Building Official, where work for which a Mechanical Permit is required by
this Code is started or proceeded with by any person prior to obtaining a
required permit, the fees specified as set forth in the amount set in the
Schedule of Fees as adopted by the Council shall be doubled. The payment of
such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the
requirements of this Code in the execution of the work or from any other
penalties prescribed herein. No additional permits of any type shall be issued
to any person who owes the City the double fee described in this subsection.
However, no double fee shall be imposed upon any person who starts without a
permit if:
               (1)   The work is started on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, or
during any other day when the Building Department is not normally open for
business; and
               (2)   The person secures the proper permit on the next Building
Department working day.
            B.   Refunds. If, within 30 days of the date of issuance, the
holder of a Mechanical Permit decides not to commence the work described in
said permit, said person may, upon application to the Building Official, be
refunded that portion of the permit fee which is in excess of the permit refund
fee set in the Schedule of Fees adopted by the Council.
            C.   Fees for permit renewals shall be based on the amount of
remaining work to be completed. If the plans are changed enough to warrant a
review, then the permit fee shall be ½ the cost of the original fee plus any
fees as set forth in Paragraph E.
      *Or the hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is greater. This cost
shall include supervision, overhead, hourly wages, and fringe benefits of the
employees involved.
            D.   Reinspections. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each
inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is
called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. This
section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time
a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this Code, but
as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready
for such inspection or reinspection. Reinspection fees may be assessed when the
approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to
provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating
from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. To obtain a
reinspection, the applicant shall pay the reinspection fee in accordance with
the Schedule of Fees as adopted by Council. In instances where reinspection
fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed
until the required fees have been paid.
            E.   Other Inspections and Fees. See the Schedule of Fees as
adopted by the Council by resolution.
      Persons performing work for the federal government, the State, the
County, or City may obtain permits for such work without paying the permit fees
described herein; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be
construed to exempt payment of permit fees by persons performing work under the
direction of the City in connection with the abatement of any public law. An
expired permit may not be reissued without a permit fee, except by resolution
of the Council.
      8.   Stop Work Orders. Section 108.5 of the IMC and IFGC shall be amended
by deleting the last sentence and replacing with the following:
      Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been
served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to civil
penalties as defined in Chapter 3 Municipal Infractions of this Code of
Ordinances.
      9.   Ductless Mini-Split System Traps. Section 307.2.4.1 shall be amended
by adding the following to the end of the last sentence: or according to the
manufacturer’s recommendations.
      10.   Copper Tubing Joints. Section 1107.5.4 shall be amended by adding
the following to the end of the section: All press-connect fittings must be
listed and labeled for refrigerant piping and installed per manufacturer’s
instructions.
156.04   LICENSING FOR ELECTRICAL, PLUMBING, AND MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS AND
INSTALLERS.
   The provisions of Chapter 160 shall be applicable for any work performed in
regards to electrical, plumbing, and mechanical systems.
156.05   BOARD OF APPEALS.
   In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations
made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of
this Code, there shall be and hereby created a Board of Appeals, consisting of
five members. Board members shall be chosen and appointed based on diversity
and building construction knowledge, all of whom shall be residents of the
City. One member of said Board of Appeals at a minimum shall be a private
citizen. The Building Official shall be an ex-officio member without a vote and
shall act as secretary of the Board. The appointment of members shall be for
four-year terms, expiring on December 31, with not more than three members’
terms expiring any one year. The Building Board of Appeals shall be appointed
by the Mayor, subject to Council approval, and shall serve without
compensation. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for
conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the Building Official with a duplicate copy to the appellant, and
may recommend to the Council such new legislation as is consistent therewith.
The Building Board of Appeals shall meet at will and when there are appeals or
business on file for a hearing. Nominal appeal fee to the Building Board of
Appeals shall be paid as set forth in Section 156.03, Permit Fees. The appeal
shall be valid for one year from the date of the Building Board of Appeals
approval to the commencement of work and to the completion of work undertaken
pursuant to the approval.
156.06   VIOLATIONS.
   See Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 157
PLUMBING CODE
 
157.01 Adoption of International Code    157.06 Sewer Service Lines Maintenance
157.02 Deletions                         157.07 Subsurface Drainage
157.03 Amendments and Additions          157.08 Secondary Storm Sewer
157.04 Licensing for Electrical,
Plumbing, and Mechanical Contractors and 157.09 Grease Interceptors
Installers
157.05 Excavation Permits                157.10 Board of Appeals
                                        157.11 Violations
 
157.01   ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL CODE.
   The State Plumbing Code consisting of the Uniform Plumbing Code, as prepared
by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, as
amended and currently adopted by the State Department of Public Health, is
hereby adopted. An alternative equivalent form of compliance to the State Code
will be the “International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition,” as published by the
International Code Council, which volume is incorporated herein by this
reference as fully as though set forth herein in its entirety, excepting only
such portions as are herein stated to be deleted there from; and such
additional provisions as are hereafter set forth. This chapter and all
provisions incorporated herein by reference or otherwise, shall be known as the
“Altoona Plumbing Code,” may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein
as such and as “this Code.”
157.02   DELETIONS.
   The following are hereby deleted from the International Plumbing Code
(hereinafter known as the IPC) and are of no force or effect herein:
   1.   Section 106.1.1.
   2.   Section 106.1.2.
   3.   Section 106.6.1.
   4.   Section 106.6.2.
   5.   Section 106.6.3.
   6.   Section 108.4.
   7.   Section 109.
157.03   AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS.
   The remaining sections in this chapter are and represent amendments and
additions to the requirements contained in the International Plumbing Code
(hereinafter known as the IPC) and where they conflict with those of the
International Plumbing Code, the requirements of this chapter shall prevail.
   1.   Section 103.1 Department of Plumbing Inspection.
   2.   Section 106.5 Permit Issuance.
   3.   Section 106.5.3 Expiration.
   4.   Section 106.6 Permit Fees.
   5.   Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders.
   6.   Section 305.4 Freezing.
   7.   Section 312.3 Drainage and Vent Air Test.
   8.   Table 403.1 Minimum Number of Required Plumbing Fixtures.
   9.   Section 410.2 Small Occupancies.
   10.   Section 413.3 Floor Drains.
   11.   Section 504.6 Water Heater Floor Drain.
   12.   Section 603.1 Size of Water Service Pipe.
   13.   Section 710.1 Maximum Fixture Unit Load.
   14.   Section 715.1 Sewage Backflow.
   15.   Section 903.1 Roof Extension.
   16.   Section 1111.1 Subsoil Drains.
      1.   Department of Plumbing Inspection. Section 103.1 shall be amended by
deleting the section and replacing with the following: “There is hereby
established in the City the Department of Plumbing Inspections, which shall be
under the direction and supervision of the Building and Zoning Official. The
Building Official shall be responsible to the Community Development Director
for the enforcement of the Plumbing Codes, and such other ordinances as shall
assign the Building Official that function, and shall perform such other duties
as may be required by the Community Development Director or by any
classification plan adopted by the City. Additional responsibilities of the
Building Official shall be assigned as required per Chapter 155 of the City of
Altoona, Code of Ordinances.”
      2.   Permit Issuance. Section 106.5 shall be added to the end of the
section to state as follows:
         1.   Permits Are Not Transferable. Plumbing work performed under the
provisions of this chapter must be done by a contractor meeting the licensing
provisions as set forth by the State Plumbing and Mechanical Systems Board in
accordance with Chapter 105 of the Code of Iowa, unless the provisions of
Section 155.13 of the Municipal Code are met. A plumbing contractor licensee by
the State Plumbing and Mechanical Systems Board as a “Master” may sign and
obtain a permit for the contractor for which they are employed only when said
“Master” has provided proof of employment by said licensed plumbing contractor.
Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be revoked by the
Building Official upon the violation of any provision of this Code.
         2.   A State licensed plumbing contractor shall be allowed only to
secure permits for themselves, or for a single firm or corporation. When a
State licensed plumbing contractor has secured such a permit, only the
employees of such contractor, when meeting the provisions of Chapter 105 of the
Code of Iowa, shall perform the work for which the permit was obtained.
         3.   For purposes of this section, an “employee” shall be one employed
by the contractor, firm, or corporation for a wage or salary. A contractor may
be required by the Building Official to show positive evidence as to the
employee status of workers on the job. Such evidence shall be in the form of
payroll and time records, canceled checks, or other such documents.
         4.   The contractor may also be required to show the agreement or
contract pertaining to the work being questioned as evidence that said
contractor is, in fact, the actual contractor for such work. Failure or refusal
by the contractor to make available such employee or contractual records within
24 hours from demand therefor shall be grounds for immediate revocation of any
permit for the work in question.
      3.   Expiration. Section 106.5.3 shall be amended by deleting the section
and replacing with the following:
         106.5.3 Expiration. Every permit, issued by the Building Official
under the provision of the Plumbing Code shall expire under any one of the
following conditions:
         1.   Failure to begin work authorized within 180 days after issuance
of the permit.
         2.   Suspension or abandonment of work for 120 days after commencement
of the work. Time of occurrence of suspension or abandonment of work shall be
computed from the date of the most recent inspection since which no progress
has been made.
         3.   Failure to complete work on a structure designed for residential
uses within one year after issuance of a permit.
         4.   Failure to complete work on a structure designed for commercial
or industrial uses within two years after issuance of a permit. For permits
with a building valuation exceeding $10,000,000.00 work shall be completed
within three years after issuance of a permit.
      Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of
the time within which they may commence or continue work. The Building Official
is authorized to grant, in writing, for periods not more than 180 days each,
two extensions. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable
cause demonstrated. Any of the extensions may be further extended by action of
the Council. In all cases, when a renewal is granted, the structure for which
the permit is required shall comply with code requirements in effect at the
time the permit is renewed.
      4.   Permit Fees. Section 106.6 shall be amended by deleting the section
and replacing with the following:
         1.   Permit Fees:
            A.   A fee for each plumbing permit shall be paid to the Building
Official in the amount set in the Schedule of Fees adopted by the Council. No
plumbing permits shall be issued to any person who has fees outstanding as
required by this Code or any other laws or ordinances of the City.
            B.   If a permit is issued for a specific amount of work and, upon
inspection, it is determined that more work was performed than was authorized
by the permit, the permittee shall amend the permit or obtain another permit to
include all additional work and shall pay a new base fee and any unit fees as
described in Paragraph A.
         2.   Additional permit fees are as follows:
            A.   Double Fee. Except in emergency situations, as determined by
the Building Official, where work for which a plumbing permit is required by
this Code is started or proceeded with by any person prior to obtaining a
required permit, the fees specified as set forth in the amount set in the
Schedule of Fees as adopted by the Council shall be doubled. The payment of
such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the
requirements of this Code in the execution of the work or from any other
penalties prescribed herein. No additional permits of any type shall be issued
to any person who owes the City the double fee described in this subsection.
However, no double fee shall be imposed upon any person who starts without a
permit if:
               (1)   The work is started on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, or
during any other day when the Building Department is not normally open for
business; and
               (2)   The person secures the proper permit on the next Building
Department working day.
            B.   Refunds. If, within 30 days of the date of issuance, the
holder of a plumbing permit decides not to commence the work described in said
permit, said person may, upon application to the Building Official, be refunded
that portion of the permit fee which is in excess of the permit refund fee as
set forth in the Schedule of Fees as adopted by the Council.
            C.   Fees for Permit Renewals shall be based on the amount of
remaining work to be completed. If the plans are changed enough to warrant a
review then the permit fee shall be half the cost of the original fee plus any
fees as set forth in Paragraph E.
      *Or the hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is greater. This cost
shall include supervision, overhead, hourly wages, and fringe benefits of the
employees involved.
            D.   Reinspections. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each
inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is
called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. This
section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time
a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this Code, but
as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready
for such inspection or reinspection. Reinspection fees may be assessed when the
approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to
provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating
from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. To obtain a
reinspection, the applicant shall pay the reinspection fee in accordance with
the Schedule of Fees as set forth in the Schedule of Fees as adopted by the
Council. In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional
inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been
paid.
            E.   Other Inspections and Fees. See the Schedule of Fees as
adopted by the Council.
      Persons performing work for the federal government, the State, the
County, or City may obtain permits for such work without paying the permit fees
described herein; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be
construed to exempt payment of permit fees by persons performing work under the
direction of the City in connection with the abatement of any public law.
      An expired permit may not be reissued without a permit fee, except by
resolution of the Council.
      5.   Stop Work Orders. Section 108.5 shall be amended by deleting the
last sentence and replacing with the following: “Any person who shall continue
any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be subject to civil penalties as defined in Chapter 3.
      6.   Freezing. Section 305.4 shall be amended by deleting “Exterior water
supply system piping shall be installed not less than six inches below the
frost line and not less than 12 inches below grade.” and replacing with
“Exterior water supply system piping shall, whenever feasible, be no less than
five feet below the surface of the ground.”
      7.   Drainage and Vent Air Test. Section 312.3 shall be amended by
deleting the first sentence in the paragraph.
      8.   Minimum Number of Required Plumbing Fixtures. Table 403.1 shall be
amended by deleting footnote e and replacing with the following footnote e:
         e.   For business and mercantile occupancies with an occupant load of
30 or fewer, service sinks shall not be required.
      9.   Small Occupancies. Section 410.2 shall be amended by deleting the
section and replacing with the following:
         410.2 Small Occupancies. Drinking fountains are not required for an
occupant load of 50 or fewer; however, a bottled water dispenser shall be
provided for occupancies with an occupant load between 16 and 49. For
occupancies less than 100, individual water bottles that are readily available,
offered continuously without fee, and displayed with approved signage within
the public area shall be allowed in place of drinking fountains or water
dispensers.
      10.   Floor Drains. Section 413.3 shall be amended by adding the
following to the existing section:
         “Unless otherwise approved by the inspector, at least one floor drain
shall be provided in each room where an automatic water heater is, or will be
installed, and in each mechanical room. When installed in a basement floor,
such floor drain shall be at least three inches in diameter.” Every water meter
shall be within eight feet of a floor drain as described per Ordinance Section
91.04.”
      11.   Water Heater Floor Drain. Section 501 shall be amended by adding
the following section.
         501.9 Proximity to Floor Drain. Every water heater shall be located in
close proximity to a floor drain meeting the provisions of ordinance Section
157.03, Floor Drains, unless otherwise approved.
      12.   Size of Water Service Pipe. Section 603.1 shall be amended by
deleting “The water service pipe shall be not less than ¾ inch in diameter” and
replacing with “The water service pipe shall be not less than one inch in
diameter.”
      13.   Maximum Fixture Unit Load. Section 710.1 shall be amended by adding
the following sentence at the end of the section “The minimum diameter for a
building sewer shall be four inches.”
      14.   Sewage Backflow. Section 714.1 shall be amended by adding the
following sentences at the end of the paragraph:
         “The requirement for the installation of a backwater valve shall apply
only when it is determined necessary by the Building Official based on local
conditions. When a valve is required by the Building Official, it shall be a
manually operated gate valve or full-way ball valve. An automatic backwater
valve may also be installed, but is not required.
      15.   Roof Extension. Section 903.1 shall be amended by deleting “
[NUMBER]” located in the second line of the first sentence and replacing with
“12 inches.”
      16.   Subsoil Drains. Section 1111.1 shall be amended by deleting the
sentence “The subsoil sump shall not be required to have either a gas-tight
cover or a vent.” and replaced with the following: “The subsoil sump shall have
a gas-tight cover appropriate to the sump basket attached in an approved
manner. The lid shall have an opening with a diameter of four inches that is
gasketed with a four-inch pipe stubbed through the lid and capped for the
future use of a radon vent. Any system used for the removal of the radon gas
shall be in accordance with accepted industry standards.”
157.04   LICENSING FOR ELECTRICAL, PLUMBING, AND MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS AND
INSTALLERS.
   The provisions of Chapter 160 shall be applicable for any work performed in
regards to electrical, plumbing, and mechanical systems.
157.05   EXCAVATION PERMITS.
   Excavation permits shall meet the requirements of Chapter 141. Plumbing
permits shall be obtained for the installation and repair of private utilities
or services located within the public right-of-way.
157.06   SEWER SERVICE LINES MAINTENANCE.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building sewer as well as the storm sewer service line (the
service line being the pipe from the storm sewer main to the structure) shall
be borne by the property owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any
loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the
installation or maintenance of the building sewer as well as the storm sewer
service line.
157.07   SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE.
   The provisions of Section
157.08, which relate to subsurface drainage, shall apply to all subsurface
drainage from buildings whether new or existing. In the event such drainage
would discharge to a point upon or so adjacent to a public sidewalk or street
as to permit the water so discharged to drain upon a public sidewalk or street
during periods of community emergency generated by extra ordinarily high levels
of precipitation is permissible upon approval.
157.08   SECONDARY STORM SEWER.
   No building permits shall be issued for any structure in the City until
provisions have been made to provide for secondary storm sewers to drain all
subsurface and foundation drains in compliance with the following:
   1.   Sanitary Sewers - Prohibited Discharge. No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged any stormwater runoff, surface or groundwater, roof
runoff, or subsurface drainage by a direct or indirect connection into the
sanitary sewer system for any new construction within the area served by the
City. Prohibited subsurface drainage shall include both interior and exterior
foundation drains into the sanitary sewer system.
   2.   Foundation Drain Discharge - Alternative Methods. All foundation drains
shall be disposed of in one of the two following alternative methods:
      A.   Sump Pump. A sump pump shall meet the provisions of the
International Residential Code, when applicable, or the International Plumbing
Code. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 901.2.1 of the International
Plumbing Code, in single-family dwellings, sumps of approved construction to
which no fixtures except one floor drain are connected, and which receive only
laundry wastes or basement drainage, need not be vented.
      B.   Alternative Method. Upon submission of plans and specifications to
the City Engineer or Building Official by any developer for an alternate method
of disposing of said waters which can be shown to be as effective as the above,
then said proposed method shall be allowed by the City Engineer or Building
Official.
   3.   Secondary Storm Sewer Details. Secondary storm sewers shall be
constructed in accordance with the following:
      A.   Design and Materials. Discharge from footing drains and sump pumps
must be discharged into a secondary storm sewer system or alternative drainage
way as approved by the City Engineer or the Building Official. Piping for
secondary storm sewer system shall be PVC pipe with thickness of SDR Series 35,
or thicker, with joints capable of pressure loadings for periods when all sump
pumps may be operating simultaneously. The secondary storm sewer system shall
be located in the same manner as the normal storm sewer location unless it can
otherwise be shown that a different location is advantageous and acceptable. It
shall be equipped with an approved flap valve at the discharge end and shall
have a sealed lid manhole at the upper terminus.
      B.   Capacity. The line shall be so designed as to accommodate the
required flows based upon the assumption that:
         (1)   With one-half of the sump pumps pumping at 20 GPM (average 10
GPM per residence), the secondary storm sewer will handle all flows by gravity
with pipe flowing full with velocity of minimum two FPS;
         (2)   With all sump pumps pumping (each at 20 GPM), the velocity in
the secondary storm sewer system shall not exceed 10 feet per second and the
friction loss shall not exceed five feet per 100 feet of pipe; and
         (3)   That the minimum size shall not be less than four inches;
         (4)   House connections shall be a minimum one- and one-half inches
Schedule 40 PVC water pipe.
      C.   Flow Design Standards. The conditions of flow design for both
gravity flow and pressurized flow shall be as per the following chart entitled
“Friction Loss Characteristics of Water Flow Through Rigid Plastic Pipe.”
Typical results are as follows:
Friction Loss Characteristics of Water Flow Through Rigid Plastic Pipe
     Min.                          H1        Q at H1                Q at V
Pipe Velocity Min. Slope Q at Min. Controls  Controlling V Controls Controlling
     Flowing  at/100     Slope GPM at 5 feet GPM         at 10 FPS  GPM
     Full-Ups                      per 100p
Friction Loss Characteristics of Water Flow Through Rigid Plastic Pipe
             Min.     Min.   Q at  H1        Q at H1     V         Q at V
Pipe         Velocity Slope  Min.  Controls  Controlling Controls  Controlling
             Flowing  at/100 Slope at 5 feet GPM         at 10 FPS GPM
             Full-Ups        GPM   per 100p
1 ½” sch. 20       1.2    12    Yes       28          No         
2" Sch. 40   2        0.85   19    Yes       53          No         
4" DR 25     2        0.37   82    Yes       350         No         
6" DR 25     2        0.23   178   No                   Yes       910
8" DR 25     2        0.18   295   No                   Yes       1,490
10" DR 25    2        0.14   470   No                   Yes       2,400
Sump pump should deliver 20 GPM against operating head of 35 feet (or 15 psi)
based upon a 50- foot long discharge line and 450 feet of secondary sanitary
sewer, figuring 25 feet of line loss, five feet of lift, and five feet of loss
through valves and fittings.
 
   4.   Elevation and Material to be Used for Footing Drains. Drain materials
and elevation of piping shall meet the provisions of the International
Residential Code, when applicable, or the International Plumbing Code. Such
piping shall be placed with two inches of bedding underneath and twelve (12)
inches of washed gravel or crushed rock over with an approved filter membrane
and shall be acceptable to the Building Official and subject to review by the
Building Official.
   5.   Method of Installing Secondary Storm Sewers and Service Lines. With
respect to installation of PVC SDR 35, or thicker, secondary storm sewer
systems, all regulations that apply to the laying of PVC water main and service
lines shall also apply to the laying of PVC secondary storm sewer and service
lines, including depth and cover.
   6.   Installation of Footing Drain Service Lines Into Standard Storm Sewer.
In instances where standard storm sewer is available for the connection of one-
and one-half inches PVC Schedule 40 service lines, the Schedule 40 service
lines shall be connected to the storm sewer by drilling a hole in the concrete
storm sewer pipe of a diameter only slightly larger than the outside diameter
of the service pipe, then place the service pipe through the storm sewer
extending the end of the service pipe to, but not past, the interior wall of
the storm sewer. The storm sewer shall be entered in its mid-point or above
with these footing drain service lines. The ditch shall be filled under,
around, and over the PVC storm service pipe with stone or gravel to form a firm
base under the PVC in the open ditch between where the PVC pipe comes out of
unexcavated natural ground and the wall of the storm sewer pipe; all in a
manner acceptable to the engineer.
   7.   Occupancy Permit. No occupancy permit shall be issued for any building
or structure within the City that is not in compliance with this section.
   8.   Site Plan Detail. All site plans must provide details showing
compliance with this section for the proposed system of secondary storm sewer.
   9.   Illegal Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a violation
of this section. A person who is the owner of any building or structure shall
be responsible to cause that building or structure to be in compliance with
this section. Any inhabitant or occupant of any building or structure shall be
responsible to cause that building or structure to be in compliance with this
section.
   10.   Continuing Violation. Each day that a violation of this section occurs
shall be deemed to be a separate violation.
   11.   Mandatory Connection. At such time as the Community Services Director
decides there is adequate storm sewer or secondary storm sewer capacity
available for the property owner to connect to, the Community Services Director
shall inform the property owner in writing and allow said property owner 90
days to install and connect a sump pump to the lines. If the property owner
fails to comply, the Community Services Director shall hire a qualified plumber
to complete the job and the costs shall be assessed to the property. Secondary
storm service lines shall be installed in compliance with Section 157.23 of
this code.
157.09   GREASE INTERCEPTORS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1003.3 of the International
Plumbing Code, all food service establishments as defined in Chapter 100 of
this code, shall meet the requirements of such ordinance in regards to grease
interceptors.
157.10   BOARD OF APPEALS.
   In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations
made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of
this Code, there shall be and hereby created a Board of Appeals, consisting of
five members. Board members shall be chosen and appointed based on diversity
and building construction knowledge, all of whom shall be residents of the
City. One member of said Board of Appeals, at a minimum, shall be a private
citizen. The Building Official shall be an ex-officio member without a vote and
shall act as secretary of the Board of Appeals. The appointment of members
shall be for four year terms, expiring on December 31, with not more than three
members’ terms expiring any one year. The Building Board of Appeals shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to Council approval, and shall serve without
compensation. The Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations
for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings
in writing to the Building Official with a duplicate copy to the appellant, and
may recommend to the Council such new legislation as is consistent therewith.
The Board of Appeals shall meet at will and when there are appeals or business
on file for a hearing. Nominal appeal fee to the Building Board of Appeals
shall be paid as set forth in Section
157.03, permit fees. The appeal shall be valid for one year from the date of
the Board of Appeals approval to the commencement of work and to the completion
of work undertaken pursuant to the approval.
157.11   VIOLATIONS.
   See Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 158
ELECTRICAL CODE
158.01 Adoption of National Code 158.13 Board of Appeals
158.01 Adoption of National Code         158.13 Board of Appeals
158.02 Deletions                         158.14 Construction Documents
158.03 Amendments and Additions          158.15 Exemption to Requirements of
                                         State Contractors License
158.04 Moved Buildings, Changes of Use
or Occupancy, and Alternations or        158.16 Service Entrance Wires
Repairs
158.05 Department of Electrical          158.17 Inspections
Inspection
158.06 Powers and Duties of Electrical   158.18 Covering or Concealing Work
Inspectors
158.07 Liability for Damages             158.19 Removal of Covering
158.08 Permits Not Required              158.20 Correcting Defective Work
158.09 Permit Issuance                   158.21 Conformity with Standards
158.10 Permit Fees                       158.22 Temporary Electrical Work
158.11 Expiration                        158.23 Furnishing Current Prior to
                                         Approval of Wiring
158.12 Licensing for Electrical,
Plumbing, and Mechanical Contractors and 158.24 Violations
Installers
 
158.01   ADOPTION OF NATIONAL CODE.
   This chapter shall consist of the “National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition,”
as published by the National Fire Protection Association, which volume is
incorporated herein by reference as fully as though set forth herein in its
entirety, excepting only such portions as are herein stated to be deleted there
from; and such additional provisions as are hereafter set forth. This chapter
and all provisions incorporated herein by reference or otherwise, shall be
known as the “Altoona Electrical Code” may be cited as such, and will be
referred to herein as such and as “this Code”.
158.02   DELETIONS.
- NONE -
158.03   AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS.
   The remaining sections in this chapter are and represent amendments and
additions to the requirements contained in the National Electrical Code
(hereinafter known as the NEC) and where they conflict with those of the
National Electrical Code, the requirements of this chapter shall prevail.
   1.   Branch Circuit Extensions or Modifications. Section 210.12(D) shall be
deleted.
   2.   Arc-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection. Section 406.4(D)(4) shall be
deleted.
   3.   Definitions. Article 680.2 NEC shall amend the following definitions:
      Permanently installed swimming, wading, immersion, and therapeutic pools.
      Storable swimming, wading, or immersion pools.
      By deleting “(42 in.)” from each definition and replacing with “(24 in.)”
158.04   MOVED BUILDINGS, CHANGES OF USE OR OCCUPANCY, AND ALTERNATIONS OR
REPAIRS.
   1.   Buildings or structures moved into or within the City shall comply with
the provisions of this Code for new buildings or structures.
   2.   If the classification of a building has been changed due to a change in
occupancy, the wiring in the entire building shall comply with all the
electrical standards applicable to the new classification. If the occupancy of
a building has been changed to a mixed occupancy, with the required fire
separation between the mixed occupancy, each occupancy shall comply with its
own particular classification and shall be wired in compliance with the
electrical standards of its particular classification.
   3.   Additions to, alterations of, and repairs to existing electrical
equipment shall comply with the Electrical Code. Furthermore, existing
electrical equipment that is temporarily exposed or made accessible because of
any remodeling or repair of an existing structure, shall be made to comply with
the Electrical Code. In any event, the Building Official may, when any
additions, alterations, or repairs are made, order other reasonable additions
or alterations in the electrical equipment of a structure or on any premises
when a danger to life or property may result if such other additions or
alterations were not made.
158.05   DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTION.
   There is hereby established in the City the Department of Electrical
Inspections, which shall be under the direction and supervision of the Building
and Zoning Official. The Building Official shall be responsible to the
Community Development Director for the enforcement of the Building Codes, and
such other ordinances as shall assign the Building Official that function, and
shall perform such other duties as may be required by the Community Development
Director or by any classification plan adopted by the City. Additional
responsibilities of the Building Official shall be assigned as required in
Chapter 155.
158.06   POWERS AND DUTIES OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTORS.
   1.   The Building Official shall have the authority to cause the
disconnection of any wiring or equipment if it is dangerous to life or property
or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department. They shall perform other
duties as may be required by the Community Services Director or by any
classification plan adopted by the City.
   2.   The Building Official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists
in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in
violation of this Code which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous,
or hazardous, the Building Official is authorized to enter the structure or
premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by
this Code, provided, if such structure or premises be occupied, that
credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure
or premises be unoccupied, the Building Official shall make reasonable effort
to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure
or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building Official shall
have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
   3.   The Building Official is hereby authorized, directed, and empowered to
inspect all electrical installations within the City, to condemn and order
removed or remodeled and put in proper and safe condition for the prevention of
fire and the safety of life, all electrical heating and lighting apparatus,
power generators, motors, machinery, fixtures, and connections, electrical
equipment used in the supply, distribution, or utilization of electrical
current for light, heat, or power purposed and to control the disposition and
arrangements of the same so that persons and property shall not be in danger
therefrom.
   4.   The Building Official shall administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. They shall keep records of each ruling or determination made
under its provisions, and notify, in writing, all persons involved. They shall
keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections made, and other
official work performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   5.   The Building Official and their assistants shall not engage in the
business of the sale, installation, or maintenance of electrical equipment
either directly or indirectly, and they shall have no financial interest in any
firm engaged in such business in the City at any time while holding office.
158.07   LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
   1.   The City or any employee of the City is not liable for damages to a
person or property as a result of any act or failure to act in the enforcement
of this Code, unless the act of enforcement constitutes false arrest.
   2.   This Code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, or controlling any equipment or
structure regulated herein for damages to a person or property caused by its
defects, nor shall the City or any City employee be held as assuming any such
liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this Code, or any
approvals issued under this Code.
158.08   PERMITS NOT REQUIRED.
   The following items do not require a permit:
   1.   Replacement of lighting fixtures, receptacles, switches, overcurrent
protection devices of the same volt and amperage.
   2.   The repair or replacement of flexible cords of same volt and amperage.
   3.   The process of manufacturing, testing, servicing, or repairing of
electrical equipment or apparatus.
   4.   Minor repair and adjustment where the total cost of the work does not
exceed $100.00.
   5.   No permit or inspections are required for electrical wiring of 50 volts
or less.
158.09   PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   1.   Permits Are Not Transferable. Electrical work performed under the
provisions of this chapter must be done by a contractor meeting the licensing
provisions as set forth by the State Electrical Examining Board in accordance
with Chapter 103 of the Code of Iowa unless the provisions of Section
155.13 or Section
158.15 are met. An electrician licensed by the State Electrical Examining board
as a “Master A or B” may sign and obtain a permit for the contractor for which
they are employed only when said “Master A or B” has provided proof of
employment by said licensed contractor. Any permit required by the provisions
of this Code may be revoked by the Building Official upon the violation of any
provision of this Code.
   2.   A State licensed electrical contractor shall be allowed only to secure
permits for themselves, or for a single firm or corporation. When a State
licensed electrical contractor has secured such a permit, only the employees of
such contractor, when meeting the provisions of Chapter 103 of the Code of
Iowa, shall perform the work for which the permit was obtained.
   3.   For purposes of this section, an “employee” shall be one employed by
the contractor, firm, or corporation for a wage or salary. A contractor may be
required by the Building Official to show positive evidence as to the employee
status of workers on the job. Such evidence shall be in the form of payroll and
time records, canceled checks, or other such documents.
   4.   The contractor may also be required to show the agreement or contract
pertaining to the work being questioned as evidence that said contractor is, in
fact, the actual contractor for such work. Failure or refusal by the contractor
to make available such employee or contractual records within 24 hours from
demand therefor shall be grounds for immediate revocation of any permit for the
work in question.
158.10   PERMIT FEES.
   1.   Permit Fees:
      A.   A fee for each electrical permit shall be paid to the Building
Official in the amount set in the Schedule of Fees adopted by the Council. No
electrical permits shall be issued to any person who has fees outstanding as
required by this Code or any other laws or ordinances of the City. Fees for
repairs to items listed shall be the same as for new construction. Any permit
required by the provisions of this Code may be revoked by the Building Official
upon the violation of any provision of this Code.
      B.   If a permit is issued for a specific amount of work and, upon
inspection, it is determined that more work was performed than was authorized
by the permit, the permittee shall amend the permit or obtain another permit to
include all additional work and shall pay a new base fee and any unit fees as
described in Paragraph A.
   2.   Additional permit fees are as follows:
      A.   Double Fee. Except in emergency situations, as determined by the
Building Official, where work for which a electrical permit is required by this
Code is started or proceeded with by any person prior to obtaining a required
permit, the fees specified as set forth in the amount set in the Schedule of
Fees as adopted by the Council shall be doubled. The payment of such double fee
shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this
Code in the execution of the work or from any other penalties prescribed
herein. No additional permits of any type shall be issued to any person who
owes the City the double fee described in this subsection. However, no double
fee shall be imposed upon any person who starts without a permit if:
         (1)   The work is started on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, or during
any other day when the Building Department is not normally open for business;
and
         (2)   The person secures the proper permit on the next Building
Department working day.
         (3)   No plan review is required prior to issuance of the permit.
      B.   Refunds. If, within 30 days of the date of issuance, the holder of a
electrical permit decides not to commence the work described in said permit,
said person may, upon application to the Building Official, be refunded that
portion of the permit fee which is in excess of the permit refund fee set in
the Schedule of Fees adopted by the Council.
      C.   Fees for permit renewals shall be based on the amount of remaining
work to be completed. If the plans are changed enough to warrant a review, then
the permit fee shall be half the cost of the original fee plus any fees as set
forth in Paragraph E.
   *Or the hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is greater. This cost
shall include supervision, overhead, hourly wages, and fringe benefits of the
employees involved.
      D.   Reinspections. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each
inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is
called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. This
section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time
a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this Code, but
as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready
for such inspection or reinspection. Reinspection fees may be assessed when the
approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to
provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating
from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. To obtain a
reinspection, the applicant shall pay the reinspection fee in accordance with
the Schedule of Fees as adopted by Council. In instances where reinspection
fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed
until the required fees have been paid.
      E.   Other Inspections and Fees. See the schedule of fees as adopted by
City Council.
         Persons performing work for the federal government, the State, the
County, or City may obtain permits for such work without paying the permit fees
described herein; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be
construed to exempt payment of permit fees by persons performing work under the
direction of the City in connection with the abatement of any public law. An
expired permit may not be reissued without a permit fee except by resolution of
the Council.
158.11   EXPIRATION.
   Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provision of the
Electrical Code shall expire under any one of the following conditions:
   1.   Failure to begin work authorized within 180 days after issuance of the
permit.
   2.   Suspension or abandonment of work for 120 days after commencement of
the work. Time of occurrence of suspension or abandonment of work shall be
computed from the date of the most recent inspection since which no progress
has been made.
   3.   Failure to complete work on a structure designed for residential uses
within one year after issuance of a permit.
   4.   Failure to complete work on a structure designed for commercial or
industrial uses within two years after issuance of a permit. For permits with a
building valuation exceeding $10,000,000.00, work shall be completed within
three years after issuance of a permit.
   Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the
time within which they may commence or continue work. The Building Official is
authorized to grant, in writing, for periods not more than 180 days each, two
extensions. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated. Any of the extensions may be further extended by action of the
Council. In all cases, when a renewal is granted, the structure for which the
permit is required shall comply with Code requirements in effect at the time
the permit is renewed.
158.12   LICENSING FOR ELECTRICAL, PLUMBING, AND MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS AND
INSTALLERS.
   The provisions of Chapter 160 shall be applicable for any work performed in
regards to electrical, plumbing, and mechanical systems.
158.13   BOARD OF APPEALS.
   In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations
made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of
this Code, there shall be and hereby created a Board of Appeals, consisting of
five members. Board of Appeals members shall be chosen and appointed based on
diversity and building construction knowledge, all of whom shall be residents
of the City. One member of said Board of Appeals, at a minimum, shall be a
private citizen. The Building Official shall be an ex-officio member without a
vote and shall act as secretary of the Board of Appeals. The appointment of
members shall be for four-year terms, expiring on December 31, with not more
than three members’ terms expiring any one year. The Building Board of Appeals
shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to Council approval, and shall serve
without compensation. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations
for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings
in writing to the Building Official with a duplicate copy to the appellant, and
may recommend to the Council such new legislation as is consistent therewith.
The Board shall meet at will and when there are appeals or business on file for
a hearing. Nominal appeal fee to the Building Board of Appeals shall be paid as
set forth in Section 158.10, Permit Fees. The appeal shall be valid for one
year from the date of the Board of Appeals approval to the commencement of work
and to the completion of work undertaken pursuant to the approval.
158.14   CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS.
   The Building Official shall require construction documents, computations,
and specifications to be prepared by a registered design professional licensed
by the State to practice such.
   1.   Construction documents, engineering calculations, diagrams, and other
data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each application for a permit.
   2.   Construction documents shall be drawn to scale and shall be of
sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature, and extent of the work
proposed and show in detail that the work conforms to the provisions of this
Code.
   3.   Construction documents shall indicate location and clear space of
electrical equipment, and the material and methods for maintaining required
structural safety, fire-resistance rating, and fire-blocking.
   4.   Exceptions.
      A.   The Building Official shall have the authority to waive the
submission of construction documents, calculations, or other data if the nature
of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not
necessary to determine compliance with this Code.
      B.   In the case of one- and two-family dwellings.
      C.   In the case of minor construction and repair.
      D.   In the case of accessory buildings when related to one- and two-
family dwellings.
158.15   EXEMPTION TO REQUIREMENTS OF STATE CONTRACTORS LICENSE.
   In accordance with Section 103.22 of the Code of Iowa, a subdivision may
provide licensure for those who perform business within the corporate limits of
the subdivision. The following criteria must be met in order to obtain an
electrical permit without being licensed by the State Electrical Examining
Board as a licensed electrical contractor:
   1.   An employee having received a “Masters A or B” license as issued by the
State Electrical Examining Board must sign the permit.
      A.   Exception. An employee tasked with performing electrical work as
indicated in their job description, which must be on file with the Department,
may continue to obtain an electrical permit until December 31, 2014, after
which said employee must have received a State issued master license or one be
employed by the firm or business.
   2.   The signatory of the permit must be an employee of a firm or business
based within the community and approved by the Department of Building.
   3.   The firm or business must not provide electrical work for any other
entity other than its own and the firm or business must not be registered with
the State Workforce Development, Labor Division, as an electrical contractor.
   4.   Employees of the firm or business who have been issued an electrical
permit shall conduct the work performed for which the permit was obtained.
   5.   The installation to be performed does not, in any way, involve work
within a new switchboard or panelboard with a voltage in excess of 480 volt.
   6.   The scope of work shall be limited to alterations of existing interior
space of 5,000 square feet or less, not defined as a hazardous location
pursuant to the adopted Electrical Code, and for any new or existing accessory
structures of not more than 1,000 square feet in floor area, that meet
Subsection 5 listed above and not defined as a hazardous location.
158.16   SERVICE ENTRANCE WIRES.
   All electrical lines not exceeding 15,000 volts and all telephone and
cablevision service lines, as well as other utility lines serving any new
building or structure, including signs and billboards, requiring permanent
electrical service shall be placed underground unless a waiver from such is
approved by the Building and Engineering Departments. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to existing buildings or additions to such buildings
(unless said addition requires the utility service provider to upgrade the
entire system from the transformer to the structure). Nothing in this section
shall be deemed to apply to temporary service when defined as such by the
utility provider.
158.17   INSPECTIONS.
   1.   The person doing electrical work, for which a permit is required, shall
notify the Building Official that the work is ready for inspection. The
Building Official shall, without undue delay, perform the required inspection
and, if the work complies with the provision of this Code, the Building
Official shall issue a notice of approval. If the work does not comply with the
provisions of this Code, the Building Official shall post a notice in a
conspicuous place on or near the work. The notice shall contain the date and
results of the inspection, and when requested, note specific violations. Work
that has no notice attached shall be considered unapproved. No notices shall be
removed by any person other than the Building Official.
   2.   When the electrical work is completed, the person doing it shall notify
the Building Official that the work is ready for final inspection.
   3.   Whenever it shall be ascertained by inspection that any electrical
installation or part thereof in any building is so defective as to render the
same dangerous to person or property, the Building Official shall at once cause
notice to be served upon the owner or person in charge, or the occupant of the
same, to remedy the defects within a reasonable time, to be stated in the
notice. If defects are not remedied within the time fixed by the notice, the
Building Official may cause the electric current to be disconnected from the
building. The electric current shall not again be turned on until all defects
or improper conditions have been removed, or repaired in conformance with the
provisions of this Code.
158.18   COVERING OR CONCEALING WORK.
   No electrical work for which a permit is required shall be concealed in any
manner from access or sight until the work has been inspected and approved by
the Building Official.
158.19   REMOVAL OF COVERING.
   The Building Official shall have the authority to remove or cause the
removal of lath, plaster, boarding, or other obstruction which may prevent the
proper inspection of wires or electrical equipment.
158.20   CORRECTING DEFECTIVE WORK.
   When any person is notified, that defects exist in their electrical work,
they shall make corrections within 30 days after notification. If not so made,
such person shall not be issued any other permits until defects are corrected,
and approval given by the Building Official.
158.21   CONFORMITY WITH STANDARDS.
   Conformity with the standards of the Underwriter's Laboratories Incorporated
as approved by the United States of American Standards Institute shall be
evidence of conformity with approved standards for electrical equipment.
158.22   TEMPORARY ELECTRICAL WORK.
   “Temporary electrical work” means that work which is obviously installed for
the convenience of a person during construction. This work shall be the
complete responsibility of the person who installs it and shall not require the
inspector’s approval prior to being used, provided that the inspector may
require corrections in the wiring to eliminate any hazardous or unsafe
conditions. All such work shall be removed before final approval of permanent
electrical work. Temporary electrical work shall not be permitted to remain in
use in excess of six months, except by written permission of the electrical
inspector.
158.23   FURNISHING CURRENT PRIOR TO APPROVAL OF WIRING.
   No person or corporation generating current for electric light, heat, or
power in the City shall connect its system or furnish current for electrical
purposes to any building or premises which has not been inspected and approved
by the Building Official. Any person or corporation shall, upon written notice
from the Building Official to do so, immediately disconnect such building or
premises from its source of current.
158.24   VIOLATIONS.
   See Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 159
SIGN CODE
159.01 Purposes                         159.11 Signs Exempt From Regulation
159.02 Applicability; Effect            159.12 Prohibited Signs
159.03 Definitions and Interpretations  159.13 General Permit Procedures
159.04 Computations                     159.14 Permits to Construct or Modify
                                        Signs
159.05 Signs Allowed on Private         159.15 Sign Permits - Continuing
Property With and Without Permits
159.06 Signs for Interstate-Oriented    159.16 Temporary Sign Permits (Private
Businesses                              Property)
                                        159.17 Time of Compliance;
159.07 Permits Required                 Nonconforming Signs and Signs Without
                                        Permits
159.08 Design, Construction, and        159.18 Violations
Maintenance
159.09 Master or Common Signage Plan    159.19 Enforcement and Remedies
159.10 Signs in the Public Right-of-Way 159.20 Fee Schedule
 
159.01   PURPOSES.
   The purposes of this chapter are to encourage the effective use of signs as
a means of communication in the City; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic
environment and the City’s ability to attract sources of economic development
and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible
adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable
the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions. The ordinance
codified in this chapter was adopted under the zoning authority of the City in
furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in the Zoning Code.
159.02   APPLICABILITY; EFFECT.
   A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or maintained
in the City only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and
other requirements of this chapter. The effect of this chapter as more
specifically set forth herein is:
   1.   To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in
commercial and industrial zones, and a limited variety of signs in other zones,
subject to the standards and permit procedures of this chapter;
   2.   To allow certain signs that are small, unobstructive, and incidental to
the principal use of respective lots on which they are located, subject to the
substantive requirements of this chapter, but without a requirement for
permits;
   3.   To provide for temporary signs without commercial messages in limited
circumstances in the public right-of-way;
   4.   To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this chapter; and
   5.   To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
159.03   DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   Words and phrases used in this chapter have the meanings set forth in this
section. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined in the
Zoning Code shall have the meanings set forth in the Zoning Code. Principles
for computing sign area and sign height are contained in Section 159.04. All
other words and phrases shall have their common, ordinary meanings unless the
context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for
reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this
chapter.
   1.   Words beginning with “A.”
      A.   “Animated sign” means any sign that uses movement or change of
lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
   2.   Words beginning with “B.”
      A.   “Banner” means any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material
that is permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one
or more edges. National flags, State, or municipal flags or the official flags
of any institution or business are not considered banners.
      B.   “Beacon” means any light with one or more beams directed into the
atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the
light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
      C.   “Building marker” means any sign indicating the name of a building
and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut
into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
      D.   “Building sign” means any sign attached to any part of a building,
as contrasted to a freestanding sign.
   3.   Words beginning with “C.”
      A.   “Canopy sign” means any sign that is a part of or attached to an
awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a
door, entrance, window, or outdoor services area. A marquee is not a canopy.
      B.   “Changeable copy sign” means a sign or portion thereof with
characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without
altering the face of the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message
changes more than every eight seconds shall be considered an animated sign and
not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter. For an electronic
message sign, the sign is allowed to scroll or flow to another message every
eight seconds but shall not continually scroll or include any flashing or
blinking lights. Signs shall be required to automatically adjust in intensity
related to ambient light levels. A sign on which the only copy that changes is
an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature is considered a
“time and temperature” portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for
purposes of this chapter.
      C.    “Commercial message” means any sign wording, logo, or other
representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
      D.   “Contractor sign” means a temporary sign, no greater than four
square feet in area identifying a contractor, supplier, or financial
institution involved in the construction of a building.
   4.   Words beginning with “D.”
   5.   Words beginning with “E.”
   6.   Words beginning with “F.”
      A.   “Flag” means any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distractive
colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political
subdivision, or other entity.
      B.   “Freestanding sign” means any sign supported by structures or
supports that are placed on or anchored in the ground and that are independent
from any building or other structure.
   7.   Words beginning with “G.”
      A.   “Garage sale sign” means a sign advertising a private sale of
personal property used to dispose of personal household possessions.
   8.   Words beginning with “H.”
   9.   Words beginning with “I.”
      A.   “Incidental sign” means a sign generally informational, that has a
purpose secondary to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such as
“no parking,” “entrance,” “loading only,” “telephone,” and other similar
directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the
zone lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.
      B.   “Interstate high rise sign” means an on-site pole sign which is
constructed to attract the attention of interstate travelers and is located
within 1,000 feet of the interstate right-of-way and advertises the use of the
principal building.
      C.   “Interstate sign” means an on-site sign which is not an interstate
high rise sign but is within 1,000 feet of the interstate right-of-way.
   10.   Words beginning with “J.”
   11.   Words beginning with “K.”
   12.   Words beginning with “L.”
      A.   “Lot” means any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a
subdivision, the boundaries of which have been established by some legal
instrument or record that is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose
of transfer of ownership.
   13.   Words beginning with “M.”
      A.   “Marquee” means any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond
a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
      B.   “Marquee sign” means any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a
part of a marquee.
   14.   Words beginning with “N.”
      A.   “Nonconforming sign” means any sign that does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
   15.   Words beginning with “O.”
   16.   Words beginning with “P.”
      A.   “Pennant” means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material,
whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or
string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
      B.   “Portable sign” means any sign not permanently attached to the
ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designated to be transported,
including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of
wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs,
balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to
or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless
said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
      C.   “Principal building” means the building in which is conducted the
principal use of the zone lot on which it is located. Zone lots with multiple
principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings,
garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal
buildings.
      D.   “Project identification sign” means a temporary sign placed on a
site during construction or remodeling, which identifies the development,
contractor, builder, developer, or financial institution for the development
and may include a plat map and real estate contact information.
      E.   “Projecting sign” means any sign affixed to a building or wall in
such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the
surface of such building or wall.
   17.   Words beginning with “Q.”
   18.   Words beginning with “R.”
      A.   “Real estate sign” means such signs advertising the sale, rental, or
lease of the property or part of the property on which the signs are displayed.
      B.   “Residential sign” means any sign located in a district zoned for
residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for
goods or services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if
offering such service at such locations conforms with all requirements of the
Zoning Code.
      C.   “Roof sign” means any sign erected and constructed wholly on and
over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending
vertically above the highest portion of the roof.
      D.   “Roof sign, integral” means any sign erected or constructed as an
integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design,
such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of
the roof and such that no part of the sign is separate from the rest of the
roof by a space of more than six inches.
   19.   Words beginning with “S.”
      A.   “Setback” means the distance from the property line to the nearest
part of the applicable building structure or sign, measured perpendicularly to
the property line.
      B.   “Sign” means any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses
any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise,
announce the purpose of or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to
communicate information of any kind to the public.
      C.   “Street” means a strip of land or way subject to vehicular traffic
(as well as pedestrian traffic) that provides direct or indirect access to
property, including, but not limited to, alleys, avenues, boulevards, courts,
drives, highways, lanes, places, roads, terraces, trails, or other
thoroughfares.
      D.   “Street frontage” means the distance for which a lot line of a zone
lot adjoins a public street, from one lot line intersecting said street to the
furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street.
      E.   “Suspended sign” means a sign that is suspended from the underside
of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
   20.   Words beginning with “T.”
      A.   “Temporary sign” means any sign that is used only temporarily and is
not permanently mounted.
   21.   Words beginning with “U.”
   22.   Words beginning with “V.”
   23.   Words beginning with “W.”
      A.   “Wall sign” means any sign attached parallel to, but within six
inches of, a wall, painted on the wall surface or erected and confined within
the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported
by such wall or building and which displays only one sign surface.
      B.   “Window sign” means any sign, picture, symbol, or combination
thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale, or service that is placed inside a window or upon the
window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
   24.   Words beginning with “X.”
   25.   Words beginning with “Y.”
   26.   Words beginning with “Z.”
      A.   “Zone lot” means a parcel of land in single ownership that is of
sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage and use,
and that can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the Zoning
Code.
      B.   “Zoning Administrator” means the Zoning Administrator of the City.
159.04   COMPUTATIONS.
   The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign
height:
   1.   Computation of Area of Individual Signs. The area of sign face (which
is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be
computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or
combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing,
representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color
forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative
fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning regulations and is
clearly incidental to the display itself.
   2.   Computation of Area of Multifaced Signs. The sign area from a sign with
more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign
faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed
back-to-back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same
time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not
more than 42 inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement
of one of the faces.
   3.   Computation of Height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the
distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest
attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower
of
      A.   Existing grade prior to construction, or
      B.   The newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any
filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating
the sign.
   In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign
height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal
grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of
the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance
to the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is lower.
   4.   Computation of Maximum Total Permitted Sign Area for a Zone Lot. The
permitted sum of the area of all individual signs on a zone lot shall be
computed by applying the formula contained in Table 159.05B, Maximum Total Sign
Area, to the frontage, building frontage or wall area, as appropriate, for the
zoning district in which the lot is located.
   5.   Lots fronting on two or more streets are allowed the permitted sign
area for each street frontage. However, the total sign area that is oriented
toward a particular street may not exceed the portion of the lot’s total sign
area allocation that is derived from the lot, building, or wall area frontage
on that street.
159.05   SIGNS ALLOWED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITH AND WITHOUT PERMITS.
   Signs are allowed on private property in the City in accordance with, and
only in accordance with, Table 159.05A.
   If the letter “P” appears for a sign type in a column, such sign is allowed
without prior permit approval in the zoning district represented by that
column. If the letter “S” appears for a sign type in a column, such sign is
allowed only with prior permit approval in the zoning district represented by
that column. Special conditions may apply in some cases. If the letter “N”
appears for a sign type in a column, such a sign is not allowed in the zoning
district represented by that column under any circumstances. Although permitted
under this section, a sign designated by an “S” or “P” in Table 159.05A shall
be allowed only if:
   1.   The sum of the area of all building and freestanding signs of the zone
lot conforms with the maximum permitted sign area as determined by the formula
for the zoning district in which the lot is located as specified in Table
159.05B;
   2.   The size, location, and number of signs on the lot conform with the
requirements of Tables 159.05C and 159.05D, which establish permitted sign
dimensions by sign type, and with any additional limitations listed in Table
159.05A;
   3.   The characteristics of the sign conform with the limitations of Table
159.05E, Permitted Sign Characteristics, and with any additional limitations on
characteristics listed on Table 159.05A.
 
A Key to Tables 159.05A Through 159.05E
R - All Residential Districts         C-6 - Commercial Entertainment and
                                      Recreational District
INS - Institutional Uses Permitted in C-7 - Regional Commercial District
Residential Zoning Districts
C-1 - Residential and Commercial      IHS - Interstate Highway Signs Permitted
District                              in Commercial Districts
C-2 - General Commercial District     M-1 - Limited Industrial District
C-3 - Planned Commercial District     M-2 - Heavy Industrial District
C-4 - Central Business District
 
Table 159.05A Permitted Signs by the Type and Zoning District
 R INS c C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-6 C-7 q IHS b M-1 M-2
Table 159.05A Permitted Signs by the Type and Zoning District
                         R   INS c C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-6 C-7 q IHS b M-1 M-2
Freestanding
Residential              S a S     N   N   N   N   N   S     N     N   N
Other                    N   S     S   S   S   S   S   S     S     S   S
Incidental c             N   P f   P d P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P
Contractor m             P   P     P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P
Real Estate n            P   P     P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P
Project Identification o S   S     S   S   S   S   S   S     S     S   S
Building
Banner j                 N   N     S   S   S   S   S   S     N     S   S
Building Marker g        P   P     P   P   P   P   P   P     N     P   P
Canopy                   N   N     S   S   S   S   S   S     N     S   S
Identification f         P   P     P   P   P   P   P   P     N     P   P
Incidental e            N   P h   P c P   P   P   P   P     N     P   P
Marquee i                N   N     N   S   S   S   S   S     N     N   N
Projecting i             N   N     S   S   S   S   S   S     N     S   S
Residential d            P   S     N   N   N   N   N   S     N     N   N
Roof, Integral           N   N     N   S   S   S   S   S     S     N   N
Suspended i              N   P     N   N   N   S   N   S     N     N   N
Temporary j              N   N     S   S   S   S   S   S     N     S   S
Wall                     N   P     S   S   S   S   S   S     S     S   S
Window                   N   N     S   S   S   S   S   S     N     N   N
Miscellaneous
Banner e                 N   N     S   S   N   N   N   N     N     N   N
Flag k                   P   P     P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P
Portable l               N   N     N   S   N   N   N   N     N     N   N
Garage Sale p            P   P     P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P
P = Allowed without sign permit
S = Allowed only with sign permit
N = Not allowed
 
 
a  Subdivision, neighborhood, or project identification only, no Commercial
District.
b  This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to commercial
districts that are defined in Section
159.06.
c  This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to institutional
uses permitted under the Zoning Code in residential zoning districts. Such uses
may include, but are not necessarily limited to, churches, schools, funeral
homes, and cemeteries.
d  No commercial message allowed on sign, except for a commercial message drawing
attention to an activity legally offered on the premises.
e  No commercial message of any kind allowed on sign if such message is legible
from any location off the zone lot on which the sign is located.
f  Only address and name of occupant allowed on sign.
g  May include only building name, date of construction, or historical data on
historic site; must be cut or etched into masonry, bronze, or similar material.
h No commercial message of any kind allowed on sign.
i If such a sign is suspended or projects above a public right-of-way, the
issuance and continuation of a sign permit shall be conditioned on the sign owner
obtaining and maintaining in force liability insurance for such a sign in such
form and such amount as the Director may reasonably from time to time determine,
provided that the amount of such liability insurance shall be at least
$500,000.00 per occurrence per sign.
j The conditions of Section
159.16 shall apply.
k Flags of the United States, the State, the City, foreign nations having
diplomatic relations with the United States, and any other flag adopted or
sanctioned by an elected legislative body of competent jurisdiction, provided
that such a flag shall not exceed 60 square feet in area and shall not be flown
from a pole, the top of which is more than 40 feet in height. These flags must be
flown in accordance with protocol established by the Congress of the United
States for the Stars and Stripes. Any flag not meeting any one or more of these
conditions shall be considered a banner sign and shall be subject to regulation
as such.
l Permitted on the same terms as a temporary sign, in accordance with Section
159.16, except that it may be freestanding.
m Two signs are allowed per lot. If four square feet in area or less, allowed
without a permit. Any contractor sign exceeding four square feet in area shall be
considered a project identification sign, regulated as such, and is subject to a
permit.
n On premise: Residential real estate signs not exceeding four square feet in
area, and may only advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon
which said sign is located. One sign is allowed per lot without a permit. Non-
residential real estate signs not exceeding 32 square feet in area, and may only
advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon which said sign is
located. One sign is allowed per lot and is subject to a permit. Off premise: All
real estate signs shall not exceed two square feet in area (“OPEN HOUSE” or
similar signs) and are permitted 24 hours in advance of the event and shall be
removed within 12 hours after the event. No real estate signs are allowed on
public rights-of-way or other public properties. These signs are allowed without
a permit.
o  The conditions of Section
159.16 shall apply.
p On premise: Garage sale signs not exceeding four square feet in area and placed
upon the property in which the sale will take place. Signs are permitted 24 hours
in advance of the event and shall be removed within 12 hours after the event. No
garage sale signs are allowed on public rights-of-way or other public properties.
These signs are allowed without a permit. Off premise: All garage sale signs
shall not exceed two square feet in area (directional signs, arrows, or similar
signs) and are permitted 24 hours in advance of the event and shall be removed
within 12 hours after the event. No garage sale signs are allowed on public
rights-of-way or other public properties. These signs are allowed without a
permit.
q Signs in this district are allowed as stated and in conformance with the
approved development plan.
 
Table 159.05B Maximum Total Sign Area Per Zone Lot by Zoning District
The maximum total area of all signs on a zone lot except incidental,
building marker, and identification signs and flags b shall not exceed the
lesser of the following:
 R-1, 2, 5 e R-3, 4 e INS a e C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-6 C-7 f IHS c M-1 M-1A M-2
Table 159.05B Maximum Total Sign Area Per Zone Lot by Zoning District
The maximum total area of all signs on a zone lot except incidental, building
marker, and identification signs and flags b shall not exceed the lesser of
the following:
           R-1,   R-3, 4 INS a C-1 C-2  C-3   C-4 C-6 C-7 f IHS c M-1 M-1A M-2
           2, 5 e e      e
Maximum
number of
total      4      30     30    100 200d 300d  200 500 300d  300   200 200d 200
square
feet
Percentage
of ground
floor area NA     NA     NA    4%  6%   8%    10% 8%  8%    NA    2%  2%   2%
of
principal
building
or
Square
feet of
signage
per linear NA     .5     .5    2.0 3.0  134.0 6.0 5.0 4.0   NA    NA  NA   NA
foot of
street
frontage
a This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to
institutional uses permitted under the Zoning Code in residential zoning
districts. Such uses may include, but are not necessarily limited to,
churches, schools, funeral homes, and cemeteries.
b Flags of the United States, the State, the City, foreign nations having
diplomatic relations with the United States, and any other flag adopted or
sanctioned by an elected legislative body of competent jurisdiction, provided
that such a flag shall not exceed 60 square feet in area and shall not be
flown from a pole the top of which is more than 40 feet in height. These flags
must be flown in accordance with protocol established by the Congress of the
United States for the Stars and Stripes. Any flag not meeting any one or more
of these conditions shall be considered a banner sign and shall be subject to
regulation as such.
c  This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to commercial
districts that are defined in Section
159.06.
d For buildings between 20,000 and 100,000 square feet of ground floor area of
the principal building, 200 square feet plus an additional 0.004 square feet.
For buildings exceeding 100,000 square feet of ground floor area of the
principal building, 500 square feet plus an additional 0.003 square feet of
signage up to a maximum of 1,000 square feet. A 50 percent increase for lots
in the M-1A District with interstate highway frontage when signs and buildings
are oriented facing said interstate highway shall be provided on the sign
calculation. In the C-7 District, for buildings, with multiple tenants and
exceeding 275,000 square feet of gross floor area of the principal buildings,
0.0225 square feet of signage per square foot of the first-floor area.
e . The conditions of Section
159.16 (Project Identification Signs) of this chapter apply.
f . Signs in this district are allowed as stated and in conformance with the
approved development plan.
 
Table 159.05C Number, Dimensions, and Location of Individual Signs by Zoning
District
Individual signs shall not exceed the applicable maximum number dimensions or
setbacks shown on this table and on Table 159.05D.
Sign Type R-1,2,5 R-3,4 INSa C-1j C-2j C-3j C-4j C-6h j C-7l IHS M-1m M-1A M-2m
Table 159.05C Number, Dimensions, and Location of Individual Signs by Zoning
District
Individual signs shall not exceed the applicable maximum number dimensions or
setbacks shown on this table and on Table 159.05D.
Sign Type R-    R-  INSa C-1j C-2j C-3j C-4j  C-6h  C-7l  IHS M-1m  M-1A  M-2m
          1,2,5 3,4                           j
Freestanding
Area
(square   NA    20  40   40   40i  40i  40    40    40i   125 40i   40i   40
feet)
Height          5   12   100  10c  10   10    10    10    35  10    10    10
(feet)
Setback         5   5    10   10   10   2     10    10    35k 10    10    10
(feet)d
Number Permitted
Per Zone        NA  1    NA   NA   NA   NA    NA    NA    NA  NA    NA    NA
Lot
Per Feet        100      1    1    1    1 per 1 per 1 per     1 per 1 per 1 per
of Street       per NA   per  per  per  100   200   200   NA  200   200   800
Frontage        200      100  200  200  ft.   ft.   ft.       ft.   ft.   ft.
                ft.      ft.  ft.  ft.
Building
Area
(max. sq. 2     2   10   NA   NA   NA   NA    NA    NA    NA  NA    NA    NA
ft.)
Wall Area NA    NA  NA   10%  15%  20%  10%   15%   20%   NA  5%    5%    5%
(%f)
Number
Permitted                1    1    1    1     1     1         1     NA    1
per Side
 
 
a  This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to
institutional uses permitted under the Zoning Code in residential zoning
districts. Such uses may include, but are not necessarily limited to, churches,
schools, funeral homes, and cemeteries.
b  Maximum sign height is 10 feet, and minimum setback is five feet; however,
in no case shall the actual sign height exceed the actual sign setback from any
adjacent lot that is zoned and used for residential purposes. For example, if
the sign is set back seven feet from such a lot, it may be no more than seven
feet high.
c Maximum sign height is 10 feet, and minimum setback is five feet; however, in
no case shall the actual sign height exceed the actual sign setback from any
adjacent lot that is zoned and used for residential purposes. See example in
Note b.
d In addition to the setback requirements on this table, signs shall be located
such that there is at every street intersection a clear view between heights of
three feet and 10 feet in a triangle formed by the corner and points on the
curb 30 feet from the intersection or entranceway.
e Lots fronting on two or more streets are allowed the permitted signage for
each street frontage, but signage cannot be accumulated and used on one street
in excess of that allowed for lots with only one street frontage.
f The percentage figure here shall mean the percentage of the area of the wall
of which such sign is a part or to which each such sign is most nearly
parallel.
g This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to commercial
districts that are defined in Section
159.06.
h Freestanding signs in this zoning district may be allowed an additional 20
square feet of signage for a reader board.
i Parcels located west of 34 th Avenue SW and within 300 feet east of said
street are allowed signs with a maximum area of 80 square feet.
j The base of the sign shall be finished in brick or stone that compliments the
principal structure a minimum of the same width of the sign. The base shall be
a minimum equal width to that of the sign and said base shall extend at least
up to within six inches of the bottom of the sign. The base must be constructed
with a frost-free footing
k The minimum setback shall be 35 feet from the right-of-way and 100 feet from
a side lot line. The sign can be no closer than 300 feet from the next closest
sign of this type.
l Signs in this district are allowed as stated and in conformance with the
approved development plan.
m The base of the sign shall be finished in brick, stone, or other decorative
masonry material that is similarly used on the principal structure (no CMU
block) a minimum of the same width of the sign. The base shall be a minimum
equal width to that of the sign and said base shall extend at least up to
within six inches of the bottom of the sign. The base must be constructed with
a frost-free footing.
 
Table 159.05D Number and Dimensions of Certain Individual Signs by Sign Type
No sign shall exceed any applicable maximum numbers or dimensions or encroach
on any applicable minimum clearance shown on this table.
          Vertical Clearance
                                           From Sidewalk or
Sign Type Number Allowed Maximum Sign Area Private Drive or From Public Street
                                           Parking
Table 159.05D Number and Dimensions of Certain Individual Signs by Sign Type
No sign shall exceed any applicable maximum numbers or dimensions or encroach
on any applicable minimum clearance shown on this table.
                Vertical Clearance
                                                   From Sidewalk or From Public
Sign Type       Number Allowed   Maximum Sign Area Private Drive or Street
                                                   Parking
Freestanding
Residential,    See              See
Other, and      Table 159.05C    Table 159.05C     NA               NA
Incidental
Building
Banner          NA               NA                9 ft.            12 ft.
Building Marker 1 per building   4 sq. ft.         NA               NA
Canopy          1 per building   25% of vertical   9 ft.            12 ft.
                                 surface of canopy
Identification  1 per building   NA                NA               NA
Incidental      NA               NA                NA               NA
Marquee         1 per building   NA                9 ft.            12 ft.
Projecting      1 per building   40 sq. ft.        9 ft.            12 ft.
Residential     1 per zone lot   NA                NA               NA
Roof, Integral  2 per principal  NA                NA               NA
                building
Suspended       1 per entrance   NA                9 ft.            NA
Temporary       See Section      NA                NA               NA
                159.16
Wall            NA               NA                NA               NA
Window          NA               25% of total      NA               NA
                                 window area
Miscellaneous
Banner          NA               NA                9 ft.            12 ft.
Flag            NA               60 sq. ft.        9 ft.            12 ft.
Portable        1 where alloweda 20 sq. ft.        NA               NA
a Permitted on the same terms as a temporary sign, in accordance with Section
159.16, except that it may be freestanding.
 
Table 159.05E Permitted Sign Characteristics by Zoning District
Table 159.05E Permitted Sign Characteristics by Zoning District
Sign Type                   R  INSC C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-6 C-7d IHSc M-1 M-1A M-2
Animated                    N  N    N   N   N   S   S   N    N    N   N    N
Changeable Copy             N  P    N   S   N   S   S   Sf   Sd   N   N    N
Illumination, Internal      Se Pb   Sb  S   S   S   S   S    S    S   S    S
Illumination, External      Se Pb   Sb  S   S   S   S   S    S    S   S    S
Illumination, Exposed Bulbs N  N    N   N   N   S   N   N    N    N   N    N
or Neon
P = Allowed without sign permit
S = Allowed only with sign permit
N = Not allowed
a This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to
institutional uses permitted under the Zoning Code in residential zoning
districts. Such uses may include, but are not necessarily limited to,
churches, schools, funeral homes, and cemeteries.
b No direct light or significant glare from the sign shall be cast onto any
adjacent zone lot that is zoned and used for residential purposes.
c This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to commercial
districts that are defined in Section
159.06.
d In accordance with Section
159.06(2), Motor Fuel Price Signs, and
159.06(3), Additional Sign.
e Illumination of subdivision/neighborhood or project sign only.
f Signs in this district are allowed as stated and in conformance with the
approved development plan.
 
(Table 159.05E – Ord._11-17-2025_#02_(681) – Nov. 25 Supp.)
159.06   SIGNS FOR INTERSTATE-ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   1.   Additional Sign. When adjacent to Interstate 80 or U.S. Highway 65, to
include U.S. Highway 65 and rerouted U.S. Highway 65 located north of
Interstate 80 as eligible roadway, the C-2 General Commercial District, the C-
3 Planned Commercial District, the C-6 Commercial Entertainment and
Recreational District, the C-7 Regional Commercial District, and the M-
l Limited Industrial District one additional on-premises sign oriented to the
interstate shall be allowed for each lot which: contains a retail business
providing food, lodging, or fuel and repair services essential to normal
operation and maintenance of motor vehicles; is not separated from the
interstate by any property, on either side of the route of access, that is
zoned or designated by the Comprehensive Plan for any residential or office
use; is located within 1,000 feet of the interstate right-of-way, and is
located within a travel distance of 5,000 feet from said interstate highways,
said distance being calculated by beginning at the center point of the
interstate median at the nearest interchange, and thence measuring along the
centerlines of streets traveled to reach the property’s primary access, to the
closest point on the lot. Such interstate signs shall comply with all
regulations of this chapter, provided that the following bulk regulations apply
in lieu of those contained in
Table 159.05C.
      A.   Orientation. The faces of a freestanding or roof sign shall be
perpendicular to, or in the case of a curve, radial to the right-of-way of the
nearest section of interstate.
      B.   Area. The maximum area shall be 300 square feet, except as provided
by Subsection 2, for motor fuel price signs. (Except C-6 District).
      C.   Height. The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be 50 feet.
(Except C-6 District).
      D.   Setback. The minimum setback of a freestanding sign from any
property line shall be 50 feet.
      E.   Signs in C-6 Commercial Entertainment and Recreational District.
         (1)   Decisions on sign height and area shall only be made after a
public hearing process. The public hearing shall meet the same requirements as
that of a rezoning application.
         (2)   Overall sign height cannot exceed the sign setback from any
street right-of-way.
         (3)   Sign must be located within 1,200 feet of the interstate right-
of-way.
         (4)   All other aspects of the sign shall comply with all other
regulations of the sign ordinance unless expressly waived during the public
hearing process.
         (5)   The commercial message of the sign is limited to activities
within the zone lot.
         (6)   If the use ceases for which the sign was constructed, the sign
must be removed within 180 days after the use ceases. The Council may grant an
extension of 90 days if requested by the property owner and deemed appropriate
by the Council.
         (7)   Any change in ownership or use of the property upon which the
sign is located will require a subsequent public hearing process as in
Subparagraph (1) for approval of use of the sign for advertisement by the new
ownership or for a new use. † 1
   2.   Motor Fuel Price Signs. Gasoline service stations, convenience stores,
and similar retail businesses selling gasoline or similar fuels for use in
motor vehicles as a major part of their business shall be allowed sign area in
addition to that customarily permitted by this chapter, to display changeable
price information for such fuel. The copy on each such price sign shall be
limited to the type of fuel and price. The maximum copy area shall not exceed
16 square feet. The signage shall be incorporated in a permitted sign type and
shall not be a separate sign structure or portable sign.
   3.   Additional Sign. When adjacent to Interstate 80 or U.S. Highway 65
(rerouted U.S. Highway 65), property zoned C-2, C-3, C-5, C-7, and M-1, one
additional on-premises sign shall be allowed for each lot which contains a
business not meeting the use requirements of Subsection 1. The following bulk
requirements apply:
      A.   The sign is considered a bonus and not figured into the total
signage allotment for the given lot.
      B.   Height. The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be 35 feet.
      C.   Area. The maximum area shall be 125 square feet.
      D.   Setback. The minimum setback shall be 35 feet from the right-of-way
and 100 feet from a side lot line. The sign can be no closer than 300 feet from
the next closest sign of this type.”
 
Notes
  †  EDITOR’S NOTE: The following ordinances have been adopted:
  8-16-04#1 (158) – Prairie Meadows Racetrack and Casino Sign is located on the
  northwest portion of their existing property, at least 120 feet south of
  Adventureland Drive right-of-way. It is 120 feet tall and has a sign area of
  approximately 2,452 square feet per side for a total of 4,904 square feet. The
  sign faces have a separation of up to 18 feet.
  10-01-2012#1 (357) – That the request of Prairie Meadows Racetrack and Casino to
  replace the existing electronic reader board sign (15’ x 30.5’) with a larger
  reader board sign (30.5’ x 30.5’) on the Interstate High Rise sign is hereby
1 approved.
  05-15-2017 #01 (455) – That the request from Adventurelands of America to
  construct a sign on the north portion of their property, north of the hotel. The
  total sign, including the brick base, is proposed to be approximately 15 feet 10
  inches tall. It will have a sign area of 79.49 square feet per side and is
  proposed to setback 17 feet from the north property line. Further, the request
  includes an electronic full color LED display with an intended use to mostly
  show text advertising of on-premise content. It will most likely include some
  digital graphics and possibly video. This sign will be classified as their
  Interstate sign, and is hereby approved.
159.07   PERMITS REQUIRED.
   If a sign requiring a permit under the provision of this chapter is to be
placed, constructed, erected, or modified on a zone lot, the owner of the lot
shall secure a sign permit prior to the construction, placement, erection, or
modification of such a sign in accordance with the requirements of Section
159.14. Furthermore, the property owner shall maintain in force, at all times,
a sign permit for such sign in accordance with Section
159.15. No signs shall be erected in the public right-of-way except in
accordance with Section
159.10 and the permit requirements of Section
159.17. No sign permit of any kind shall be issued for an existing or proposed
sign unless such sign is consistent with the requirements of this chapter
(including those protecting existing signs) in every respect and with the
Master Signage Plan or Common Signage Plan in effect for the property.
159.08   DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND MAINTENANCE.
   All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with
the following standards:
   1.   All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the Uniform
Building Code and the Electrical Code of the City at all times.
   2.   Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs conforming
in all respects with the requirements of this chapter, all signs shall be
constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the
ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall,
frame, or structure.
   3.   All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in
compliance with all building and electrical codes, and in conformance with this
chapter, at all times.
159.09   MASTER OR COMMON SIGNAGE PLAN.
   No permit shall be issued for an individual sign requiring a permit unless
and until a Master Signage Plan or a Common Signage Plan for the zone lot on
which the sign will be erected has been submitted to the Zoning Administrator
and approved by the Zoning Administrator as conforming with this section.
   1.   Master Signage Plan. For any zone lot on which the owner proposes to
erect one or more signs requiring a permit, unless such zone lot is included in
a Common Signage Plan, the owner shall submit to the Zoning Administrator a
Master Signage Plan containing the following:
      A.   An accurate plot plan of the zone lot, at such scale as the Zoning
Administrator may reasonably require;
      B.   Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas
on such zone lot;
      C.   Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area for
individual signs, the height of the signs, and the number of freestanding signs
allowed on the zone lots included in the plan under this chapter; and
      D.   An accurate indication on the plot plan of the proposed location of
each present and future sign of any type, whether requiring a permit or not,
except that incidental signs need not be shown.
   2.   Common Signage Plan. If the owner of a single lot with more than one
building (not including any accessory building) or the owners of two or more
contiguous (disregarding intervening streets and alleys) zone lots file with
the Zoning Administrator for such zone lots a Common Signage Plan conforming
with the provisions of this section, a 50 percent increase in the maximum total
sign area shall be allowed for each included zone lot. This bonus shall be
allocated within each zone lot as the owners elect. Parcels with buildings over
20,000 square feet located west of 34 th Avenue SW and within 300 feet east of
said street are allowed a 75 percent increase in the maximum total signage
allowed.
   3.   Provisions of Common Signage Plan. The Common Signage Plan shall
contain all of the information required for a Master Signage Plan and shall
also specify standards for consistency among all signs on the zone lots
affected by the Plan with regard to:
      A.   Color scheme;
      B.   Lettering or graphic style;
      C.   Lighting;
      D.   Location of each sign on the building;
      E.   Materials; and
      F.   Sign proportions.
   4.   Showing Window Signs on Common or Master Signage Plan. A Common Signage
Plan or Master Signage Plan including window signs may simply indicate the
areas of the windows to be covered by window signs and the general type of the
window signs (e.g., paper affixed to window, painted, etched on glass, or some
other material hung inside window) and need not specify the exact dimension or
nature of every window sign.
   5.   Limit on Number of Freestanding Signs Under Common Signage Plan. The
Common Signage Plan, for all zone lots with multiple uses or multiple users,
shall limit the number of freestanding signs to a total of one for each street
on which the zone lots included in the plan have frontage and shall provide for
shared or common usage of such signs.
   6.   Other Provisions of Master or Common Signage Plans. The Master or
Common Signage Plan may contain such other restrictions as the owners of the
zone lots may reasonably determine.
   7.   Consent. The Master or Common Signage Plan shall be signed by all
owners or their authorized agents in such form as the Zoning Administrator
shall require.
   8.   Procedures. A Master or Common Signage Plan shall be included in any
development plan, site plan, planned unit development plan, or other official
plan required by the City for the proposed development and shall be processed
simultaneously with such other plan.
   9.   Amendment. A Master or Common Signage Plan may be amended by filing a
new Master or Common Signage Plan that conforms with all requirements of this
chapter then in effect.
   10.   Existing Signs Not Conforming to Common Signage Plan. If any new or
amended Common Signage Plan is filed for a property on which existing signs are
located, it shall include a schedule for bringing into conformance, within
three years, all signs not conforming to the proposed amended plan or to the
requirements of this chapter in effect on the date of submission.
   11.   Binding Effect. After approval of a Master or Common Signage Plan, no
sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except in conformance
with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision
of this chapter. In case of any conflict between the provisions of such a plan
and any other provision of this chapter, this chapter shall control.
159.10   SIGNS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   No signs shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except for the
following:
   1.   Permanent Signs. Permanent signs, including:
      A.   Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post
legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, and direct
or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
      B.   Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company;
      C.   Information signs of a public utility regarding its pole, lines,
pipes, or facilities;
      D.   Awning, projecting and suspended signs projecting over a public
right-of-way in conformity with the conditions of Table 159.05A of this
chapter.
      E.   Iowa Department of Transportation “Trailblazer” signs.
   2.   Temporary Signs. Temporary signs for which a permit has been issued in
accordance with Section 159.17, which shall be issued only for signs meeting
the following requirements:
      A.   Such signs shall contain no commercial message; and
      B.   Such signs shall be no more than two square feet in area each.
   3.   Emergency Signs. Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental
agency, a public utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted
work within the public right-of-way.
Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in conformity with the
requirements of this section, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to
confiscation. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the City shall have the
right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs
for removal and disposal of such sign.
159.11   SIGNS EXEMPT FROM REGULATION.
   The following signs are exempt from regulation under this chapter:
   1.   Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable
federal, State, or local law, regulation, or ordinance;
   2.   Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is
not legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the
zone lot or parcel on which such sign is located;
   3.   Works of art that do not include a commercial message;
   4.   Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message; but only
between November 15 and January 15;
   5.   Traffic control signs on private property, such as Stop, Yield, and
similar signs, the face of which meets Department of Transportation standards
and which contain no commercial message of any sort; and
   6.   Political campaign signs which are not contained within a right-of-way,
street, or on public grounds and their maximum size is 32 square feet.
   7.   Signs advertising a community-wide event open to the public and
officially supported by the Council (such as AltoonaPalooza, 4 th of July
parade, etc.). Signs are allowed on private property, and are allowed up to 30
days prior to the event.
159.12   PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   All signs not expressly permitted under this chapter or exempt from
regulation in accordance with the previous section are prohibited in the City;
such signs include, but are not limited to:
   1.   Beacons;
   2.   Pennants;
   3.   Strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background, except
those exempt under the previous section; and
   4.   Inflatable signs and tethered balloons, except those waived by the City
Administrator for display during City sanctioned events.
159.13   GENERAL PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   The following procedures shall govern the application for and issuance of
all sign permits under this chapter, and the submission and review of Common
Signage Plans and Master Signage Plans.
   1.   Applications. All applications for sign permits of any kind and for
approval of a Master or Common Signage Plan shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator on an application form or in accordance with application
specifications published by the Zoning Administrator.
   2.   Fees. Each application for a sign permit or for approval of a Master or
Common Signage Plan shall be accompanied by the applicable fee.
   3.   Completeness. Within five days of receiving an application for a sign
permit or for a Common or Master Signage Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall
review it for completeness. If the Zoning Administrator finds that it is
complete, the application shall then be processed. If the Zoning Administrator
finds that it is incomplete, the Zoning Administrator shall, within such five-
day period, send to the applicant a notice of the specific way in which the
applicant is deficient, with appropriate references to the applicable sections
of this chapter.
   4.   Action. Within seven days after the submission of a complete
application for a sign permit, the Zoning Administrator shall either:
      A.   Issue the sign permit, if the sign or signs that are the subject of
the application conform in every respect with the requirements of this chapter
and of the applicable Master or Common Signage Plan; or
      B.   Reject the sign permit if the sign or signs that are the subject of
the application fail in any way to conform with the requirements of this
chapter and of the applicable Master or Common Signage Plan. In case of a
rejection, the Zoning Administrator shall specify in the rejection the section
or sections of this chapter or applicable plan with which the sign or signs are
inconsistent.
   5.   Action on Plan. On any application for approval of a Master Signage
Plan or Common Signage Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall take action on the
application on one of the following dates:
      A.   Fourteen days after the submission of a complete application if the
application is for signs for existing buildings; or
      B.   On the date of final action on any related application for building
permit, site plan, or development plan for signs involving new construction.
   On or before such applicable date, the Zoning Administrator shall either
approve the proposed plan or reject the proposed plan if the signs as shown on
the plan or the plan itself fails in any way to conform with the requirements
of this chapter. In case of a rejection, the Zoning Administrator shall specify
in the rejection the section or sections of this chapter with which the plan is
inconsistent.
159.14   PERMITS TO CONSTRUCT OR MODIFY SIGNS.
   Signs identified as “P” or “S” on Table 159.05A shall be erected, installed,
or created only in accordance with a duly issued and valid sign construction
permit from the Zoning Administrator. Such permits shall be issued only in
accordance with the following requirements and procedures:
   1.   Permit for New Sign or for Sign Modifications. An application for
construction, creation, or installation of a new sign or for modification of an
existing sign shall be accompanied by detailed drawings to show the dimensions,
design, structure, and location of each particular sign, to the extent that
such details are not contained on a Master Signage Plan or Common Signage Plan
then in effect for the zone lot. One application and permit may include
multiple signs on the same zone lot.
   2.   Inspection. The Zoning Administrator shall cause an inspection of the
zone lot for which such permit for a new sign or for modification of an
existing sign is issued during the sixth month after the issuance of such
permit or at such earlier date as the owner may request. If the construction is
not substantially complete at the time of inspection, the permit shall lapse
and become void. If the construction is complete and in full compliance with
this chapter and with the building and electrical codes, the Zoning
Administrator shall affix to the premises a permanent symbol identifying the
signs and the applicable permit by number or other reference. If the
construction is substantially complete but not in full compliance with this
chapter and applicable codes, the Zoning Administrator shall give the owner or
applicant notice of the deficiencies and shall allow an additional 30 days
after the date of inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If the
deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse. If the
construction is then complete, the Zoning Administrator shall affix to the
premises the permanent symbol described above.
159.15   SIGN PERMITS - CONTINUING.
   The owner of a zone lot containing signs requiring a permit under this
chapter shall at all times maintain in force a sign permit for such property.
Sign permits shall be issued for individual zone lots, notwithstanding the fact
that a particular zone lot may be included with other zone lots in a Common
Signage Plan.
   1.   Initial Sign Permit. An initial sign permit shall be automatically
issued by the Zoning Administrator covering the period from the date of the
inspection for the completed sign installation, construction, or modification
through the last day of that calendar year.
   2.   Subsequent Sign Permits. Sign permits shall be issued for five years.
Except as provided herein, sign permits shall be renewable every five years
upon submission of a renewal application form and the applicable fees. Renewal
applications shall contain a representation by the applicant that no change in
signage under the permit has been made or shall contain dimensions, drawings,
and photos of any changes.
   3.   Lapse of Sign Permit. A continuing sign permit shall lapse
automatically if not renewed or if the business license for the premises is
discontinued for a period of 180 days or more and is not renewed within 30 days
of a notice from the City to the last permittee, sent to the premises, that the
sign permit will lapse if such activity is not renewed.
   4.   Assignment of Sign Permits. A current and valid sign permit shall be
freely assignable to a successor as owner of the property or holder of a
business license for the same premises, subject only to filing such application
as the Zoning Administrator may require and paying any applicable fee. The
assignment shall be accomplished by filing and shall not require approval.
159.16   TEMPORARY SIGN PERMITS (PRIVATE PROPERTY).
   1.   Temporary signs on private property shall be allowed only upon the
issuance of a temporary sign permit, which shall be subject to the following
requirements:
      A.   Term. A temporary sign permit shall allow the use of a temporary
sign for a specified 30-day period.
      B.   Number. Only one temporary sign permit shall be issued to the same
business license holder on the same zone lot in any calendar year.
      C.   Other Conditions. A temporary sign shall be allowed only in
districts with a letter “S” for “Temporary Signs” on Table 159.05A and subject
to all of the requirements for temporary signs as noted therein.
      D.   Signs advertising community events provided that the event is open
to the general public and that the event is in support of a governmental body
or a not-for-profit organization operating in the interest of a governmental
body or the Chamber of Commerce. Signs are allowed on private property, are
allowed up to 30 days prior to the event and are limited to 32 square feet in
size. Permits are required to verify placement of sign, but no fee is charged.
   2.   Project Identification Signs.
      A.   In residential districts, project identification signs shall be
removed when 50 percent of the lots within the plat have been issued a
Certificate of Occupancy or a final inspection has been completed by the City.
The signs shall be removed within seven days of the City notifying the
developer.
      B.   Project identification signs are limited to:
         (1)   Residential property - one per plat.
         (2)   Commercial property - one per project area or one per exterior
street frontage.
         (3)   Must be located on plat or development advertised.
         (4)   Maximum area is 32 square feet.
         (5)   Setback a minimum of five feet.
         (6)   Maximum six feet tall.
         (7)   In the C-7 District, for sites where buildings are approved with
gross square feet of building space exceeding 300,00 square feet, project
identification signs can be up to 128 square feet in size, setback at least 10
feet from property lines, and can be up to 10 feet tall.
      C.   Project identification signs may not be illuminated.
159.17   TIME OF COMPLIANCE; NONCONFORMING SIGNS AND SIGNS WITHOUT PERMITS.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the owner of any zone lot or other
premises on which exists a sign that does not conform with the requirements of
this chapter or for which there is no current and valid sign permit shall be
obligated to remove such sign or, in the case of a nonconforming sign, to bring
into conformity with the requirements of this chapter.
   1.   Signs Existing on Effective Date. For any sign existing in the City on
August 10, 1995, an application for a sign permit must be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator before January 1, 1996. For any sign on property annexed
at a later date, applications for sign permits shall be submitted within six
months after the effective date of the annexation or within such period as may
be established in an annexation agreement between the City and the landowner.
Signs that are subject of applications received after the applicable date set
forth in this section shall be subject to all of the terms and conditions of
this chapter and shall not be entitled to the protection of Subsection 2.
Applications for permits for existing signs submitted before January 1, 1996,
shall be exempt from the initial fees adopted under authority of this chapter,
but not from renewal and subsequent fees.
   2.   Nonconforming Existing Signs, Permits, and Terms. A sign that would be
permitted under this chapter only with a sign permit, but which was in
existence on August 10, 1995, or on a later date when the property is annexed
to the City, and which was constructed in accordance with the ordinances and
other applicable laws in effect on the date of its construction, but which, by
reason of its size, height, location, design, or construction, is not in
conformity with the requirements of this chapter, shall be issued a
Nonconforming Sign Permit if an application in accordance with Subsection 1 is
filed in a timely manner. Such permit shall allow the signs subject to such
permit, which were made nonconforming by the adoption of this chapter, to
remain in place and be maintained for a period ending no later than January 1,
1997, provided that no action is taken which increases the degree or extent of
the nonconformity. Such signs are also subject to the provisions of Subsection
3. A change in the information on the face of an existing nonconforming sign is
allowed. However, any nonconforming sign shall either be eliminated or made to
conform with the requirements of this chapter when any proposed change, repair,
or maintenance would constitute an expense of more than 25 percent of the
lesser of the original value or replacement value of the sign.
   3.   Lapse of Nonconforming Sign Permit. A Nonconforming Sign Permit shall
lapse and become void under the same circumstances as those under which any
other sign permit may lapse and become void.
   4.   Sign Removal Required. A sign that was constructed, painted, installed,
or maintained in conformance with a permit under this chapter, but for which
the permit has lapsed or not been renewed or for which the time allowed for the
continuance of nonconforming signs has expired, shall be forthwith removed
without notice or action from the City.
159.18   VIOLATIONS.
   Any of the following is a violation of this chapter and subject to the
enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this chapter, by the Zoning Code
and by State law:
   1.   To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is
inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zone lot on
which the sign is located;
   2.   To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit
without such permit;
   3.   To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected, or
maintained in violation of this chapter, or for which the sign permit has
lapsed; or
   4.   To continue any such violation. Each such day of a continued violation
shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions of
this chapter.
   5.   Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of
this chapter shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty
portions of this chapter.
159.19   ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.
   Any violation or attempted violation of this chapter or of any condition or
requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, or abated, as
the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceeding pursuant to
State law. A violation of this chapter is considered a violation of the Zoning
Code of the City. The remedies of the City include the following:
   1.   Issuing a stop-work order for any and all work on any signs on the same
zone lot;
   2.   Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that
requires the removal of the signs or the correction of the nonconformity;
   3.   Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the City under
the Zoning Code;
   4.   Seeking in court the imposition of any penalties that can be imposed by
such court under the Zoning Code; and
   5.   In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the public
health or safety, taking such measures as are available to the City under the
applicable provision of the Zoning Code and Building Code for such
circumstances.
The City shall have such other remedies as are and as may from time to time be
provided for or allowed by State law for the violation of the Zoning Code. All
remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent that State law may
limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth herein for certain
violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain available for other
violations or other parts of the same violation.
159.20   FEE SCHEDULE.
   1.   The fees for sign permits and plans for the five-year period are:
A     Master Signage Plan Application Fee   $100.00.
B .    Common Signage Plan Application Fee   $100.00.
C .    Sign Permit, Initial, including inspection, per zone lot   $75.00.
D .    Reinspection Fee   $35.00.
E .    Sign Permit, Continuing, per zone lot   $25.00.
   2.   Additional Fees (Initial and Continuing) for signs extending:
A .   Temporary Sign Permit, Private Property, per sign    $100.00.
B .   Temporary Sign Permit, Public Property   $25.00.
C .    Plus per sign   $2.00.
CHAPTER 160
CONTRACTOR LICENSING
 
160.01 Purpose     160.03 Permit Requirements
160.02 Definitions  
160.01   PURPOSE.
   1.   No person shall engage in the activity or represent themselves to the
public as engaging in the activity of plumbing work, electrical work,
mechanical work, or building construction without obtaining a proper license
from the State.
   2.   Exceptions:
      A.   An owner or occupant of a single-family dwelling performing
electrical, plumbing, or mechanical work on the interior of said dwelling unit
is not required to be licensed by the State pursuant to Chapters 103 and 105 of
the Code of Iowa. The owner or occupant, however, shall prove competency as
required per Chapter 155.
      B.   Any person performing building construction is not required to be
licensed by the State but must still however meet the provisions of this
chapter.
160.02   DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a
different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this
chapter, have the following meanings:
   1.   “Building construction” means any work performed on new or existing
structures by means of constructing, enlarging, installing, altering,
repairing, replacing, moving, removing, maintaining, and demolishing any
structural and non-structural element, fixture, or component as regulated by
the adopted Building Code.
   2.   “Building contractor” means any corporation, company, firm,
partnership, or person in the business of contracting or offering to contract
with any property owner the services of building construction.
   3.   “Electrical work” means all installations, alterations, repairs,
replacements, connections, disconnections, and maintenance of electrical wiring
and equipment connected to an electrical power source. No person shall engage
in the work or practice the trade of installing, altering, maintaining, or
repairing any electrical equipment within the scope of the Electrical Code
without meeting the provisions of Chapter 103 of the Code of Iowa and this
chapter.
   4.   “Mechanical work” means all installations, alterations, repairs,
replacements, connections, disconnections, and maintenance of mechanical
systems and equipment. No person shall engage in the work or practice the trade
of installing, altering, maintaining, or repairing any mechanical equipment or
system within the scope of the Mechanical Code without meeting the provisions
of Chapter 105 of the Code of Iowa and this chapter.
   5.   “Owner or occupant” means one who owns or occupies an existing property
no larger than a single-family dwelling. An owner or occupant shall qualify for
the homestead tax in order to be considered exempt from Section 160.01.
   6.   “Plumbing work” means all installations, alterations, repairs,
replacements, connections, disconnections, and maintenance of plumbing systems
and equipment. No person shall engage in the work or practice the trade of
installing, altering, maintaining, or repairing any plumbing equipment or
system within the scope of the Plumbing Code without meeting the provisions of
Chapter 105 of the Code of Iowa and this chapter.
160.03   PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   A permit shall accompany any and all work as required per Chapters 155, 156,
157, and 158. All corporations, companies, firms, partnerships, or persons
performing building construction as a building contractor, electrical work,
mechanical work, and plumbing work requesting a permit for such shall hold
current registration with the Department of Labor, Iowa Workforce Development.
CHAPTER 161
FIRE CODE
 
161.01 Adoption of Fire Code          161.06 Hazardous Substances,
                                      Notification, and Cleanup
161.02 Deletions                      161.07 False Fire Alarms
161.03 Amendments and Additions       161.08 Board of Appeals
161.04 Fireworks                      161.09 Violations
161.05 Fireworks Bond for Display and  
Disposal
161.01   ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE.
   This chapter shall consist of the “International Fire Code, 2018 Edition,
including Appendix B, C, D, and I.” as published by the International Code
Council which volume is incorporated herein by this reference as fully as
though set forth herein in its entirety, excepting only such portions as are
hereinafter stated to be deleted therefrom; and such additional provisions as
are hereinafter set forth. This chapter and all provisions incorporated herein,
by reference or otherwise, shall be known as the “Fire Code,” may be cited as
such, and will be referred to herein as such and as “this Code.”
161.02   DELETIONS.
   The following are hereby deleted from this Code and are of no force or
effect herein:
   1.   Section 105.3.1 and Section 105.3.2.
   2.   Section 109.
   3.   Section 503.3.
161.03   AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS.
   The remaining sections in this chapter are and represent amendments and
additions to the requirements contained in the Fire Code, and where their
requirements conflict with those of the Fire Code, the requirements of this
chapter shall prevail. The sections listed below shall be construed in the
context of the enumerated chapter or chapters of Fire Code.
   1.   Section 101.1 – Title.
   2.   Section 105.1.1 – Permits Required.
   3.   Section 105.1.2 - Types of Permits.
   4.   Section 105.3.1 – Expiration.
   5.   Section 106 – Permit Fees.
   6.   Section 202 – Definitions.
   7.   Section 307.1 - Open Burning, Recreational Fires, and Portable Outdoor
Fireplaces.
   8.   Section 308.1.4 – Open Flame Cooking Devices.
   9.   Section 503.2.1 – Dimensions.
   10.   Section 505.1 - Address Identification.
   11.   Section 506.1 - Key Boxes.
   12.   Section 507.5.1.1 - Hydrant for Fire Department Connections.
   13.   Section 507.5.7 - Fire Hydrant Markers and Identification Color.
   14.   Section 507.5.8 - Fire Hydrant Installation.
   15.   Section 511 - Fire and Emergency Vehicle Lanes.
   16.   Section 903.2.3 – Group E Daycare Facilities.
   17.   Section 903.2.6 – Group I.
   18.   Section 903.2.8.4 - Care Facilities.
   19.   Section 903.2.11.1.3 – Basements.
   20.    Section 903.3.1.2.3 – Attics in Multi-Family Structures.
   21.   Section 903.4.2 – Alarms.
   22.   Section 905.3.1 #1 – Height.
   23.   Section 905.3.9 – Excessive Distance.
   24.   Section 907.1.4 - Fire Alarm Control Panels (FACP).
   25.   Section 907.2.10 - Single and Multiple Station Smoke Alarms.
   26.   Section 907.6.4.3 - Zone and Address Location Labeling.
   27.   Section 907.6.6 – Monitoring.
   28.   Section 912.1 - Fire Department Connections.
   29.   Section 912.2 – Location.
   30.   Section 1008.3.3 – Rooms and Spaces.
   31.   Section 1009.2 – Continuity and Components.
   32.   Section 1010.1.6 – Frost Protection.
   33.   Section 1013.1.1 - Additional Exit Signage.
   34.   Section 1014.4 – Handrails.
   35.   Section 1015.9 – Walking Surfaces.
   36.   Section 1028.5.1 – Hard Surfaces.
   37.   Section 1030.3 - Egress Window Landings.
   38.   Section 1030.4 - Window Well Drainage.
   39.   Section 3313.1 – Where Required.
      1.   Title. Section 101.1 shall insert “The City of Altoona” for name of
jurisdiction.
      2.   Permits Required. Section 105.1.1 shall be amended by adding the
following sentence to the end of the paragraph:
      “A fee for each construction permit shall be paid to the fire official in
the amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees as adopted by the Council.”
      3.   Types of Permits. Section 105.1(2) shall be deleted and replaced
with the following:
         105.1.2 Types of Permits. There shall be two types of permits as
follows:
         1.   Operational Permit. A Certificate of Occupancy issued pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 155 shall be assumed to meet the provisions of this
section, except for Sections 105.6.32, 105.6.33, 105.6.34, and 105.6.47.
         2.   Construction Permit. A construction permit allows the applicant
to install or modify systems and equipment for which a permit is required by
Sections 105.7.1, 105.7.7, 105.7.8, 105.7.9, 105.7.15, 105.7.16, 105.7.23,
105.7.24, and 105.7.25.
      4.   Expiration. Section 105.3.1 shall be deleted and replaced with the
following:
         105.3.1 Expiration. Every permit issued by the fire official under the
provision of the fire code shall expire under any one of the following
conditions:
         1.   Failure to begin work authorized within 180 days after issuance
of the permit.
         2.   Suspension or abandonment of work for 120 days after commencement
of the work. Time of occurrence of suspension or abandonment of work shall be
computed from the date of the most recent inspection since which no progress
has been made.
         3.   Failure to complete work on a structure designed for residential
uses within one year after issuance of a permit.
         4.   Failure to complete work on a structure designed for commercial
or industrial uses within two years after issuance of a permit. For permits
with a valuation exceeding $10,000,000.00, work shall be completed within three
years after issuance of a permit.
      Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of
the time within which they may commence or continue work. The fire official is
authorized to grant, in writing, for periods not more than 180 days each, two
extensions. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated. Any of the extensions may be further extended by action of the
Council. In all cases, when a renewal is granted, the structure for which the
permit is required shall comply with Code requirements in effect at the time
the permit is renewed.
      5.   Permit Fees. Section 106 shall be deleted and replaced with the
following:
         106.1 Permit Fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees have
been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional
fee, if any, has been paid:
         A.   A fee for each construction permit shall be paid to the Fire
Chief in the amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees as adopted by the
Council.
         B.   If a permit is issued for a specific amount of work and, upon
inspection, it is determined that more work was performed than was authorized
by the permit, the permittee shall amend the permit or obtain another permit to
include all additional work and shall pay a new base fee and any unit fees as
described in Paragraph A above.
         C.   Permits and fees for mechanical, plumbing, and electrical work
shall meet the requirements of Ordinances 156, 157, or 158 respectively.
         106.2 Additional Permit Fees:
         A.   Plan Check Fees: Plan Check Fees shall be in the amount set forth
in the Schedule of Fees as adopted by the Council.
         B.   Double Fee. Except in emergency situations, as determined by the
Fire Chief, where work for which a building permit is required by this Code is
started or proceeded with by any person prior to obtaining a required permit,
the fees in the amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees as adopted by the
Council shall be doubled. The payment of such double fee shall not relieve any
person from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution
of the work or from any other penalties prescribed herein. No additional
permits of any type shall be issued to any person who owes the City the double
fee described in this subsection. However, no double fee shall be imposed upon
any person who starts without a permit if:
            (1)   The work is started on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, or
during any other day when the Building Department is not normally open for
business; and
            (2)   The person secures the proper permit on the next Fire
Department working day.
         106.3 Refunds. If, within 30 days of the date of issuance, the holder
of a construction permit decides not to commence the work described in said
permit, said person may, upon application to the Fire Chief, be refunded that
portion of the permit fee which is in excess of the permit refund fee as set
forth in the Schedule of Fees as adopted by the Council.
         106.4 Renewals. Fees for Permit Renewals shall be based on the
percentage of valuation of remaining work to be performed provided the plans
are not changed. If the plans are changed enough to warrant a review, then the
permit fee shall be half the cost of the original fee plus any fees as set
forth in Section 106.6 of this Code section.
      * Or the hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is greater. This cost
shall include supervision, overhead, hourly wages, and fringe benefits of the
employees involved.
         106.5 Reinspections. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each
inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is
called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. This
section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time
a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this Code, but
as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready
for such inspection or reinspection. Reinspection fees may be assessed when the
inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available on the work site,
the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to
provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating
from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. To obtain a
reinspection, the applicant shall pay the reinspection fee as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees as adopted by the Council. In instances where reinspection
fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed
until the required fees have been paid.
         106.6 Other Inspections and Fees. See the schedule of fees as adopted
by Council.
      Persons performing work for the federal government, the State, the
County, or City may obtain permits for such work without paying the permit fees
described herein; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be
construed to exempt payment of permit fees by persons performing work under the
direction of the City in connection with the abatement of any public law.
      An expired permit may not be reissued without a permit fee except by
resolution of the Council.
      6.   Definitions. Section 202 shall be amended by including the following
definitions:
         Bedroom. Any room designed for and potentially used for sleeping
purposes at the present time or in the future. Bedrooms shall meet all the
minimum provisions of this Code to include minimum emergency escape and rescue
opening, shall have a permanently powered dual sensor smoke alarm device with
battery backup. For the purpose of this chapter “bedroom(s) and sleeping room
(s) shall be synonymous with each other.”
         Speculative building. A strip mall, warehouse, or other structure
where the final occupancy group of the building is not known at the time of
permitting.
      7.   Open Burning, Recreational Fires, and Portable Outdoor Fireplaces.
Section 307 of the International Fire Code shall be deleted and replaced with
the following:
      307.1 Open Burning, Recreational Fires, and Portable Outdoor Fireplaces.
There shall be no open burning in the City of Altoona Corporate Limits without
prior approval of Polk County Air and Waste Management Department and the Fire
Chief.
      8.   Open Flame Cooking Devices. Section 308.1.4 Exception #3 of the
International Fire Code shall be amended by deleting and replacing with the
following:
         3.   LP-gas cooking devices having an LP-gas container with a water
capacity greater than 47.7 pounds (nominal 20 pound LP gas capacity) shall not
be located on combustible balconies and decks or within 10 feet of combustible
construction.
         Exception: One- and two-family dwellings.
      9.   Dimensions. Section 503.2.1 shall be amended by changing the
dimension of 13 feet 6 inches to 14 feet.
      10.   Address Identification. Section 505.1 of the IFC shall be deleted
and replaced with the following:
         505.1 Address Identification. Every new and existing principal
structure on a premise shall have the address number affixed thereto. The
numbers shall be six inches in height for structures built per the provisions
of the IBC with the exception that individual dwelling units in multi-family
structures are allowed numbers to be a height of three inches. The numbers for
buildings constructed per the provisions of the IRC shall be four inches in
height. The numbers shall be of visible from the public right-of-way and of
contrasting color from the principal structure. Where required by the Fire Code
Official, address identification shall be provided in additional approved
locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a
private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a
monument, pole, or other approved sign or means shall be used to identify the
structure. Address identification shall be maintained.
      11.   Key Boxes. Section 506.1 of the International Fire Code shall be
amended by adding the following to the end of the section:
         “Key boxes shall be located at the front of the building typically
adjacent to the main front doors at a maximum height of six feet above grade or
at a location as directed by the Fire Code Official.”
      12.   Hydrant for Fire Department Connections. Section 507.5.1.1 shall be
deleted and replaced with the following:
         Buildings equipped with a Fire Department connection installed in
accordance with Section 912 shall have a fire hydrant located on a fire access
road within 100 feet (30 m) of the Fire Department connection as measured by an
approved route around the exterior of the building.
         Exception: The distance shall be permitted to exceed 100 feet (30 m)
where approved by the Fire Code Official.
      13.   Fire Hydrant Markers and Identification Color. Chapter 5 shall be
amended by adding the following section:
         Section 507.5.7 Fire Hydrant Markers and Identification Color. When
required by the Fire Code Official, hydrant locations shall be identified by
the installation of an approved reflective marker. Both public and private
hydrants shall comply with and be painted to City specifications.
      14.   Fire Hydrant Installation. Chapter 5 shall be amended by adding the
following section:
         Section 507.5.8 Fire Hydrant Installation. Fire hydrants shall be
installed with the grade mark on the fire hydrant at the level of finished
grade. The large diameter connection shall be installed such that the
connection is oriented facing the fire department access road.
      15.   Fire Service Features. Chapter 5 shall be amended by adding the
following section:
         Section 511 Fire and Emergency Vehicle Lanes
         Section 511.1 General. Fire and emergency vehicle lanes shall be
provided and maintained in accordance with Section 511.2 through 511.6, and
referred to as fire lanes in this ordinance.
         Section 511.2 Purpose. The requirement that fire lanes be established
in certain parking areas and the enforcement of restrictions on parking in such
fire lanes established in this chapter are designed to ensure adequate access
to commercial, office, multi-family, and other high density use facilities by
fire-fighting and other emergency vehicles.
         Section 511.3 Designation. The Fire Code Official may designate fire
lanes on private and public property as deemed necessary for the protection of
life and property.
         Section 511.4 Obstruction. No person shall park or place a vehicle or
other obstruction in a designated fire lane that would prevent such fire lane
from being immediately accessible to emergency vehicles, or deter or hinder
emergency vehicles from gaining immediate access to the fire lane. A written
request to the Fire Chief for temporary obstruction of a fire lane shall be
submitted for approval.
         Section 511.5 Signs and Markings. Wherever a fire lane has been
designated, the Code Official shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be
placed identifying such fire lanes. Signs or markings shall be maintained in a
clean and legible condition at all times and shall be replaced or repaired when
necessary to provide adequate visibility. Fire lanes may be established or
relocated at the time of plan review, pre-construction site inspection, or post
construction site inspection, as well as any time during the life of the
occupancy as needed to provide and maintain emergency vehicle access. All
designated fire lanes shall be clearly marked in the following manner:
         1.   Vertical curbs shall be painted red on the top and side,
extending the length of the designated fire lane. Rolled curbs or surfaces
without curbs shall have a red six-inch wide stripe painted the length of the
designated fire lane. One of the following identification lettering methods
shall be utilized:
            A.   The words “NO PARKING – FIRE LANE” shall be stenciled with
three-inch white letters and a minimum three – quarter inch stroke on the face
of the curbing, or in the absence of vertical curbing, on the red stripe, and
spaced at 50-foot intervals or portions thereof, or
            B.   The pavement adjacent to the painted curbs shall be marked
with minimum 18-inch in height block lettering with a minimum three-inch brush
stroke reading: “NO PARKING - FIRE LANE.” Lettering shall be red and spaced at
50-foot intervals or portions thereof.
         2.   Signage identifying fire lanes shall conform to the following:
            Fire lane signs shall be 18 inches tall x 12 inches wide with red
letters on a white reflective background to read “Fire Lane No Parking” or
similar verbiage as approved by the code official. Fire lane signs shall be
placed two to four feet from the edge of the street. The top of fire lane signs
shall be approximately six feet from the ground. Intermediate fire lane signs
shall be set every 100 feet in a continuous fire lane. The “BEGINS” sign shall
mark the beginning of a fire lane and shall be mounted below the first fire
lane sign. The “ENDS” sign shall mark the ending of a fire lane and shall be
mounted below the last fire lane sign. The “BEGINS” and “ENDS” signage may be
omitted by the Code Official due to the location of the fire lane. Signs may be
placed on a building when approved by the Fire Code Official.
         Section 511.6 Maintenance. The owner, manager, or person in charge of
any property upon which designated fire lanes have been established shall
provide marking as required above and, shall maintain fire lanes, at their
expense, as often as needed to clearly identify the designated area as being a
fire lane.
      16.   Group E Daycare Facilities. Section 903.2.3 shall be amended by
adding the following subsection:
         4.   Group E daycare facilities 5,000 square feet or more, or
containing an occupant load of 100 persons or more, including children and
staff, shall be provided with a NFPA 13 system throughout the occupancy.
      17.   Group I. Section 903.2.6 shall be amended by deleting exception #2
and replacing with the following:
         2.   A Group I- four daycare facility with a fire area less than 5,000
square feet and an occupant load less than 100, which is located at the level
of exit discharge, and where every room where care is provided has not fewer
than one exterior exit door, an automatic sprinkler system is not required.
      18.   Care Facilities. Subsection 903.2.8.4 shall be amended by deleting
the section and replacing with the following:
         903.2.8.4 Care Facilities. Care facilities for eight or fewer persons
receiving care that are within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply
with the International Residential Code.
      19.   Basements. Subsection 903.2.11.1.3 Basements shall be deleted and
replaced with the following:
         903.2.11.1.3 Basements. Where any portion of a basement is located
more than 75 feet from openings required by Section 903.2.11.1, the basement
shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
      20.   Attics in Multi-Family Structures. Section 903.3.1.2.3 shall be
amended by adding the following Subsection #5.
         5.   Multi-family residential structures required to have a sprinkler
system installed, shall provide automatic sprinklers throughout all portions of
the attic area.
         Exceptions:
            1.   Structures are two stories or less in height.
            2.   The attic structural and roofing components are composed of
non-combustible materials
            3.   Attic areas with less than four-foot height
      21.   Alarms. Section 903.4.2 shall be amended by replacing the first
sentence with the following:
      An approved weather proof audible device listed for outdoor use with 110
candela visual signal shall be located on the exterior of the building in an
approved location, and connected to each automatic sprinkler system.
      22.   Height. Section 905.3.1 #1 shall be deleted and replaced with the
following:
         1.   Three or more stories are above or below grade.
      23.   Excessive Distance. Section 905.3 shall be amended by adding the
following subsection:
         905.3.9 Excessive Distance. Where the most remote portion of a floor
or story is more than 400 feet from a hose connection or fire department access
road, the Fire Code Official is authorized to require standpipes to be provided
in approved locations. Class I manual standpipes shall be allowed.
      24.   Fire Alarm Control Panels (FACP). Section 907.1 shall be amended by
adding the following subsection:
         Section 907.1.4 Fire Alarm Control Panels (FACP). Each building shall
have no more than one FACP.
         Installation of fire alarm panel shall not exceed six feet in height
measured from the floor to the top of the unit.
         Exception: Suppression system releasing panels are not required to
meet the height requirement or the limitation in the number of panels.
      25.   Single and Multiple Station Smoke Alarms. Section 907.2.10 shall be
modified by inserting the following immediately following the existing
language:
         “Smoke alarms in dwelling units shall be addressable with sounder
bases and monitored by the building fire alarm system as a supervisory signal
only. Mini horns in dwelling units are not required if notification from a
building fire alarm system is through the smoke alarms with sounder bases. An
addressable system is required whenever there are eight or more signaling
devices, i.e., detectors, pull stations, flow switches, etc.”
      26.   Zones. Section 907.6.4 Zones shall be amended by adding a new
section as follows:
         907.6.4.3 Zone and Address Location Labeling. Fire alarm panels shall
have all zones and address points plainly and permanently labeled as to their
location on the outside of the panel or on an easily readable map of the
building, if no display screen is present.
      27.   Monitoring. Section 907.6.6 (IBC) shall be deleted and replaced
with the following language:
         907.6.6 Monitoring. Fire alarm systems required by this chapter shall
be monitored by a central station approved and listed under UL 827 in
accordance with NFPA 72.
      28.   Fire Department Connections. Section 912.1 shall be amended by
adding the following to the end of the section:
      “The Fire Department connection shall be a five-inch Storz type connector
(s) compatible with the hose couplings currently in use by the Fire Department.
A Fire Department connection having the standard internal threaded swivel
fittings of two and one-half inches NST may be substituted for the five-inch
Storz connection with the approval of the Fire Code Official where system
pressures may exceed hose test pressure or where the water supply locations
could require an extensive hose lay to the structure.”
      29.   Location. Section 912.2 shall be amended by adding the following to
the end of the paragraph:
      Structures more than two stories in height, or with sidewalls greater
than 20 feet in height, shall have a remote FDC located separately from the
structure on a fire access road at an approved location when feasible.
      30.   Rooms and Spaces. Section 1008.3.3 shall be amended by deleting
item #5 and replacing with the following:
         5.   Public restrooms that contain more than one water closet or
urinal or that are required to be accessible.
      31.   Continuity and Components. Subsection 1009.2 shall be amended by
adding item #11 as follows:
         11.   Components of required exterior walking surfaces shall be hard
surfaced.
      32.   Frost Protection. Section 1010.1.6 shall be amended by adding a new
subsection as follows:
         1010.1.6.1 Frost Protection: Exterior landings at doors required to be
at the same level by 1010.1.5 shall be provided with frost protection.
      33.   Additional Exit Signage. Section 1013.1 shall be amended by adding
the following subsection:
         1013.1. 1 Additional Exit Signage. Additional exit signs may be
required at the discretion of the Code Official to clarify an exit or exit
access.
      34.   Handrails. Section 1014.4 Continuity shall be amended by deleting
exception number 1 and replacing with the following:
         1.   Handrails within a dwelling unit, or serving an individual
dwelling unit of groups R-2 and R-3, shall be permitted to be interrupted by a
newel post at a turn or landing. Handrails serving these occupancies shall be
allowed to be interrupted at one location in a straight stair when the rail
terminates into a wall or ledge, is offset, and immediately continues.
      35.   Walking Surfaces. Section 1015 shall be amended by adding a new
subsection 1015.9 as follows.
         1015.9 Walking Surfaces. A guard shall be provided along retaining
walls where a finished walking surface such as a sidewalk, patio, driveway,
parking lot, or similar, are located on the top side of a retaining wall. The
guard shall be installed along any portion of the wall measuring 30 inches or
greater in height measured at any point within 36 inches horizontally to the
edge of the open side. A guard shall not be required along portions of the
retaining wall where the horizontal distance between the edge of the finished
walking surface and the face of the wall is greater than 72 inches.
      36.   Hard Surfaces. Section 1028.5 shall be amended by adding the
following subsection:
         1028.5.1 Hard Surfaces. Components of required exterior walking
surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, or other approved hard surface.
      37.   Requirements for Egress Window Landings. Section 1030.3 shall be
amended by adding the following to the end of the section:
      “Where a landing is provided for egress windows in new and existing
construction of Group R, One- and Two- Family, and Townhouse Dwellings where
the maximum height from the floor requirement cannot be met as stated in
Section 1026.3 shall have a minimum width of 36 inches, a minimum depth of 12
inches and a maximum height of 24 inches. The landing shall be permanently
affixed to the floor under the window it serves.”
      38.   Window Well Drainage. Section 1030.4 shall be amended by adding a
new subsection as follows:
      1030.4.3 Window Well Drainage. Window wells shall be designed for proper
drainage by connecting to the buildings foundation drainage system required by
Section 1805.4.2 or by an approved alternate method.
      39.   Where Required. Section 3313.1 shall be amended by changing the
reference of 40 feet (12,192 mm) to read 30 feet (9,144 mm).
      40.   Fire Alarm Systems. Section 1103.7 shall be amended by deleting the
section and replacing with the following:
         1103.7 Fire Alarm Systems. An approved fire alarm system shall be
installed in existing buildings and structures in accordance with Section
1103.7.1 through 1103.7.6. The system shall provide occupant notification in
accordance with Section 907.5 and monitoring in accordance with Section
907.6.6.
      Exception: Occupancies with an existing, previously approved fire alarm
system, and equipped with an approved NFPA 13 of NFPA 13R automatic
extinguishing system.
161.04   FIREWORKS.
   1.   **General.** It shall be unlawful to manufacture fireworks within the
corporate limits of the City.
   2.   The Fire Chief, Police Chief, or duly appointed representatives are
authorized to seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed, at the expense of
the owner, all stocks of illegal fireworks (not State approved), offered or
exposed for sale, stored, and held to be in violation of State law.
   3.   The City deems the use of first-class consumer fireworks as a threat to
public safety or a nuisance to landowners and therefore prohibits the use of
first-class consumer fireworks within the corporate limits of the City, except
as expressly permitted by Iowa Code §727.2.
      A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, expose for
sale, or sell at retail any consumer fireworks within the corporate limits of
the City unless all of the following conditions are met:
         (1)   The person holds a valid Retail Fireworks License issued by the
State of Iowa (e.g., State Fire Marshal/DIAL);
         (2)   The person has obtained a local Fireworks Sales Permit as
required by this section;
         (3)   Sale occurs only during the dates and times allowed by Iowa Code
§727.2.
      B.   The use or explosion of first-class consumer fireworks shall be
allowed only on the following dates and during the times mandated by State law,
during which the City may not enforce its prohibition:
         (1)   **July 3**: from **9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.**, or until **11:00
p.m.** if July 3 falls on a Saturday or Sunday;
         (2)   **July 4**: from **9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.**;
         (3)   **December 31**: from**9:00 a.m. to 12:30 a.m.** on January 1.
      C.   Outside of the dates and times identified in Subsection B, the use
or explosion of first-class consumer fireworks is prohibited and shall be
subject to enforcement under this ordinance. This includes, but is not limited
to:
         (1)   Any time before 9:00 a.m. or after the ending time listed for
July 3, July 4, or December 31;
         (2)   All other dates within the State’s authorized fireworks period:
**June 1 through July 2**, **July 5 through July 8**, and **December 10 through
December 30**, and **January 1 through January 3**.
      D.   The use or explosion of second-class consumer fireworks, as defined
herein, shall also be prohibited outside the dates and times listed in
Subsection B. These items may only be used during the same timeframes as first-
class consumer fireworks and must comply with all other applicable ordinances
related to noise, nuisance, and public safety.
      E.   The sale and use of novelties, known as snappers, party poppers,
glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices, and sparklers are permitted at all
times.
      F.   As used in this section:
         (1)   “Consumer fireworks” means those fireworks as defined by the
Iowa Revised Statutes, S.F. 489, that may be sold within the City even where
the use of those items has been prohibited.
         (2)   “First-class consumer fireworks” means the following consumer
fireworks, as described in APA 87-1, Chapter 3:
            a.   Aerial shell kits and reloadable tubes.
            b.   Chasers.
            c.   Helicopter and aerial spinners.
            d.   Firecrackers.
            e.   Mine and shell devices.
            f.   Missile type rockets.
            g.   Roman candles.
            h.   Skyrockets and bottle rockets.
            i.   Multiple tube devices manufactured per APA 87-1, Section 3.5.
         (3)   “Second-class consumer fireworks” means the following consumer
fireworks, as described in APA 87-1, Chapter 3:
            a.   Cone fountains.
            b.   Cylindrical fountains.
            c.   Flitter sparklers.
            d.   Ground and hand-held sparkling devices, including multiple
tube versions compliant with APA 87-1, Section 3.5.
            e.   Ground spinners.
            f.   Illuminating torches.
            g.   Toy smoke devices not classified as novelties.
            h.   Wheels.
            i.   Wire or dipped sparklers not classified as novelties.
      G.   Exceptions:
         (1)   The Armed Forces of the United States, Coast Guard, or National
Guard;
         (2)   Explosives in forms prescribed by the official United States
Pharmacopoeia;
         (3)   Possession, storage, and use of small ammunition in DOT-
compliant packaging;
         (4)   Possession, storage, and use of limited quantities of sporting
black powder and smokeless powder for personal use;
         (5)   Official use by regulatory, law enforcement, and fire agencies;
         (6)   Special industrial explosive devices under 50 pounds aggregate
explosive materials;
         (7)   Blank industrial power load cartridges packaged per DOT
standards;
         (8)   Transportation in compliance with DOT 49 C.F.R. Parts 100
through 178;
         (9)   Items preempted by federal regulations;
         (10)   Items considered as “second-class consumer fireworks” and
“novelties.”
   4.   The use of fireworks for display is allowed per Section 161.19 with
Council approval, and in accordance with Section 161.20.
(Section 161.04 – Ord. 07-21-2025_#01_(675) – Nov. 25 Supp.)
161.05   FIREWORKS BOND FOR DISPLAY AND DISPOSAL.
   1.   The applicant shall, at the time they make their application for a
permit, attach thereto a bond or certificate of insurance naming the applicant
and the City as insured, in the sum of not less than $1,000,000.00, provided
that the Chief of the Fire Department or the Council do not require a greater
amount. Said bond and insurance shall insure the use and benefit of the City or
any person who suffers damage either to person or property by reason of said
display of fireworks.
   2.   Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall
be immediately disposed of in a way safe for the particular type of fireworks
remaining.
161.06   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES, NOTIFICATION, AND CLEANUP.
   1.   Scope. This section shall apply to the release of hazardous substances
and the notification, cleanup, and recovery of costs associated with the
mitigation of hazardous conditions.
   2.   Definitions. For the purposes of the section, these words have the
following meaning:
      A.   “Cleanup” means the removal, by approved personnel, of the hazardous
substances to a place where the waste will not cause any danger to persons or
the environment, in accordance with the State statutes, rules, and regulations
therefore, or the treatment of the material as defined herein to eliminate the
hazardous condition, including the restoration of the area to general good
appearance without noticeable odor as far as practicable. Cleanup includes all
actions necessary to contain, collect, identify, analyze, treat, disperse,
remove, or dispose of a hazardous substance and to restore the sites from which
such hazardous substance was cleaned up.
      B.   “Hazardous Condition” means any situation involving the actual,
imminent, or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance:
         (1)   Within the City or onto City property located outside the City
which, because of the quantity, strength, and toxicity of the hazardous
substance, its mobility in the environment and its persistence creates an
immediate potential danger to the public health or safety; or
         (2)   Onto land, into the waters within the State, or into the
atmosphere, but outside the City, which because of the quantity, strength, and
toxicity of the hazardous substance, its mobility in the environment and its
persistence, creates an immediate potential danger to the public health or
safety of persons or property within the City. Hazardous condition includes
involving hazardous materials required to be reported under Section 321.266 (4)
of the Code of Iowa.
      C.   “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substance
that presents a danger to public health or safety or environment and includes,
but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or
that is an irritant, or that, in confinement, generates pressure through
decomposition, heat, or other means. The following are examples of substances
which, in sufficient quantity, may be hazardous; acids; alkalis; explosives;
fertilizers; heavy metals such as chromium, arsenic, mercury, lead, and
cadmium; industrial chemicals; paint thinners; paints; pesticides; petroleum
products; poisons; radioactive materials; sludges; and organic solvents.
“Hazardous substance” includes any hazardous waste identified or listed by the
Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under Section 307 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act of 1976, as amended to January 1, 1977, or any
hazardous materials designated under Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous materials
designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous Materials
Transportation Act, or any hazardous substance listed under the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980.
      D.   “Person” means a natural person, their heirs, executors,
administrators, or assigns and also includes a firm, partnership, or
corporation, or their successors of assigns, or any other similar legal entity
or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
      E.   “Responsible person” means the person, whether the owner, agent,
lessor or tenant, in charge of the hazardous substance being stored, processed,
or handled, or the owner or bailee transporting hazardous wastes or substances
whether on public ways or grounds or on private property where the spill would
cause danger to the public or to any persons or to the environment.
      F.   “Treatment” means a method, technique, or process, including
neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical, or biological
character or composition of a hazardous substance so as to neutralize it or
render the substance non-hazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery,
amenable for storage, or to reduce it in volume.
      Treatment includes any activity or processing designed to change the
physical form or chemical composition of a hazardous substance to render it
non-hazardous.
   3.   Notification. When a hazardous condition is created, the responsible
person shall notify the Fire Department immediately upon discovery of the
condition, but in no instance later than 30 minutes after the discovery of the
hazardous condition.
   4.   Cleanup Required. Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the
deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of a hazardous
substance, so that the hazardous substance, or a constituent of the hazardous
substance, may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged
into any waters, including ground waters, the Fire Chief may remove or provide
for removal and the disposal of the hazardous substance at any time, unless the
Fire Chief determines such removal will be properly and promptly accomplished
by the responsible person. If the responsible party does not initiate and
complete cleanup within the time designated by the Fire Department, the City
may proceed to remedy the hazardous condition by performing necessary cleanup
devices.
   5.   Loss, Burden, or Costs. A responsible person shall be liable to the
City for all cleanup costs incurred by the City, including, but not limited to;
chemical damage, contamination of equipment, and the use of consumable
materials, personnel, but shall not be liable for those losses, burdens, or
costs normally associated with response to fire emergencies which do not
involve hazardous conditions. If charges for such cleanup costs are not paid
within 30 days after invoice, the City shall proceed to obtain payment by all
legal means.
161.07   FALSE FIRE ALARMS.
   1.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, these words have the
following meaning:
      A.   “False alarm” means the activation of a fire alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, improper maintenances,
or the negligence of the owner or lessee of the fire alarm system or their
employees or agents. This does not include alarms caused by unauthorized
tampering with a fire alarm system by anyone other than the fire alarm user or
their agent.
      B.   “Fire Alarm System” means any assembly of equipment, mechanical, or
electrical, installed by a fire alarm business, arranged to signal the
occurrence of a fire, smoke, water flow, or other condition to which the Fire
Department may be expected to respond.
      C.   “Fire alarm user” means a person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind that is in control of any
building, structure, or facility where a fire alarm system is present.
      D.   “Testing and maintenance” means when an alarm service technician or
alarm company conducts fire alarm system testing.
   2.   Fire Alarm Activation and User Fee.
      A.   Whenever fire department personnel respond to an activated fire
alarm system the Fire Chief or authorized fire official in charge of the
incident shall determine if the response was caused by a false alarm and shall
indicate that fact upon the incident report.
      B.   The Fire Department shall regularly review incident reports to
monitor the accumulation of false alarms at any one location. Whenever two
false alarms have occurred at the same location within one calendar year, and
the location is within the response jurisdiction area of the City, the Fire
Department shall notify the fire alarm user by letter, citing the location and
date of each alarm activation. The letter shall recommend that appropriate
action be taken on the part of the fire alarm user to alleviate the causes of
such false alarms and shall include a statement that an accumulation of more
than three false alarm activations within a year shall result in a charge for
services. Another similar letter shall be sent when three false alarms have
occurred at the same location within the year.
      C.   When four false alarms have occurred at one location within a
calendar year, a user fee for service for false alarm response shall be
invoiced to the property owner. Each additional false fire alarm activation
within the same calendar year shall be invoiced an additional fee. In the event
that payment of the fee is not made within 30 days of billing, an
administrative charge for collection shall be assessed. All fees shall be
established by resolution of the Council, as adopted. The fee hereby
established affords only partial recovery of the expenses incurred in
responding to the false alarms.
      D.   Whenever fire department personnel respond to a fire alarm that has
been activated due to testing and maintenance, the fire official in charge of
the incident shall determine if the response resulted from failure to make the
proper notification to the alarm system monitor center and the County
Communication Dispatch Center and shall so indicate on the incident report.
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other section of the ordinance
codified in this chapter, if a fire alarm is activated due to testing and
maintenance and the County Communication Dispatch Center was not given proper
notification, a user fee established by resolution will be imposed upon each
false alarm. The responsible party will be the agency, testing, or maintenance
company representative, or individual that initiated the alarm testing or
maintenance.
   3.   Evidence of Repair Accepted in Lieu of Fee. An alarm user may submit
evidence that a malfunctioning system has been repaired in lieu of paying a
user fee within 10 days of the date of notification of the fee. Evidence such
as a receipt from a licensed alarm business with a statement of repairs made to
the system is acceptable.
   4.   Review of False Alarm Fee. Any person may appeal the imposition of the
fee to the Council. A false alarm activation user, or their designee, shall
appeal in writing and such appeal shall be made to the Fire Chief within 10
days of the date of notification of the fee.
   5.   False Alarm Fees. A fee for each false alarm shall be paid to the Fire
Chief in the amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees as adopted by the
Council.
   6.   False Alarm Effective Date. False fire alarm activation fees will begin
at the time of Council resolution.
161.08   BOARD OF APPEALS.
   In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations
made by the Fire Official relative to the application and interpretation of
this Code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals, consisting
of five members. Board of Appeals members shall be chosen and appointed based
on diversity and building construction knowledge, all of whom shall be
residents of the City. One member of said Board of Appeals, at a minimum, shall
be a private citizen. The Fire Official or Building Official shall be an ex-
officio member without a vote and shall act as secretary of the Board of
Appeals. The appointment of members shall be for four-year terms, expiring on
December 31, with not more than three members’ terms expiring in any one year.
The Fire Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to Council
approval, and shall serve without compensation. The Fire Board of Appeals and
the Building Board of Appeals shall be one in the same. The Board of Appeals
shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations
and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the Fire or Building
Official with a duplicate copy to the appellant, and may recommend to the
Council such new legislation as is consistent therewith. The Board of Appeals
shall meet at will and when there are appeals or business on file for a
hearing. Nominal appeal fee to the Fire or Building Board of Appeals shall be
paid as set forth in Section 161.03. The appeal shall be valid for one year
from the date of the Board approval to the commencement of work and to the
completion of work undertaken pursuant to the approval.
161.09   VIOLATIONS.
   See Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 162
HOUSING CODE
162.01 Adoption of Housing Code         162.11 Owners Responsibilities
162.02 Amendments and Additions         162.12 Rental Certificate
                                        Transferability
162.03 Electrical                       162.13 Notices on Sale of Dwelling
162.04 Application of Other Codes       162.14 Complaint by Tenant and
                                        Retaliatory Actions
162.05 Required Owner or Agent          162.15 Rent Collections
Information
162.06 Rental Certificate Required      162.16 Secondary Storm Sewer
162.07 Applications for Certificate     162.17 Board of Appeals
162.08 Fees and Rental Certificates     162.18 Violations
162.09 Inspection Procedure              
162.10 Appointments for Inspections and  
Number of Certificates Issued
162.01   ADOPTION OF HOUSING CODE.
   This chapter shall consist of the “International Property Maintenance Code,
2018 Edition,” as published by the International Code Council which volume is
incorporated herein by this reference as fully as though set forth herein in
its entirety, excepting only such portions as are hereinafter stated to be
deleted therefrom; and such additional provisions as are hereinafter set forth.
This chapter and all provisions incorporated herein, by reference or otherwise,
shall be known as the “Housing Code,” may be cited as such, and will be
referred to herein as such and as “this Code.”
162.02   AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS.
   The remaining sections in this chapter are and represent amendments and
additions to the requirements contained in the International Property
Maintenance Code, and where their requirements conflict with those of the
International Property Maintenance Code, the requirements of this chapter shall
prevail. The sections listed below shall be construed in the context of the
enumerated chapter or chapters of the International Property Maintenance Code.
   1.   Section 101.1 Title.
   2.   Section 101.2 Scope.
   3.   Section 103 Department Established; Director Appointed.
   4.   Section 202 Definitions.
   5.   Section 302.4 Weeds.
   6.   Section 302.8 Motor Vehicles.
   7.   Section 303.2 Enclosures.
   8.   Section 304.3 Premises Identification.
   9.   Section 304.14 Insect Screens.
   10.   Section 307 Handrails and Guardrails.
   11.   Section 308.4 Rubbish and Garbage.
   12.   Section 601.3 CSST Bonding.
   13.   Section 602.3 Heat supply.
   14.   Section 602.4 Occupiable Workspaces.
   15.   Section 604.4 Cable Protection.
   16.   Section 605.2 Receptacles.
   17.   Section 605.3 Luminaries.
   18.   Section 702.4 Emergency Escape Openings.
   19.   Section 705.1 - Carbon Monoxide Alarms and Detection.
      1.   Title. Section 101 shall be amended by inserting: “The City of
Altoona” in place of “(Name of Jurisdiction)”
      2.   Scope. Section 101.2 shall be amended by deleting the section and
replacing with the following:
      101.2 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
residential rental properties, short term residential properties, and their
related accessory structures, now in existence or hereafter constructed,
rehabilitated, renovated, or converted to residential use within the corporate
limits. These provisions shall constitute minimum requirements and standards
for premises, structures, equipment, and facilities for light, ventilation,
space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety
from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the
responsibility of owners, operators, and occupants; the occupancy of existing
structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties.
      3.   Department Established; Director Appointed. Section 103 shall be
amended by deleting the section and replacing with the following:
         1.   There is hereby established in the City the Department of
Housing, which shall be under the direction and supervision of the Building and
Zoning Official. The Building Official shall be responsible to the Community
Development Director for the enforcement of the Housing Code, and such other
ordinances as shall assign the Building Official that function, and shall
perform such other duties as may be required by the Community Development
Director or by any classification plan adopted by the City.
         2.   The Building Official shall have the authority to appoint staff
members and delegate duties to those staff members. The Building Official shall
submit a report to the Community Development Director not less than once a
year, covering the work of the department during the preceding period and shall
incorporate in that report a summary of recommendations as to desirable
amendments to this Code.
         3.   The Building Official shall keep a permanent, accurate account of
all fees and other moneys collected and received under this Code, the names of
the persons upon whose account the same were paid, the date and amount thereof,
together with the location of the building or premises to which they relate.
         4.   The titles Housing Official, Code Official, Director of Building,
Building and Zoning Official, and Building Official, as used herein, are
synonymous and may be used interchangeably.
         5.   The Code Official, officer, or employee charged with the
enforcement of this Code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby
be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act
required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted
against any officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the
provisions of this Code shall be defended by the legal representative of the
jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The Code Official,
or any subordinate, shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit, or
proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this Code; and
any officer of the Department of Housing, acting in good faith and without
malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its
provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official
duties in connection therewith.
      4.   Definitions. Section 202 shall be amended by adding the following
definitions:
      “Accessory structure” means a structure detached from the principal
building or buildings on the same lot and customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal building or use that is permitted in each
particular zoning district. The structure is either occupied or devoted to a
use incidental to the principal use.
      “Construction Codes” means the International Building Code, International
Residential Code, International Existing Building Code, International
Mechanical Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Plumbing Code, and
National Electrical Code as adopted by the City Code.
      “Residential rental properties” means dwelling units, which are occupied
by one or more persons, none of whom are record titleholder. The temporary
absence of the record titleholder for a period of not more than six months, and
occupied by a family member during that period, shall not require a rental
certificate. Exceptions to the six months absence shall be made for military
service personnel on deployment.
      “Short Term Residential Rental Property” means dwelling or sleeping units
which are rented for a period of 31 days or less, and are not recognized as a
hotel or motel. The unit shall be owner occupied, and the owner shall be on-
site and present at the time of and for the duration of the rental period.
      “Structure” means a combination of materials to form a construction for
use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of land and water. That which is built or constructed. By this
definition, all buildings are structures, however, not all structures are
buildings.
      5.   Weeds. Section 302.4 shall be deleted and replaced with the
following:
         302.4 Weeds. Weeds and grass shall be regulated as defined in the City
Code.
      6.   Motor Vehicles. Section 302.8 shall be deleted and replaced with the
following:
         302.8 Motor Vehicles. Motor vehicles shall be regulated as defined in
the City Code.
      7.   Enclosures. Section 303.2 shall be deleted and replace with the
following:
         303.2 Enclosures. Swimming pool, spas, and hot tubs shall be regulated
as defined in the City Code.
      8.   Premises Identification. Section 304.3 shall be deleted and replaced
with the following:
         304.3 Premises Identification. Every new and existing principal
structure on a premise shall have the address number affixed thereto. The
numbers shall be six inches in height for structures built per the provisions
of the IBC with the exception that individual dwelling units in multi-family
structures are allowed numbers to be a height of three inches. The numbers for
buildings constructed per the provisions of the IRC shall be three inches in
height. The numbers shall be visible from the public right-of-way and of
contrasting color from the principal structure. Where required by the Fire Code
Official, address identification shall be provided in additional approved
locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a
private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a
monument, pole, or other approved sign or means shall be used to identify the
structure. Address numbers may be required to be increased in height and stroke
width at the direction of the Fire Code Official. Address identification shall
be maintained.
      9.   Insect screens. Section 304.14 shall be amended by inserting the
following dates: [from date] April 1 [to date] October 31, and the end of the
paragraph stating; “and every screen door used for insect control shall have a
self-closing device in good working condition.” shall be deleted.
      10.   Handrails and Guardrails. Section 307 shall be deleted and replaced
with the following:
         307.1 General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having
four or more risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair, said
handrail shall not be less than 30 inches high or more than 42 inches high
measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor
of the landing or walking surfaces. Handrails within a dwelling unit or serving
an individual dwelling unit of groups R-2 and R-3 or one- and two-family
dwellings shall be permitted to be interrupted at one location in a straight
stair when the rail terminates into a wall or ledge and is offset and
immediately continues. Every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch,
deck, ramp, or other walking surface, which is more than 30 inches above the
floor or grade below, shall have guards.
         307.2 Guards. Guards within a dwelling unit or serving an individual
dwelling unit of groups R-2 and R-3 or one- and two-family dwellings shall be
permitted to be not less than 36 inches high. All other guards shall not be
less than 42 inches in height. If guards are unenclosed, they shall have
intermediate rails or an ornamental pattern such that no object in excess of
four inches in diameter can pass through.
         307.3 Existing Structures. For buildings constructed prior to 1983,
handrails and guardrails, which are structurally sound, may provide the same
height and opening protection or restriction as was required when the structure
was originally constructed. If handrails or guardrails are replaced, they shall
be constructed in compliance with the currently adopted code. Guards shall not
be required where exempted by the adopted Building Code.
      11.   Rubbish and Garbage. Section 308 shall be amended by adding the
following section:
         308.4 Compliance. All rubbish, garbage, and junk shall be regulated as
defined in the City Code.
      12.   CSST Bonding. Section 601 shall be amended by adding the following
section:
         601.3 CSST Bonding. Corrugated Stainless Steel Tubing (CSST) that is
not listed with an arc-resistant jacket or coating system in accordance with
ANSI LC1/CSA 6.26. CSST gas piping systems and piping systems containing one or
more segments of CSST shall be electrically continuous and bonded to the
electrical service grounding electrode system or, where provided, the lightning
protection grounding electrode system.
      13.   Heat Supply. Section 602.3 shall be amended by inserting the
following dates: [from date] September 15 [to date] May 15.
      14.   Occupiable Workspaces. Section 602.4 shall hereby be amended by
inserting the following dates: [from date] September 15 [to date] May 15.
      15.   Cable Protection. Section 604 shall be amended by adding the
following section:
         604.4 Cable Protection. Type NM or SE cable installed on the wall of
an unfinished basement shall be permitted to be installed in a listed conduit
or tubing or shall be protected by hardboard, plywood, sheetrock, or similar to
extend no less than one foot on either side of the exposed cable to a height of
not less than seven feet high.
      16.   Receptacles. Section 605.2 shall hereby be amended by adding the
following to the end of the section: All receptacle outlets located above the
kitchen counter top surface, in bathrooms, in garages and exterior shall be
GFCI protected.
      17.   Luminairies. Section 605.3 shall be amended by adding the following
sections:
         605.3.1 Lampholders in Wet or Damp Locations. Luminaires installed in
wet or damp locations shall be installed so that water cannot enter or
accumulate in wiring compartments, lampholders, or other electrical parts. All
luminaires installed in wet locations shall be marked “SUITABLE FOR WET
LOCATIONS.” All luminaires installed in damp locations shall be marked
“SUITABLE FOR WET LOCATIONS” or “SUITABLE FOR DAMP LOCATIONS.”
         605.3.2 Bathtub and Shower Areas. Cord-connected luminaires, chain-,
cable-, or cord-suspended-luminaires, lighting track, pendants, and ceiling-
suspended (paddle) fans shall not have any parts located within a zone measured
three feet (914 mm) horizontally and eight feet (2,438 mm) vertically from the
top of a bathtub rim or shower stall threshold. This zone is all encompassing
and includes the space directly over the tub or shower. Luminaires within the
actual outside dimension of the bathtub or shower to a height of eight feet
(2,438 mm) vertically from the top of the bathtub rim or shower threshold shall
be marked for damp locations and where subject to shower spray, shall be marked
for wet locations.
      18.   Emergency Escape Openings. Section 702.4 shall be amended by adding
the following exceptions:
         Exceptions:
         1.   When the maximum height requirement cannot be met, a landing may
be provided for egress windows. Landings shall have a minimum width of 36
inches, a minimum depth of 12 inches, and a maximum height of 24 inches. The
landing shall be permanently affixed to the floor below or the wall under the
window it serves.
         2.   Construction existing prior to 1983 need not meet the standard
minimum clear opening sizes and sill height requirement, but shall have minimum
clear opening width and height dimensions of 18 inches. These windows shall
also have a minimum finished sill height of not more than 48 inches above the
floor.
      19.   Carbon Monoxide Alarms and Detection. Section 705.1 shall be
amended by adding the following language to the end of the section:
      “Carbon monoxide alarms located in single or multi-family rental units
shall be in conformance with Chapter 1092 of the Code of Iowa.”
162.03   ELECTRICAL.
   Any reference in the International Property Maintenance Code to the “ICC
Electrical Code” shall be replaced with “the National Electrical Code, as
adopted per Chapter 158 of this Code of Ordinances.”
162.04   APPLICATION OF OTHER CODES.
   1.   Repairs, additions, or alterations to a structure, or changes of
occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of
the International Building Code, International Residential Code, International
Existing Building Code, International Mechanical Code, International Fuel Gas
Code, International Plumbing Code, and the National Electrical Code. Nothing in
this Code shall be construed to cancel, modify, or set aside any provisions of
the Zoning Code and any other applicable ordinances as adopted by the City.
   2.   No other building or structure regulated by this Code shall be erected,
constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted,
or demolished unless a separate permit for each building or structure has first
been obtained from the Building Official in the manner and according to the
applicable conditions prescribed in the adopted construction codes.
   3.   Where work for which a permit is required by the adopted construction
codes is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said permit, there shall
be assessed an additional fee as set forth in the prevalent adopted codes. The
payment of such additional fee, if any, shall not relieve any persons from
fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work
nor from any other additional fees prescribed herein.
162.05   REQUIRED OWNER OR AGENT INFORMATION.
   Owners of residential rental properties in the City shall provide the
Department of Housing with their physical addresses and telephone numbers.
Owners of residential rental properties in the City who reside in a county
other than Polk County, or any county contiguous thereto, shall provide the
Department of Housing with the name, physical address, and telephone number of
an individual over the age of 18 who shall reside in County or any county
contiguous thereto, and who shall be designated as agent for receiving notice
and service of process. A new owner shall provide the information required in
this section within five days from the date of any change of ownership.
162.06   RENTAL CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   An owner who has submitted a rental housing application and fee to the
Department of Housing no later than December 31, 2009, shall be allowed to
continue to rent, lease, let, or otherwise allow occupancy of any dwelling,
dwelling unit, or rooming unit until such time said property has received a
valid rental certificate after which no owner shall rent, lease, let, or
otherwise allow the occupancy of any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit
without having a current valid rental certificate.
162.07   APPLICATIONS FOR CERTIFICATE.
   Every owner or owner’s agent that offers for rent a dwelling or portions
thereof within the City shall submit to the Department of Housing, on forms
provided, an application requesting an inspection and rental certificate. An
inspection and application fee in the amount set forth in Section 162.08 shall
accompany such application. Any owner who fails to register within the allotted
six-month time frame as indicated in Section 162.06 of the ordinance codified
in this chapter is subject to a double registration fee. The application shall
contain the following:
   1.   Owner or owner’s agent information as set forth in Section
162.05.
   2.   Legal description and address of the subject property.
   3.   The applicant’s interest held in the property; the record title holder,
if different from the applicant; the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or
other lien or encumbrance of record; and any contract buyer.
   4.   Any additional information as required by the Building Official.
   At least 30 days prior to initial occupancy as a rental property, the owner
or agent of a new rental property shall apply to the Department of Housing for
inspection of the structure and all units therein.
162.08   FEES AND RENTAL CERTIFICATES.
   1.   Fees.
      A.   A fee for each application and inspection for a rental certificate
shall be paid to the Building Official in the amount set forth in the Schedule
of Fees as adopted by the Council.
      B.   Re-inspections. A re-inspection fee shall be assessed for each
inspection conducted after the initial first re-inspection when such portion of
work which is identified is not complete or when corrections called for are not
made. Re-inspection fees may be assessed for failure to provide access on the
date and time for which inspection is requested. To obtain a re-inspection, the
applicant shall submit an application therefore in writing on a form furnished
for that purpose and pay the re-inspection fee as set forth in the Schedule of
Fees as adopted by the Council. In instances where re-inspection fees have been
assessed, no additional inspections will be performed until the required fees
have been paid.
      C.   Rental certificates that are not renewed within 30 days of
expiration shall be applicable to a re-registration fee. The re-registration
fee shall be in the sum equal to twice the amount of the registration fee.
      D.   No rental certificates shall be issued nor shall any rental
inspections be conducted to any person who owes the City any fees.
      E.   Other Inspections and Fees. See the schedule of fees as adopted by
Council.
   2.   When the requirements of Section 162.09 have been met, certificates
will be issued for the following periods:
      A.   Thirty-six months for single-family and duplex structures. A
certificate will not be issued for a duplex unless each duplex dwelling unit
complies with this Code.
      B.   Twenty-four months for multiple-family dwellings. A certificate will
not be issued unless all dwelling units within the same structure comply with
this Code.
   3.   Certificates shall be revoked if not renewed within 30 days from the
date of expiration.
162.09   INSPECTION PROCEDURE.
   Upon receipt of application and fees, the Building Official shall cause an
inspection of the premises, and if the same comply with the provisions of this
chapter, issue a rental certificate. If the premises for which an inspection is
required does not meet the provisions of this chapter then formal notification
to the applicant shall be provided in accordance with the procedures set forth
in Section 107 of the International Property Maintenance Code.
162.10   APPOINTMENTS FOR INSPECTIONS AND NUMBER OF CERTIFICATES ISSUED.
   1.   Appointments for inspections with the owner or agent of the building
shall be scheduled by the City. The owner or agent may request the appointment
to be rescheduled. However, the inspection shall be performed within 30 days of
the original date. An owner or agent shall be required to arrange for access to
all portions of the building. Failure to provide access to all portions of the
building shall prevent the issuance of a rental certificate and thus compliance
with the law. The owner or agent shall notify all tenants of the inspection in
accordance with Chapter 562A of the Code of Iowa.
   2.   Inspections shall not be:
      A.   Conducted with a minor as the sole representative of the owner.
      B.   Conducted against the will of the tenant without the building owner
or agent present.
      C.   Conducted without prior notice to the tenant as required by State
law.
      D.   Conducted of an occupied dwelling without the owner, agent, or
tenant of the dwelling or designated agent being present.
   3.   Should the person in control of the unit refuse admittance to the
Building Official and refuse to reschedule the certification inspection or re-
inspection, the Building Official may request that a court of competent
jurisdiction issue an administrative search warrant.
   4.   All areas of each dwelling covered by this Code shall be inspected.
Should access not be obtained to all areas, a re-inspection must be scheduled
and an additional fee may be charged for each subsequent re-inspection in
accordance with the established fee schedule.
162.11   OWNERS RESPONSIBILITIES.
   1.   It is the responsibility of the owner to make certain that their
residential rental property has a valid rental certificate. However, as a
courtesy, the department may send a renewal notification to the owner of an
existing valid rental certificate and the owner's authorized agent, if
applicable, at least 30 days in advance of expiration. The owner or agent shall
notify all tenants of the inspection in accordance with Chapter 562A of the
Code of Iowa.
   2.   The owner of a multifamily dwelling unit shall display a copy of the
rental certificate in a common hallway of each building or in the on-site
management office. The owner of a single-family and duplex dwelling must be
able to show a copy of the rental certificate upon request. Every rental
certificate shall be valid for the time specified in the regular inspection
schedule established in Section 162.08, unless sooner suspended or revoked. The
rental certificate issued under this chapter shall contain the following
information:
      A.   Address of structure.
      B.   Date of inspection.
      C.   Date of issuance.
      D.   Type of structure and number of dwelling units.
      E.   Expiration date.
      F.   Any additional information as deemed necessary by the Building
Official.
162.12   RENTAL CERTIFICATE TRANSFERABILITY.
   Sale or transfer of a rental property shall not invalidate a current rental
certificate issued in accordance with this chapter.
162.13   NOTICES ON SALE OF DWELLING.
   Every person holding a rental certificate as required in Section 162.06
shall give notice in writing to the Department of Housing within 30 days after
having sold, transferred, conveyed, or otherwise disposed ownership of,
interest in or control of the residential rental property. The notice shall
include information, in accordance with Section 162.05, of new said owner and
owners’ agent. The seller shall also provide the following information to the
new prospective owner prior to the closing date:
   1.   Current status of rental certificate.
   2.   Any outstanding notice regarding violations of this Code.
   3.   The existence of any court or administrative proceeding which pertains
to alleged violations of this Code.
162.14   COMPLAINT BY TENANT AND RETALIATORY ACTIONS.
   Unless there are significant health or safety issues, if the property has a
valid rental certificate, a tenant must first file a complaint with the owner
or owners’ agent. Forms for that purpose will be available in the office of the
Department of Housing.
   1.   An owner or agent shall have seven calendar days to address the
complaint. If the complaint is not remedied to the tenant’s satisfaction within
seven calendar days, the Department of Housing will schedule an inspection
appointment with the tenant and owner.
   2.   If an inspection was made at the written request of a tenant and the
residential rental property is found to be in non-compliance, due to an
omission of the owner, such owner shall be responsible for payment of the
inspection fee in accordance with Section 162.08. If an inspection was made at
the written request of a tenant and the residential rental property is found to
be in compliance or if such noncompliance is due to conduct on the part of the
tenant, the tenant shall be liable for the cost of such inspection in
accordance with Section 162.08.
   3.   No person shall maintain an action for eviction because the occupant
has reported a violation of this chapter or a related provision of the City
Code to the Department of Housing or other City officers or employees.
   4.   No person shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility
required under this chapter to be removed, shut off, or discontinued in
retaliation for a complaint.
162.15   RENT COLLECTIONS.
   Rent shall not be recoverable by the owner or lessee of any dwelling unit
which does not comply with the provisions of this chapter for any period of
occupancy which commences on or after the date that the City gives notice to
the owner and tenant of the provisions of this section. Rent shall not
thereupon be recoverable by the owner of such dwelling unit until the City
gives written notice to the owner and occupant that such dwelling unit has been
issued a valid inspection certificate as required by this chapter.
162.16   SECONDARY STORM SEWER.
   The provisions for secondary storm sewers shall comply with Section 157.08
for all structures with habitable or useable space below grade.
162.17   BOARD OF APPEALS.
   1.   In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or
determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and
interpretation of this Code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of
Appeals, consisting of five members. Board of Appeals members shall be chosen
and appointed based on diversity and building construction knowledge, all of
whom shall be residents of the City. One member of said Board of Appeals, at a
minimum, shall be a private citizen. The Building Official shall be an ex-
officio member without a vote and shall act as secretary of the Board of
Appeals. The appointment of members shall be for four-year terms, expiring on
December 31, with not more than three members’ terms expiring in any one year.
   2.   The Building Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject
to Council approval, and shall serve without compensation. The Board shall
adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and
shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the Building Official
with a duplicate copy to the appellant, and may recommend to the Council such
new legislation as is consistent therewith. The Board of Appeals shall meet at
will and when there are appeals or business on file for a hearing.
   3.   Nominal appeal fee to the Building Board of Appeals shall be paid as
set forth in Section 162.08.
162.18   VIOLATIONS.
   See Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 163
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
 
163.01 Title                  163.07 Building Maintenance
163.02 Purpose                163.08 Refuse and Inoperable Vehicles
163.03 Interpretation         163.09 Residing and Reconstruction
163.04 Abrogation and Greater 163.10 Violations
Restrictions
163.05 Definitions            163.11 Board of Appeals
163.06 Maintenance Standards   
163.01   TITLE.
   This chapter may be referred to as the “Property Maintenance Code,” and is
herein referred to as “this Code.”
163.02   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Code is to protect the public health, safety, welfare,
esthetics, and property values, by establishing minimum standards for
maintenance, appearance, condition, and occupancy, and for essential utilities,
facilities, and other physical components and conditions to make residential
premises fit for human habitation, and to make nonresidential premises fit for
use according to the purpose for which they were developed; by fixing certain
responsibilities and duties upon the owners and managers, and distinct and
separate responsibilities and duties upon the occupants; by authorizing and
establishing procedures for inspection of premises, and enforcement of this
Code; establishing penalties for violations; and providing for proper repair,
demolition, or vacation of premises which do not comply with this Code.
163.03   INTERPRETATION.
   The provisions of this Code shall be interpreted and applied as minimum
requirements, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power
granted by the Code of Iowa. Nothing in this Code shall be construed to
abrogate the federal or State constitutions, nor to grant powers to the City
that are otherwise reserved by and for federal and State government.
163.04   ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not the intent of this Code to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or
issued pursuant to law. Where two or more provisions apply, the higher standard
shall prevail.
163.05   DEFINITIONS.
   Words used in this Code shall have the same meaning as that defined by the
Zoning Code, unless otherwise defined by this Code.
   1.   “Abandoned building” means any building or portion of a building under
construction which has stood with an incomplete exterior shell for more than
one year, or any completed building or portion thereof which has stood
unoccupied for longer than six months, and which is unsecured or has Housing
Code or Building Code violations.
   2.   “Board of Appeals” means the Board established and appointed by the
City to hear appeals from the Building Code, referred to herein as “the Board.”
   3.   “Deterioration” means a state of conditions caused by a lack of
maintenance or excessive use, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling,
peeling paint, rusting, or other evidence of physical decay or neglect.
   4.   “Enforcement Officer” means the Director of Community Development.
   5.   “Exposed to public view” means any premises, or any part thereof, which
may be lawfully viewed by the public or from adjoining premises.
   6.   “Exterior” means yards and other open outdoor spaces on premises, and
the external surfaces of any structure.
   7.   “Extermination” means the control and elimination of insects, rodents,
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying,
fumigating, trapping, or by any other approved pest elimination method.
   8.   “Farm” means a tract of land having an area of 35 or more acres,
devoted to raising of crops zoned and maintained in accordance with the A-
1 Zoned District as stated in the Zoning Code.
   9.   “Infestation” means the presence of insects, vermin, or other pests on
the premise to the extent that they constitute a health hazard, are deemed by
an Enforcement Officer to be in threat of spreading to adjoining premises, or
are exposed to public view.
   10.   “Junk” means any discarded or salvaged material or fixture; obsolete
or inoperable machinery or vehicle, or parts thereof; or scrap metal. (See also
Chapter 51).
   11.   “Nuisance” means physical conditions that are dangerous or detrimental
to the health or safety of persons on or near the premises where the conditions
exist, or anything that is injurious to the senses or interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property. (See also Chapter 50).
   12.   “Owner” means any person who alone, jointly, or severally with others,
holds legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof.
   13.   “Premises” means a lot, plot, or parcel of land, easement, or public
way, including any structures thereon.
   14.   “Public authority” means any officer or any department or branch of
the City, County, or State charged with regulating health, fire, zoning, or
building regulations, or other activities concerning property in the City.
   15.   “Refuse” means any material that has lost its value for the original
purpose for which it was created or manufactured, or for its redesigned use,
whether putrescible or non-putrescible, combustible, or non-combustible, which
is not securely stored in a building or legal outdoor storage yard for prompt
disposal or resale, including, but not limited to, junk; paper or cardboard;
plastic; metals; glass; yard clippings, leaves, woody vegetative trimmings, and
other plant wastes which have not been properly composted; vegetable or animal
waste resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving,
or consumption of food; crockery; bedding, furniture, or appliances; offal;
rubbish; ashes or incinerator residue; construction debris; accumulation of
animal feces; dead animals; or wastes from commercial or industrial processes.
   16.   “Responsible party” means any person having possession, charge, care,
or control of real or personal property, which with or without the knowledge
and consent of the owner, including without limitation any one or more of the
following: owner, agent, property manager, contract purchaser, mortgagee, or
vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, or tenant, or any
other person, firm, or corporation exercising apparent control over a property.
   17.   “Vehicle” means any device designed to transport a person or property
by land, air, or water, and includes, without limitation, a motor vehicle,
automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggies, wagons, boats,
airplanes, campers, or any combination thereof, except bicycles.
   18.   “Vehicle, Inoperable” means any vehicle that is not licensed for the
current year as required by law or which exhibits any of the following
characteristics: Cannot legally travel on a public street due to broken,
damaged, or missing windshield or other glass customary to the vehicle, fender,
door, bumper, hood, wheel, steering wheel, or exhaust system; lacking an engine
or other means of power suitable to the design, one or more wheels, or other
structural parts which renders the vehicle incapable of both forward and
reverse movement in the manner for which is was designed; has become a habitat
for rats, mice, snakes, or any other vermin or insects; or constitutes a threat
to the public health and safety because of its defective or obsolete condition.
163.06   MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   1.   General. The exterior of every premises and structure shall be
maintained in good repair, to the end that the premises and each structure
thereon will be preserved; adjoining properties protected from blighting
influences; and safety and fire hazards eliminated.
   2.   Maintenance of Premises. Each and every premises shall be kept free of
all nuisances, health, safety, and fire hazards, unsanitary conditions, and
infestations. It shall be the duty of the responsible party to keep the
premises free of all said conditions and to promptly remove and abate same,
which include, but are not limited to, the following declared nuisances:
      A.   Weeds, grass, vines or brush allowed to grow to a height greater
than that which is listed in Chapter 52 or any accumulation of dead weeds,
grass, vines, or brush that are exposed to public view, on any non-farm
property which is not within the jurisdiction of the County Weed Commissioner.
This provision shall not apply to prairies, wetlands, or similar areas of
naturalized perennial vegetation, which are certified by an Enforcement Officer
to not constitute a nuisance.
      B.   Accumulation of refuse to the prejudice of others.
      C.   Any structure or piece of equipment which is in such a dilapidated
condition that it is unfit for human habitation or the use for which it was
constructed; kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the
health of people residing therein or in the vicinity thereof; any structure
determined as an unsafe structure or piece of equipment by the most-current
edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, as published by the
International Code Council or any building that is defined as abandoned or a
public nuisance by Chapter 657A of the Code of Iowa.
      D.   Any inoperable vehicle that is exposed to public view, unless
located on the premises of a lawfully operated junkyard or undergoing repairs
in an expeditious manner at a vehicle repair business.
      E.   Mud, dirt, gravel, or other debris or matter, whether organic or
inorganic, deposited upon public property in a quantity judged by an
Enforcement Officer to be a threat to public safety or to cause pollution,
obstruction, or siltation of drainage systems, or to violate solid waste
disposal regulations.
      F.   Failure to establish a permanent cover of perennial grasses or
ornamental ground cover on any property as soon as practical after any
construction, and to thereafter maintain same in such condition as to
substantially bind the surface of the soil and prevent erosion, whether by
sheet or gullying, or by wind or water. Exceptions shall be permitted for
densely shaded areas, landscape beds, and gardens, provided that vegetable
gardens and agricultural crops shall not be placed in the front yard of a non-
farm property, unless it can be demonstrated that no other viable location
exists on the premises because of topography, natural vegetation, or similar
circumstances out of the resident’s control.
      G.   Any nuisance as defined herein or described as such by Chapter 657
of the Code of Iowa.
      H.   Any alteration, modification, or obstruction which prevents,
obstructs, or impedes the normal flow of runoff from adjacent lands, or any
alteration or modification which substantially concentrates or increases the
flow of water onto an adjoining premises to the extent of damaging or
saturating such premises.
      I.   Conditions which are conducive to the harborage or breeding of
vermin.
      J.   Facilities for the storage or processing of sewage, such as privies,
vaults, sewers, private drains, septic tanks, cesspools, and drain fields,
which have failed or do not function properly, as may be evidenced by overflow,
leakage, seepage, or emanation of odors, or which do not comply with the County
Department of Health regulations, as applicable. Septic tanks, cisterns, and
cesspools that are no longer in use shall be removed, or emptied and filled,
with clean dirt or sand.
      K.   Vehicles parked on the lawn or other unpaved surface in the yard
exposed to public view.
      L.   Fences or retaining walls that are not structurally sound or which
are deteriorating, as may be evidenced by leaning or loose elements.
      M.   Dead or diseased trees or other woody vegetation which may lead to
the spread of the disease to other specimens or pose a threat to safety or
buildings; major parts thereof, such as a limb, which may be dead or broken or
otherwise pose a threat to safety or buildings on adjoining premises; any
vegetation located on private property which overhangs and is less than 14 feet
above the traveled portion of any public street, or less than eight feet
vertically, or which protrudes into any public sidewalk.
      N.   Loose, overhanging objects or accumulations of ice or snow, which by
reason of location above ground level constitute a danger of falling on persons
in the vicinity thereof.
163.07   BUILDING MAINTENANCE.
   Every building shall be maintained to be weather and water tight, and free
from excessively peeling paint or other conditions suggestive of deterioration
or inadequate maintenance. Exterior surfaces shall not have any holes or broken
glass; loose, cracked, or damaged shingles or siding; or other defects in the
exterior finish which admit rain, cold air, dampness, rodents, insects, or
vermin. Basements, cellars, and crawl spaces shall be free of standing water
and hazards. All wood, including floorboards, subfloors, joists, bridging, roof
rafters, and sheathing, and all other wood in any interior or exterior floor,
wall, roof, or other part of the structure, shall be maintained to be free of
cracks affecting structural integrity, termite damage, infestation, or rot. Any
and all damaged or deteriorating materials shall be replaced. If infestation
exists in any basement, cellar, or crawl space, such infestation shall be
remedied in accordance with industry standards.
163.08   REFUSE AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   Inoperable vehicles shall be stored within a fully enclosed building or
other location not exposed to public view, or shall be removed from the
premises. All refuse shall be contained in suitable collection containers; kept
free from infestation; and shall be removed weekly.
163.09   RESIDING AND RECONSTRUCTION.
   Materials and practices used in reconstruction and residing shall be of
standard quality and appearance commensurate with the character of other
properties in the vicinity of the premises. Their appearance, as judged under
prevailing appraisal practices and standards, shall not depreciate the value of
adjoining premises or the neighborhood.
163.10   VIOLATIONS.
   1.   Enforcement. The creation or maintenance of a violation of this chapter
is prohibited and shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation is
permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense.
      A.   All inspections, enforcement actions, and hearings on violations,
unless expressly stated to the contrary, shall be under the direction and
supervision of an Enforcement Officer, who may appoint or designate other
public officers or employees to perform duties as may be necessary to enforce
this Code, including inspections and holding of hearings. The Enforcement
Officers are hereby authorized to abate such violations in accordance with the
procedures of this Code and to serve notice to abate same, whether upon the
owner or other responsible party for a premise(s) upon which a violation is
being maintained, or upon the person or persons causing or maintaining the
violation.
      B.   If a violation is found to exist on an owner-occupied premises and
the owners demonstrate that the cost of remedying such violation would exceed
the household’s annual disposable income and thereby cause a financial
hardship, enforcement shall be held in temporary abeyance until a means of
financing or assistance can be identified.
      C.   The objective of this Code being the abatement of violations,
persons violating this Code shall be allowed a reasonable amount of time to
voluntarily remedy the violation before action to assess costs or penalties for
a violation is undertaken. Consideration will be given to evidence of a good
faith effort to correct the violation; whether an imminent health or safety
hazard exists; whether the person has previously been notified of or charged
with violations of a similar nature; and other factors.
      D.   Violations which are not voluntarily remedied may be abated by an
administrative abatement process; the municipal infraction process; by court
proceedings; or by City abatement and assessment of costs therefor against the
responsible party, at the discretion of the City.
      E.   It is further provided by this Code that if the City judges that an
emergency exists which creates a dangerous and imminent health or safety hazard
to persons, property, or the general public which requires immediate action,
the City may order such action as may be necessary to meet the emergency. Any
orders issued pursuant to this paragraph shall be effective immediately or in
the time and manner prescribed in the order itself.
      F.   The Enforcement Officer may, but shall not be required to, give
notice to abate prior to issuance of a civil citation for a repeat offense
involving the same property and occurring within one year of a prior violation
and notice to abate.
   2.   Notice. When service of a notice to abate is required, the following
methods of service shall be deemed adequate:
      A.   By personal service upon the owner or other responsible party of the
property upon which the nuisance exists, or upon the person or persons causing
or maintaining the violation; or
      B.   Sending the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested to
the last known address; or
      C.   Publishing the notice once a week for two consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City; or
      D.   By posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the property or
building deemed a nuisance.
   3.   Appeal. Any person affected by any notice to abate a violation of this
Code may request a hearing on the matter before the Board of Appeals, provided
that a written appeal shall be filed with the Enforcement Officer within 10
days after the notice to abate was served. The appeal shall be filed on a form
provided by the City for that purpose, and shall state the particular section
of the chapter or interpretation thereof being appealed, and a brief statement
of the grounds upon which such appeal is taken. Failure to file a timely appeal
as prescribed herein shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing, and
the notice shall become final. The Board of Appeals determination and order
shall be appealable to the County District Court by writ of certiorari. Such
appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date of the Board of Appeals
decision. The Board of Appeals order shall not be carried out until the time
for filing the writ of certiorari has expired.
   4.   Abatement Remedies and Penalties.
      A.   In the event that the violation is not abated as ordered and within
the time specified, the City may abate such violation by any of the following
means:
         (1)   By undertaking such abatement and assessing the costs therefore
against the property.
         (2)   By issuance of a civil citation charging the owner or
responsible party with a municipal infraction.
      B.   Abatement may include, but is not limited to, repair, removal,
cleaning, extermination, cutting, mowing, grading, sewer repairs, draining,
securing, barricading or fencing, demolition of dangerous or abandoned
structures, or portions thereof, and elimination of nuisances. Abatement costs
may include the cost of removing or eliminating the violation; the cost of
investigation, such as title searches, inspection, and testing; the cost of
notification; filing costs; and other related administrative costs. Inoperable
or obsolete vehicles which have been impounded may be sold in accordance with
state law. If an inoperable or obsolete vehicle is not sold or if the proceeds
of such sale or redemption are not sufficient to pay the costs of abatement,
storage, and sale of said inoperable or obsolete vehicle, such cost or the
balance of such cost may be assessed against the premises in the same manner as
a property tax.
      C.   Before the assessment of any charges for work done or caused to be
done by the City, the owner of the property proposed to be assessed shall be
provided notice and opportunity for hearing before the Council. The notice
shall set forth the amount proposed to be assessed, and include a statement of
the time, place, and date of hearing.
      D.   The court may order any one or more of the following:
         (1)   Place a judgment against the person or property of defendant for
the costs of abatement.
         (2)   Order abatement of the violation in any manner.
         (3)   Assess costs of abatement against the premises.
   5.   Emergency Abatement Procedure. If an Enforcement Officer determines
that a violation exists and constitutes an imminent, clear, and compelling
danger to health, safety, or welfare of persons or property, the Enforcement
Officer is authorized to abate the violation or have it abated without prior
notice and opportunity for hearing. The costs of such action may be assessed
against the premises. However, prior to such assessment, the City shall give a
property owner notice and the opportunity for a hearing before the Council in
accordance with Section 50.07. An appeal shall not stay the effect of a notice
or order under the emergency provisions of this chapter, unless so ordered by
the Board of Appeals.
163.11   BOARD OF APPEALS.
   1.   Authority. The Board is hereby empowered to hold hearings on appeals
from the regulations of this Code.
   2.   Procedure. Upon receipt of a timely-filed appeal, the Enforcement
Officer shall set a time and place for the Board to hear such appeal and shall
publish notice thereof. The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be
recorded either electronically or manually. All parties shall be afforded an
opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument. If the appellant
fails to appear at such hearing, the Board of Appeals may proceed with the
hearing and made a decision in the absence of the appellant.
   3.   Decision of the Board of Appeals. No hearing shall be valid unless a
majority of the Board of Appeals is present, and no appeal shall be granted
unless reached by a majority of all members of the Board of Appeals. The Board
of Appeals shall render a decision based upon the record, at the conclusion of
the hearing or within a reasonable time thereafter. The Board of Appeals may
affirm, modify, or reverse any action, interpretation, notice, or order which
has been issued in connection with the enforcement of this Code. Following the
decision of the Board of Appeals, all parties shall be notified of the decision
personally or by general mail service delivered to the address provided by the
party. Any party to the hearing, including the City, may seek judicial review
by filing a petition in the County District Court within 30 days after the
issuance of the decision by the Board.
CHAPTER 165
ZONING CODE - GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
165.01 Interpretation of Standards 165.04 Rules for Interpretation of District
                                   Boundaries
165.02 Definitions                 165.05 Application of District Regulations
165.03 Establishment of Districts;  
Official Zoning Map
165.01   INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of Chapter 165
through 171 (herein referred to as the Zoning Code) shall be held to be minimum
requirements. Where the Zoning Code imposes a greater restriction than is
imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules or regulations
or ordinances, the provisions of the Zoning Code shall control. In addition,
the International Building Code, International Residential Code, International
Existing Building Code, the International Fire Code, the National Electrical
Code, the International Mechanical Code, and the International Plumbing Code
shall apply.
165.02   DEFINITIONS.
   The purpose of this section is to define certain words and terms used within
and throughout the Zoning Code. All definitions are constant, unless otherwise
specified.
   1.   Words beginning with “A.”
      A.   “Abut” means to physically touch or border upon, or to share a
common property line (i.e., adjoining or contiguous). See also “adjoining lot
or land.”
      B.   “Accessory building” - See “building, accessory.”
      C.   “Accessory structure” means a structure detached from a principal
building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal building or use that is permitted in each particular zoning district.
(Listed as “accessory uses.”) See also “building, accessory.”
      D.   “Adjacent land” - See “adjoining lot or land.”
      E.   “Adjoining lot or land” means a lot or parcel of land which shares
all or part of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land. See also
“abut.”
      F.   “Alley” means a service way providing a secondary means of public
access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
      G.   “Alter” or “alteration” means any change or rearrangement in the
supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns,
beams, girders or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors or
windows, or any enlargement to or diminution of a building or structure,
whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure
from one location to another.
      H.   “Amusement and recreation services” means establishments engaged in
providing amusement or entertainment for a fee or admission charge and include
such activities as dance halls; studios; theatrical producers; bands;
orchestras; and other musical entertainment; bowling alleys and billiard and
pool establishments; commercial sports such as arenas, rings, racetracks,
public golf courses, and coin-operated devices; amusement parks; membership
sports and recreational clubs; amusement and bathing beaches; swimming pools;
riding academies; carnival operations; expositions; game parlors and animal
shows.
      I.   “Amusement park” means an outdoor facility, which may include
structures and buildings, where there are various devices for entertainment,
including rides, booths for the conduct of games or sale of items, and
buildings for shows and entertainment.
      J.   “Annexation” means the incorporation of a land area into an existing
community with a resulting change in the boundaries of that community.
      K.   “Apartment unit” means one or more rooms with private bath and
kitchen facilities, comprising an independent self-contained dwelling unit in a
building containing more than two dwelling units. See also “dwelling unit.”
      L.   “Attached dwelling” - See “dwelling, attached.”
   2.   Words beginning with “B.”
      A.   “Basement” means a space having one-half or more of its floor-to-
ceiling height above the average level of the adjoining ground and with a
floor-to-ceiling height of not less than six and one-half feet. A basement
shall be counted as a story if the vertical distance from the average adjoining
grade to its ceiling is over five feet. See also “cellar.”
      B.   “Bed and breakfast” (also known as a short term residential rental
property rented for 31 days or less) means a dwelling used to provide transient
lodging accommodations for compensation. The dwelling shall be the owner-
operators primary residence and is occupied by the owner at the time of and
during the duration of the customer’s stay. All parking generated by the use
shall be accommodated on the property and off the street. The dwelling must
meet the requirements of Chapter 162 Housing Code.
      C.   “Bi-attached houses” - See “dwelling, semi-detached.”
      D.   “Board of Adjustment” means an officially constituted body whose
principal duties are to grant variances from the strict application of the
Zoning Code and to grant special exceptions and conditional uses as provided by
law.
      E.   “Building” means any structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual,
animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind or nature. See also
“structure.”
      F.   “Building, accessory” means a subordinate structure on the same lot
as the principal or main building or use occupied or devoted to a use
incidental to the principal use. Among other things, the following are
considered to be accessory buildings: shed, gazebo, garage, shelter,
greenhouse. See also “accessory structure.”
      G.   “Building height” means the vertical distance above a reference
datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck
line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a
pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the
following, whichever yields a greater height of building:
         (1)   The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground
surface within a five-foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the
building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than 10 feet above
lowest grade.
         (2)   An elevation 10 feet higher than the lowest grade when the
sidewalk or ground surface is more than 10 feet above lowest grade.
         (3)   The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum
height of any segment of the building.
      H.   “Bulk stations” means distributing stations, commonly known as bulk
or tank stations, used for the storage and distribution of flammable liquids or
liquefied petroleum products, where the aggregate capacity of all storage tanks
is more than 12,000 gallons.
      I.   “Bulk storage” means the storage of chemicals, petroleum products,
and other materials in above-ground containers for subsequent resale to
distributors or retail dealers or outlets.
   3.   Words beginning with “C.”
      A.   “Carport” means a roofed structure providing space for the parking
or storage of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than three sides. See
also “garage.”
      B.   “Cellar” means a space with less than one-half of its floor-to-
ceiling height above the average finished grade of the adjoining ground or with
floor-to-ceiling height of less than six and one-half feet. A cellar is not
included in computing the number of stories for the purpose of height
measurement. See also “basement.”
      C.   “Child” means a person under 18 years of age.
      D.   “Childcare center” means a facility providing child daycare for
seven or more children, except when the facility is registered as a group
daycare home.
      E.   “Child daycare” means the care, supervision, or guidance of a child
by a person other than the parent, guardian, relative, or custodian for periods
of two hours or more and less than 24 hours per day per child on a regular
basis in a place other than the child’s home, but does not have:
         (1)   An instructional program administered by a public or nonpublic
school system approved by the Department of Public Instruction or the State
Board of Regents;
         (2)   A church-related instructional program of not more than one day
per week;
         (3)   Short-term classes held between school terms.
      F.   “Child daycare facility” means a childcare center, group daycare
home, or registered family daycare home. See also “family daycare home” and
“group daycare home.”
      G.   “Cluster” means a development design technique that concentrates
buildings in specific areas on the site to allow the remaining land to be used
for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally
sensitive features. See
Figure A.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2729.png]
Figure A
      H.   “Cluster subdivision” means a form of development for single-family
residential subdivisions that permits a reduction in lot area and bulk
requirements, provided there is no increase in the number of lots permitted
under a conventional subdivision and the resultant land area is devoted to open
space. See
Figure A.
   See also “planned unit development.”
      I.   “Common open space” - See “open space, common.”
      J.   “Conditional use” means a use permitted in a particular zoning
district only upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use
as specified in the Zoning Code and authorized by the Board of Adjustment. A
conditional use may only be granted for those uses listed under the “permitted
conditional uses” sections of the Zoning Code.
      K.   “Conditional Use Permit” means a permit issued by the authorized
board stating that the conditional use meets all conditions set forth in local
ordinances. See also “special use permit.”
      L.   “Condominium” means a building or group of buildings in which units
are owned individually, and the structure, common areas, and facilities are
owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
      M.   “Conversion” means a change in the use of land or a structure.
   4.   Words beginning with “D.”
      A.   “Data center” means real and personal property consisting of
buildings or structures specifically designed or modified to house networked
computers and data and transaction processing equipment and related
infrastructure support equipment, including, without limitation, power and
cooling equipment, used primarily to provide, as a service to persons other
than the company operating the data center, data and transaction processing
services, outsource information technology services and computer equipment
colocation services, or, used primarily to provide, to a single user, including
the user’s affiliates, customers, lessees, vendors, and other persons
authorized by the user, data, and transaction processing services.
      B.   “Deck” means any flat-floored, roofless structure, at or above the
finished grade, adjoining or directly adjacent to a building. See also
“terrace.”
      C.   “Developmental disability” or “developmentally disabled” means a
disability of a person which has continued or can be expected to continue
indefinitely and which is one of the following:
         (1)   Attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, or
autism;
         (2)   Attributable to any other condition found to be closely related
to mental retardation because the condition results in impairment of general
intellectual functioning or adaptive behavior similar to that of mentally
retarded persons or required treatment and services similar to those required
for the persons;
         (3)   Attributable to dyslexia resulting from a disability described
in either Subparagraph 1 or 2;
         (4)   Attributable to a mental or nervous disorder.
      D.   “Dish antenna” means any parabolic, spiracle, or other shaped
structure used for, or intended to be used for, reception of satellite
transmissions.
      E.   “District” means a geographic area within the City within which
certain zoning or development regulations apply. See also “zone.”
      F.   “Duplex” - See “dwelling, two-family.”
      G.   “Dwelling” means a structure or portion thereof which is used
exclusively for human habitation.
      H.   “Dwelling, attached” means a one-family dwelling attached to two or
more one-family dwellings by common vertical walls.
      I.   “Dwelling, detached” means a dwelling which is not attached to any
other dwelling by any means. See
Figure B. See also “dwelling, single-family detached.”
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2731.png]
Figure B
      J.   “Dwelling, multi-family” means a dwelling containing more than two
dwelling units.
      K.   “Dwelling, semi-detached” means a one-family dwelling attached to
one other one-family dwelling by a common vertical wall, and each dwelling
located on a separate lot. See
Figure C.† 9   
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2733.png]
Figure C
      L.   “Dwelling, single-family” means a building containing one dwelling
unit.
      M.   “Dwelling, single-family detached” means a dwelling which is
designed for and occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open
space or yards and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means.
See also “dwelling, detached.”
      N.   “Dwelling, townhouse” means a one-family dwelling in a row of at
least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to
the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated
from any other unit by one or more walls. See
Figure D.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2735.png]
Figure D
      O.   “Dwelling, triplex” means a dwelling containing three dwelling
units, each of which has direct access to the outside or to a common hall.
      P.   “Dwelling, two-family (duplex)” means a structure on a single lot
containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the
other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced
ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a
common stairwell or hall exterior to both dwelling units. See
Figure E.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2737.png]
Figure E
      Q.   “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms designed, occupied, or
intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and
sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of
a single-family maintaining a household. See also “apartment unit.”
   5.   Words beginning with “E.”
      A.   “Easement” means a grant of one or more of the property rights by
the property owner to or for the use of the public, a corporation, or another
person or entity.
   6.   Words beginning with “F.”
      A.   “Family” means one or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit and
living as a single household unit.
      B.   “Family daycare home” means a facility which provides child daycare
to less than seven children. See also “child daycare facility” and “group
daycare home.”
      C.   “Family home” means a community-based residential home which is
licensed as a residential care facility under Chapter 135C of the Code of Iowa,
or as a child foster care facility under Chapter 237 of the Code of Iowa, to
provide room and board, personal care, habitation services, and supervision in
a family environment exclusively for not more than eight developmentally
disabled persons and not meaning an individual foster family home licensed
under Chapter 237 of the Code of Iowa. See also “boarding house” and “group
quarters.”
      D.   “Fences” means artificially constructed barriers of any material or
combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
      E.   “Finished grade” - See “grade, finished.”
      F.   “Fish farm” means an area devoted to the cultivation of fish and
other seafood for commercial sale.
      G.   “Flag lot” means a lot not fronting on or abutting a public road and
where access to the public road is by a narrow, private right-of-way.
      H.   “Frontage” means that side of a lot abutting on a street; the front
lot line.
   7.   Words beginning with “G.”
      A.   “Garage” means a deck, building, or structure, or part thereof, used
or intended to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles. See also
“carport.”
      B.   “Garage, private residential” means a structure which is accessory
to a residential building and which is used for the parking and storage of
vehicles owned and operated by the residents thereof and which is not a
separate commercial enterprise available to the general public.
      C.   “Garage, public” means a building, or portion thereof, other than a
private customer and employee garage or private residential garage, used
primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles and available to the general
public.
      D.   “Garage, repair” means any building, premises, and land in which or
upon which a business, service, or industry involving the maintenance,
servicing, repair, or painting of vehicles is conducted or rendered.
      E.   “Gazebo” means an accessory building or structure having a roof
supported by columns with or without opaque or translucent materials
constructed between said columns and intended for use as a shelter or housing
of recreational activities associated with residential uses.
      F.   “General public” means any and all individuals without any prior
qualifications.
      G.   “Grade” means the degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.
See
Figure F.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2739.png]
Figure F
      H.   “Grade, finished” means the final elevation of the ground surface
after development.
      I.   “Grade, natural” means the elevation of the ground surface in its
natural state, before man-made alterations.
      J.   “Grading” means any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling of
earth or land, including the land in its cut or filled condition.
      K.   “Greenbelt” means an open area which may be cultivated or maintained
in a natural state surrounding development or used as a buffer between land
uses or to mark the edge of an urban or developed area.
      L.   “Greenhouse” means a building or accessory structure constructed
chiefly of glass or other translucent material, which is devoted to the
protection or cultivation of flowers or other tender plants.
      M.   “Group daycare home” means a facility providing child daycare for
more than six, but less than 12 children, with no more than six children at one
time being less than six years of age. See also “child daycare home” and
“family daycare home.”
      N.   “Group living quarters” - See “group quarters.”
      O.   “Group quarters” means a dwelling that houses unrelated individuals.
“Group quarters” includes fraternities, sororities, army barracks, dormitories,
and the like. See also “boarding house” and “family home.”
   8.   Words beginning with “H.”
      A.   “Home occupation” means any activity carried out for gain by a
resident, conducted in the resident’s dwelling unit.
      B.   “Hospital” means a place which is devoted primarily to the
maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment, or care
over a period exceeding 24 hours of two or more nonrelated individuals
suffering from illness, injury, or deformity, or a place which is devoted
primarily to the rendering over a period exceeding 24 hours of obstetrical or
other medical or nursing care for two or more nonrelated individuals, or any
institution, place, building, or agency in which any accommodation is primarily
maintained, furnished, or offered for the care over a period exceeding 24 hours
of two or more nonrelated aged or infirm persons requiring chronic or
convalescent care.
      C.   “Hotel” means a facility offering transient lodging accommodations
to the general public and may provide additional services such as restaurants,
meeting rooms, and recreation facilities. See also “motel.”
   9.   Words beginning with “I.”
      A.   “Industrial park” means a large tract of land that has been planned,
developed, and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual
industrial uses, with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs,
aesthetics, and compatibility.
      B.   “Intermediate care facility” means any institution, place, building,
or agency providing for a period exceeding 24 consecutive hours’ accommodation,
board, and nursing services, the need for which is certified by a physician to
three or more individuals, not related to the administrator or owner thereof
within the third degree of consanguinity, who, by reason of illness, disease,
or physical or mental infirmity, require nursing services which can be provided
only under the direction of a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse.
See also “residential care facility.”
   10.   Words beginning with “J.”
      A.   “Junk” means any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris,
whether or not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing,
salvage, storage, baling, disposal, or other use or disposition.
      B.   “Junk yard” means any area, lot, land, parcel, building, or
structure or part thereof used for the storage, collection, processing,
purchase, sale, or abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap,
or discarded goods, materials, machinery of two or more unregistered,
inoperable motor vehicles or other type of junk.
   11.   Words beginning with “K.”
   12.   Words beginning with “L.”
      A.   “Living space” means that part of the building which is enclosed and
supported upon the main foundation system of the structure excluding garages
and cellars.
      B.   “Lot” means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established
by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed
or built upon as a unit.
      C.   “Lot area” means the total area within the lot lines of a lot,
excluding any streets rights-of-way.
      D.   “Lot, corner” means a lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or
more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street
forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. See
Figure G.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2741.png]
Figure G
      E.   “Lot coverage” means that portion of the lot that is covered by
buildings and structures.
      F.   “Lot depth” means the distance measured from the front lot line to
the rear lot line. See
Figure G.
      G.   “Lot, double frontage” - See “lot, through.”
      H.   “Lot, flag” means a lot not fronting on or abutting a public road
and where access to the public road is by narrow, private right-of-way. See
Figure G.
      I.   “Lot frontage” means the length of the front lot line measured at
the street right-of-way line.
      J.   “Lot, interior” means a lot other than a corner lot. See
Figure G.
      K.   “Lot line” means a line of record bounding a lot which divides one
lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public
space. See
Figure G.
      L.   “Lot, reverse frontage” means a through lot which is not accessible
from one of the parallel or nonintersecting streets upon which it fronts.
      M.   “Lot, through” means a lot which fronts upon two parallel streets,
or which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of
the lot. See
Figure G.
      N.   “Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lines of
a lot measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to
the front lot line at the minimum required building setback line. See
Figure G.
   13.   Words beginning with “M.”
      A.   “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure, which is
manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403 and is
to be used as a place for human habitation, but which is not constructed or
equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other
than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site, and which does not have
permanently attached to its body or frame any wheel or axles. See also “modular
home.”
      B.   “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed, or reconstructed
as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or
more persons; but shall also include any such vehicle with motive power not
registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa.
      C.   “Mobile home park” means a site with required improvements and
utilities for the long-term parking of mobile homes which may include services
and facilities for the residents.
      D.   “Model home” means a representative home used solely for the purpose
of showing the design, structure, and appearance of units within a specific
development, and used for on-site sales of homes or lots by realtors within the
same approved preliminary subdivision plat as said model home or within a
specific final plat if so restricted by the Community Development Director. A
model home shall not operate out of a temporary structure or trailer, only a
permanent structure designed for residential habitation.
      E.   “Modular home” means a factory-built structure which is manufactured
or constructed to be used as a place for human habitation, but which is not
constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to
be attached or towed behind a motor vehicle, and which does not have
permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. See also “mobile
home.”
      F.   “Motel” means an establishment providing transient accommodations
containing six or more rooms with at least 25 percent of all rooms having
direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main
lobby of the building. See also “hotel” and “lodging house.”
   14.   Words beginning with “N.”
      A.   “Noise” means any undesired audible sound.
      B.   “Noise pollution” means continuous or episodic excessive noise in
the human environment. Noise pollution is defined in terms of a maximum decibel
level by frequency range.
      C.   “Nonconforming use” means a use or activity that does not conform to
the present requirements of the zoning district.
      D.   “Nursing home” means any institution or facility, or part thereof,
defined as such for licensing purposes under State law or pursuant to the rules
and regulations for nursing homes established by the State Department of Public
Health, whether proprietary or nonprofit, including, but not limited to,
nursing homes owned or administered by the federal or State government or an
agency or political subdivision thereof.
   15.   Words beginning with “O.”
      A.   “Open space” means any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or
private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants
of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
      B.   “Open space, common” means land within or related to a development,
not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and
intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development
and may include such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary
and appropriate.
      C.   “Open space, green” means an open space area not occupied by any
structures or impervious surfaces.
      D.   “Ordinance” means a municipally adopted law or regulation.
   16.   Words beginning with “P.”
      A.   “Parapet” means the extension of the main walls of a building above
the roof level.
      B.   “Parking area” means any public or private land area designed and
used for parking motor vehicles including parking lots, garages, private
driveways, and legally designated areas of public streets.
      C.   “Parking space” means a space for the parking of a motor vehicle
within a public or private parking area.
      D.   “Patio” - See “terrace.”
      E.   “Permitted use” means any use allowed in a zoning district and
subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
      F.   “Planned Unit Development” or “PUD” means an area of a minimum
contiguous size, as specified by ordinance, to be planned and developed as a
single entity containing one or more residential clusters or planned unit
residential developments and one or more public, quasi-public, commercial, or
industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential uses to residential
uses as shall be specified. See also “cluster development.”
      G.   “Porch” means a roofed open area, which may be glazed or screened,
usually attached to or part of and with direct access to or from a building.  †
10    
      H.   “Preschool” means a child daycare facility which provides to
children ages three through five for periods of time not exceeding three hours
per day, programs designed to help the children to develop intellectual skills,
social skills, and motor skills and to extend their interest and understanding
of the world about them.
      I.   “Principal building” means a building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is located.
      J.   “Principal use” means the primary or predominant use of any lot.
   17.   Words beginning with “Q.”
   18.   Words beginning with “R.”
      A.   “Recreation facility” means a place designed and equipped for the
conduct of sports, leisure time activities, and other customary and usual
recreational activities.
      B.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicular type unit primarily
designed as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, or travel use,
which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another
vehicle. The basic entities are: camping trailer, motor home, travel trailer,
and truck camper. Dwelling in these units is permissible in recreational
vehicle parks and campgrounds. Dwelling is also allowed in “R” zoning districts
for a period not to exceed 14 consecutive days or 30 days in a calendar year.
(See also Chapter 145).
      C.   “Relative” means a person who by marriage, blood, or adoption is a
parent, grandparent, brother, sister, stepfather, stepmother, stepbrother,
stepsister, uncle, aunt, first cousin, or guardian.
      D.   “Residence” means a home, abode, or place where an individual is
actually living at a specific point in time.
      E.   “Residential” means regularly used by its occupants as a permanent
place of abode, which is made one’s home as opposed to one’s place of business
and which has housekeeping and cooking facilities for its occupants only.
      F.   “Residential care facility” means any institution, place, or
building, or agency providing for a period exceeding 24 consecutive hours
accommodation, board, personal assistance, and other essential daily living
activities to three or more individuals, not related to the administrator or
owner thereof, within the third degree of consanguinity, who by reason of
illness, disease, or physical or mental infirmity are unable to sufficiently or
properly care for themselves, but who do not require the services of a
registered or licensed practical nurse except on an emergency basis. See also
“intermediate care facility.”
      G.   “Resort” means a facility for transient guests where the primary
attraction is general recreational features or activities.
      H.   “Right-of-way” means
         (1)   A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced
dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied or
occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, gas or
oil pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, and other similar uses; or
         (2)   Generally, the right of one to pass over the property of
another.
      I.   “Residential swimming pool” means a water filled enclosure accessory
to a one- or two-family dwelling or townhouse structure, that is portable or
permanently constructed, intended for swimming or recreational bathing that has
the ability to contain water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth. This
includes in-ground, aboveground, and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and
spas.
      J.   “Residential wading pools” means a water filled enclosure accessory
to a one- or two- family dwelling or townhouse structure, that is portable or
permanently constructed, intended for swimming or recreational bathing that
does not have the ability to contain water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in
depth. This includes in-ground, aboveground, and on-ground swimming pools, hot
tubs, and spas.
      K.   “Right-of-way lines” means the lines that form the boundaries of a
right-of-way. See
Figure H.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2743.png]
Figure H
      L.   “Row houses” - See “dwelling, townhouse.”
   19.   Words beginning with “S.”
      A.   “Screening” means to lessen the transmission from one lot to another
of noise, dust, and glare; to lessen visual pollution by providing an
impression of separation of spaces or entirely shielding one land use from; or
establishing a sense of privacy from visual or physical intrusion. Typical
screening methods include fences, berms, or a living screen of deciduous or
coniferous type vegetation.
      B.   “Semi-attached houses” - See “dwelling, single-family detached.”
      C.   “Setback” means the distance between the street right-of-way line
and the front line of a building or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered
steps. † 11  See
Figure H.
      D.   “Shipping container” means a standardized, reusable, metal container
originally designed for the transportation of goods and materials by ship, rail
or truck. For the purposes of this Code, a shipping container shall be
considered a portable storage container when placed on a property, and shall
not be deemed an accessory building or structure under Section
167.04. Shipping containers include but are not limited to Conex boxes, cargo
containers, intermodal containers, and other similar containers, whether new or
repurposed for storage or other use and are prohibited unless specifically
permitted by this Code.
      E.   “Solar access” means a property owner’s right to have the sunlight
shine on his land.
      F.   “Solar energy system” means a complete design or assembly consisting
of a solar energy collector, an energy storage facility (where used), and
components for the distribution of transformed energy.
      G.   “Solar skyspace” means the space between a solar energy collector
and the sun, which must be free of obstructions that shade the collector to an
extent which precludes its cost-effective operation.
      H.   “Special use permit” means a permit issued by the proper
governmental authority which must be acquired before a special exception use
can be constructed. See also “Conditional Use Permit.”
      I.   “Story” means that portion of a building included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or if there be
no floor above it then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it and including those basements used for the principal use.
      J.   “Story half” means a space under a sloping roof which has the line
of intersection of the roof and wall face not more than three feet above the
floor level, and in which space the possible floor area with head room of five
feet or less occupies at least 40 percent of the total floor area of the story
directly beneath.
      K.   “Street” means any vehicular way which
         (1)   Is an existing State, County, or municipal roadway, or
         (2)   Is shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law, or
         (3)   Is approved by other official action, or
         (4)   Is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
County Recording officer prior to the appointment of a planning board and the
grant to such board of the power to review plats and includes the land between
the street lines, whether improved or unimproved.
      L.   “Street line” - See “right-of-way lines.”
      M.   “Structural alterations” means any change in either the supporting
members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, and girders, or in
the dimensions or configurations of the roof or exterior walls.
      N.   “Structure” means a combination of materials to form a construction
for use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of land or water. See also “building.” † 12    
      O.   “Swimming pools” means a water filled enclosure that is portable or
permanently constructed, intended for swimming or recreational bathing that has
the ability to contain water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth, and is not
defined as a residential swimming pool. This includes in-ground, aboveground,
and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas.
(Subsection 19 – Ord. 10-20-2025_#01_(678) – Nov. 25 Supp.)
   20.   Words beginning with “T.”
      A.   “Terrace” means a level, landscaped, or surfaced area directly
adjacent to a building at or within three feet of the finished grade and not
covered by a permanent roof. See also “deck.”
      B.   “Townhouse” - See “dwelling, townhouse.”
      C.   “TV dish” - See “dish antenna.”
   21.   Words beginning with “U.”
   22.   Words beginning with “V.”
   23.   Words beginning with “W.”
      A.   “Wading pool” means a water filled enclosure that is portable or
permanently constructed, intended for swimming or recreational bathing that
does not have the ability to contain water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in
depth. This includes in-ground, aboveground, and on-ground swimming pools, hot
tubs, and spas”
      B.   “Wall” means
         (1)   The vertical exterior surface of a building; or
         (2)   Vertical interior surfaces which divide a building space into
rooms.
      C.   “Wind (Generator) Energy Conversion System (WECS)” means any device
that converts wind power to another form of energy, such as electricity or
heat, including wind chargers, wind turbines, and windmills.
   24.   Words beginning with “X.”
   25.   Words beginning with “Y.”
      A.   “Yard” means an open space that lies between the principal or
accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be
specifically provided in the Zoning Code. See
Figure I.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2745.png]
Figure I
      B.   “Yard depth” means the shortest distance between a lot line and a
yard line.
      C.   “Yard, front” means a space extending the full width of the lot
between any building and the front lot line, and measured perpendicular to the
building at the closest point to the front lot line. Such front yard is
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be permitted
elsewhere in the Zoning Code. See
Figure I.
      D.   “Yard line” means a line drawn parallel to a lot line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the required yard. See
Figure I.
      E.   “Yard, rear” means space extending across the full width of the lot
between the principal building and the rear lot line, and measured
perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. Such
rear yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may
be permitted elsewhere in the Zoning Code. See
Figure I and
Figure M for corner lots.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2749.png]
Figure M
      F.   “Yard, required” means the open space between a lot line and the
buildable area within which no structure shall be located except as provided in
the Zoning Code.
      G.   “Yard, side” means a space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard between the principal building and the side lot line measured
perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal
building. Such side yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward
except as may be permitted elsewhere in the Zoning Code. See
Figure I.
   26.   Words beginning with “Z.”
      A.   “Zero lot line” means the location of a building on a lot in such a
manner that one or more of the building’s sides rest directly on a lot line.
See
Figure J.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2747.png]
Figure J
      B.   “Zone” means a specifically delineated area or district in a
municipality within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the
use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings. See also “district.”
      C.   “Zoning” means the dividing of a municipality into districts and the
establishment of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing, and size of
land and buildings.
      D.   “Zoning district” - See “zone.”
      E.   “Zoning map” means the map or maps, which are a part of the Zoning
Code, and delineate the boundaries of zone districts.
 
Notes
   †  EDITOR’S NOTE: The semi-detached dwelling is part of a two-family structure with
9  the dwelling units side by side as opposed to one on top of the other. The semi-
   detached dwelling also could be the end unit of a townhouse row or a duplex.
   †  EDITOR’S NOTE: A porch becomes a room when the space enclosed is heated or air
10 conditioned and, if glazed, when the percentage of window area to wall area is less
   than 50 percent.
11 †  EDITOR’S NOTE: Where the setback is narrow, as in an urban area, even steps may
   be required to be behind the setback.
12 †  EDITOR’S NOTE: By this definition, all buildings are structures, however, not
   all structures are buildings.
165.03   ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS; OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   For the purpose of this Zoning Code, the following districts are hereby
established within the City as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which,
together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this Zoning Code:
   1.   A-1   Agricultural District.
   2.   R-1   Single-family Residential District.
   3.   R-2   One-family and Two-family Residential District.
   4.   R-3   Multi-family Residential District.
   5.   R-4   Mobile Home Park Residential District.
   6.   R-5   Planned Unit Development.
   7.   C-1   Residential-Commercial District.
   8.   C-2   General Commercial District.
   9.   C-3   Planned Commercial District.
   10.   C-4   Village Commercial District.
   11.   C-5   Office Park.
   12.   C-6   Commercial Entertainment or Recreational District.
   13.   C-7   Regional Commercial District.
   14.   M-1   Limited Industrial District.
   15.   M-1A    Commercial And Limited Light Industrial Business Park.
   16.   M-2   Heavy Industrial District.
   17.   Floodway (Overlay) District (FW) - those areas identified as Floodway
on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map.
   18.   Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District (FF) - those areas identified as
Zone AE on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map but excluding those areas
identified as Floodway.
   19.   General Floodplain (Overlay) District (GF) - those areas identified as
Zone A on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map.
   The Official Zoning Map shall bear the signature of the Mayor, attested by
the Clerk, under the certification that it is the Official Zoning Map. If, in
accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code and Chapter 414 of the Code
of Iowa, changes are made in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on
the Official Zoning Map, copies of such changes shall be filed with the
Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the
Council. The Council may, from time to time, adopt a new Official Zoning Map
which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map, in the event that the
Official Zoning Map becomes damaged or destroyed; or for purposes of clarity
due to a number of boundary changes, or to correct drafting errors or
omissions; provided, however, any such adoption shall not have the effect of
amending the original zoning ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof. The
Official Zoning Map, together with amending ordinances, shall be the final
authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings,
and other structures in the City.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official Zoning Map
described in Section
165.03 of this chapter and have not been codified herein, but have been
specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. DATE ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. DATE ADOPTED
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official Zoning Map
described in Section
165.03 of this chapter and have not been codified herein, but have been
specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO.        DATE ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO.        DATE ADOPTED
7-1-85.2             7-1-85       7-99 #1 (35)         8-16-99
7-88 #1 (31)         7-5-88       8-99 #1 (37)         8-16-99
8-88 #1 (33)         8-15-88      11-99 #2 (39)        11-15-99
2-89 #2 (46)         2-6-89       5-00 #1 (46)         5-15-00
6-90 #2 (72)         6-18-90      6-00 #1 (48)         7-10-00
6-90 #3 (73)         6-18-90      6-00 #2 (49)         6-5-00
8-90 #2 (75)         8-20-90      6-00 #3 (50)         6-19-00
11-90 #1 (79)        12-10-90     8-00 #1 (53)         8-21-00
2-91 #2 (86)         2-18-91      10-00 #1 (57)        10-16-00
2-92 #2 (104)        2-17-92      10-00 #2 (58)        10-16-00
3-92 #1 (105)        3-16-92      10-00 #5 (61)        10-16-00
6-92 #1 (108)        6-22-92      11-00 #5 (66)        1-8-01
6-92 #2 (109)        6-22-92      11-00 #6 (67)        11-20-00
9-92 #1 (113)        10-5-92      12-00 #4 (71)        1-8-01
3-93 #2 (117)        3-15-93      12-00 #5 (72)        1-8-01
4-94 #1 (129)        4-4-94       01-01 #1 (73)        1-22-01
4-94 #2 (130)        4-4-94       4-01 #2 (80)         4-2-01
4-94 #4 (132)        4-18-94      4-01 #4 (82)         5-7-01
4-94 #5 (133)        4-18-94      5-01 #1 (83)         6-4-01
5-94 #2 (135)        5-16-94      8-01 #2 (87)         9-17-01
7-94 #2 (138)        7-11-94      8-01 #4 (89)         9-4-01
7-94 #3 (139)        7-11-94      10-01 #1 (90)        10-15-01
7-94 #4 (140)        7-11-94      04-02 #1 (101)       4-1-02
5-95 #1 (151)        5-22-95      02-02 #1 (97)        12-16-02
5-95 #3 (153)        5-30-95      8-19-02 #1 (105)     9-16-02
11-95 #3 (161)       11-20-95     4-7-03#1 (126)       4-21-03
3-96 #1 (167)        3-18-96      5-19-03#1 (128)      6-2-03
3-96 #2 (168)        3-18-96      6-2-03#2 (130)       6-2-03
3-96 #3 (169)        3-18-96      7-21-03#1 (133)      8-18-03
5-96 #1 (173)        6-3-96       7-21-03#2 (134)      8-18-03
8-96 #1 (178)        9-3-96       7-21-03#3 (135)      8-18-03
8-96 #2 (179)        8-5-96       9-15-03#1 (136)      9-15-03
8-96 #3 (180)        9-3-96       10-20-03#1 (140)     10-20-03
12-96 #1 (3)         12-2-96      1-5-04#1 (144)       1-5-04
2-97 #1 (6)          2-17-97      4-19-04#1 (147)      4-19-04
7-97 #1 (13)         7-7-97       7-19-04#3 (157)      8-16-04
11-97 #2 (21)        11-17-97     9-20-04#1 (159)      10-4-04
11-98 #4 (26)        11-16-98     11-15-04#1 (166)     11-15-04
12-98 #1 (28)        12-15-98     3-21-05#1 (172)      3-21-05
3-99 #1 (30)         4-5-99       3-21-05#2 (173)      3-21-05
4-18-05#1 (174)      5-2-05       05-18-2015 #2 (408)  7-20-15
6-6-05#1 (176)       6-20-05      11-16-2015 #01 (416) 12-21-15
6-20-05#1 (177)      6-20-05      01-04-2016 #1 (420)  1-4-16
6-20-05#5 (181)      6-20-05      3-21-2016 #01 (422)  3-21-16
8-15-05#1 (184)      9-6-05       03-21-2016 #02 (423) 3-21-16
8-15-05#2 (185)      9-6-05       06-20-2016 #01 (432) 7-5-16
8-15-05#4 (187)      9-6-05       07-05-2016 #01 (434) 7-5-16
9-6-05#1 (190)       9-6-05       08-15-2016 #01 (435) 8-15-16
10-17-05#1 (193)     10-17-05     09-19-2016 #01 (437) 10-3-16
10-17-05#2 (194)     10-17-05     10-17-2016 #01 (442) 10-17-16
2-20-06#1 (206)      2-20-06      11-21-2016 #02 (444) 11-21-16
2-6-06#2 (207)       3-6-06       12-19-2016 #01 (445) 3-20-17
2-20-06#1 (208)      3-6-06       04-17-2017 #01 (451) 4-17-17
2-20-06#2 (209)      3-6-06       04-17-2017 #02 (452) 4-17-17
2-20-06#3 (210)      2-20-06      04-17-2017 #03 (453) 4-17-17
5-15-06#1 (215)      5-15-06      07-03-2017 #1 (459)  7-3-17
6-19-06#3 (219)      6-19-06      07-17-2017 #01 (460) 7-17-17
8-21-06#3 (228)      8-21-06      07-17-2017 #02 (461) 7-17-17
9-18-06#1 (231)      10-2-06      10-02-2017 #01 (471) 10-2-17
10-16-06#2 (234)     10-16-06     10-16-2017 #02 (473) 10-16-17
11-20-06#1 (236)     11-20-06     11-20-2017 #03 (477) 11-20-17
2-19-07#1 (246)      3-19-07      11-20-2017 #04 (478) 11-20-17
7-16-07#2 (253)      7-16-07      12-18-2017 #01 (481) 1-2-18
7-16-07#1 (252)      8-6-07       03-19-2018 #01 (483) 3-19-18
8-20-07#1 (256)      9-4-07       05-21-2018 #01 (489) 5-21-18
9-17-07#1 (265)      9-17-07      05-21-2018 #02 (490) 5-21-18
1-21-08#1 (273)      1-21-08      07-16-2018 #02 (498) 7-16-18
8-4-08#1 (283)       8-4-08       07-16-2018 #03 (499) 7-16-18
10-20-08#1 (290)     10-20-08     01-21-2019 #01 (511) 1-21-19
12-15-2008 #3(296)   12-15-08     02-18-2019 #01 (512) 2-18-19
2-2-2009 #1(299)     2-16-09      02-18-2019 #02 (513) 2-18-19
11-2-2009 #1(314)    11-2-09      03-18-2019 #01 (514) 3-18-19
09-20-2010 #1(326)   10-4-10      03-18-2019 #03 (516) 3-18-19
09-06-2011 #1(340)   9-6-11       04-15-2019 #01 (518) 3-18-19
06-18-2012 #5 (348)  6-18-12      05-06-2019 #01 (521) 5-6-19
07-16-2012 #1 (350)  7-16-12      06-17-2019 #01 (524) 6-17-19
09-04-2012 #1 (355)  9-17-12      01-20-2020 #01 (540) 1-20-20
09-04-2012 #2 (356)  9-17-12      03-16-2020 #03 (543) 3-16-20
8-19-2013 #01 (379)  9-16-13      03-16-2020 #04 (544) 3-16-20
8-19-2013 #02 (380)  9-16-13      03-16-2020 #05 (545) 3-16-20
9-16-2013 #01 (382)  9-16-13      04-20-2020 #02 (547) 4-20-20
9-16-2013 #02 (383)  9-16-13      03-16-2020 #02 (542) 6-15-20
02-17-2014 #01 (387) 2-17-14      06-15-2020 #01 (548) 6-15-20
08-18-2014 #03 (397) 8-18-14      0-02-2020 #01 (550)  8-3-20
12-15-2014 #01 (400) 12-15-14     09-21-2020 #01 (551) 9-21-20
10-19-2020 #01 (554) 10-19-20
10-19-2020 #02 (555) 10-19-20
10-19-2020 #03 (556) 10-19-20
10-19-2020 #04 (557) 10-19-20
11-16-2020 #02 (563) 11-16-20
12-21-2020 #01 (566) 12-21-20
01-18-2021 #01 (567) 1-18-21
06-21-2021 #02 (575) 6-21-21
06-21-2021 #03 (576) 6-21-21
07-19-2021 #01 (577) 7-19-21
07-19-2021 #02 (578) 7-19-21
07-19-2021 #03 (579) 7-19-21
07-19-2021 #04 (580) 7-19-21
08-16-2021 #02 (582) 8-16-21
10-18-2021 #02 (593) 10-18-21
12-20-2021 #01 (595) 12-20-21
03-21-2022 #01 (600) 3-21-22
04-18-2022 #605      4-18-22
9-19-2022 #01 (611)  9-19-22
9-19-2022 #02 (612)  9-19-22
10-17-2022 #01 (615) 10-17-22
12-05-2022 #01 (618) 12-5-22
01-16-2023 #01 (621) 1-16-23
03-20-2023 #01 (623) 4-3-23
03-20-2023 #02 (624) 3-20-23
03-20-2023 #03 (625) 3-20-23
06-19-2023 #02 (637) 6-19-23
07-17-23 #01 (638)   7-17-23
08-21-2023 #01 (639) 8-21-23
10-16-2023 #01 (643) 10-16-23
10-16-2023 #02 (644) 10-16-23
02-19-2024 #02 (655) 2-19-24
04-15-2024 #01 (656) 5-6-24
04-15-2024 #02 (657) 4-15-24
06-17-2024 #01 (659) 6-17-24
10-21-2024 #02 (665) 10-21-24
03-17-2025 #01 (671) 3-17-25
04-21-2025 #01 (672) 4-21-25
06-02-2025_#01_(674) 6-2-25
09-15-2025_#01_(676) 9-15-25
 
165.04   RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   In cases where the exact location of a district boundary is not clear as
shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall be used in
determining location of said boundary:
   1.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
   2.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines.
   3.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be
construed as following City limits.
   4.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main tracks.
   5.   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be
construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as
approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or
other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
   6.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in Subsections 1 through 5 above shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the
scale of the map.
   7.   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances
not covered by Subsections 1 through 6 above, the Board of Adjustment shall
interpret the district boundaries.
165.05   APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set by this Zoning Code within each district shall be
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land, throughout each district, but the regulations in one
district may differ from those in other districts. In addition:
   1.   No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied,
and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, or structurally altered unless in conformity with
all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is
located. It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure
regulated by this Zoning Code, or cause the same to be done without first
obtaining a separate permit for each building or structure from the
Administrative Official. (See Section
169.03).
   2.   No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
      A.   To exceed the height;
      B.   To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
      C.   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or
      D.   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or
other open spaces than herein required, or in any other manner contrary to the
provisions of this Zoning Code.
   3.   No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or
loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose
of complying with the Zoning Code shall be included as part of a yard, open
space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other
building.
   4.   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance
codified herein shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum
requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date
of the Zoning Code shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by
said Zoning Code.
CHAPTER 166
ZONING CODE - NONCONFORMING USES
 
166.01 Intent                          166.05 Repairs and Maintenance
166.02 Nonconforming Lots of Record    166.06 Special Exemptions
166.03 Nonconforming Use of Land       166.07 Registration of Nonconforming
                                       Uses
166.04 Nonconforming Use of Structures  
166.01   INTENT.
   Within the districts established by the Zoning Code or amendments that may
later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures
which were lawful before the Zoning Code was adopted or amended, but which
would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of the Zoning
Code or future amendment. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these
nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their
survival. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall
not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, or be used as grounds for adding
other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. To avoid
undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require change in
the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or
amendment of the Zoning Code and upon which actual building construction has
been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include
the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a
permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing
building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such
demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that
such work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building
involved.
166.02   NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of the Zoning Code, a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any
single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the
Zoning Code. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the
requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the
district.
166.03   NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND.
   Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the Zoning Code,
lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of
the Zoning Code as enacted or amended, such use may be continued subject to the
following provisions:
   1.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of the
adoption or amendment of the Zoning Code.
   2.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved, in whole or in part, to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of the adoption or amendment of the Zoning Code.
   3.   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than six months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform
to the regulations specified by the Zoning Code for the district in which such
land is located.
166.04   NONCONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURES.
   If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and premises in combination,
exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the Zoning Code that
would not be allowed in the district under the terms of the Zoning Code, the
lawful use may be continued subject to the following provisions:
   1.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by the Zoning Code
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, or structurally altered except in changing the use
of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
   2.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any of the parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of
adoption or amendment of the Zoning Code, but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside such building.
   3.   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to a more restricted
classification.
   4.   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six months, the structure, or
structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in
conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   5.   Where nonconforming use status applied to a structure and premises in
combination, removal, or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
166.05   REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   On any building devoted, in whole or in part, to any nonconforming use, work
may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing
walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, provided that the cubic content of the
building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of the Zoning Code
shall not be increased. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof
declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public
safety, upon order of such official.
166.06   SPECIAL EXEMPTIONS.
   Any use for which a special exception is permitted as provided in Section
167.07 shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further
action, be deemed a conforming use in such district.
166.07   REGISTRATION OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   No nonconforming structure or use shall be maintained, renewed, changed or
extended until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued
pursuant to Section
169.04 hereof.
CHAPTER 167
ZONING CODE - GENERAL REGULATIONS
167.01 Visibility at Intersections in   167.10 Development and Maintenance of
Residential District                    Parking Areas
167.02 Fences, Walls, and Hedges        167.11 TV Dish Antennas
167.03 Street Frontage Required         167.12 Freestanding Communication
                                        Towers
167.04 Accessory Buildings              167.13 Building Supported Communication
                                        Towers
167.05 Corner Lots; Side Yards          167.14 Small Wind Energy Conversion
                                        Systems
167.06 Building Lines on Approved Plats 167.15 Home Occupations
167.07 Exceptions, Modifications, and   167.16 Temporary Use Permits
Interpretations
167.08 Off-Street Loading Spaces        167.17 Swimming Pools and Hot Tubs
Required
167.09 Off-Street Parking Area Required  
167.01   VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   On a corner lot in a residential district, nothing shall be erected, placed,
planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision
between a height of two and one-half and 10 feet above the centerline grades of
the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner
lots and a line joining points along said street lines 25 feet from the point
of intersection of right-of-way lines.
167.02   FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES.
   Notwithstanding other provisions of the Zoning Code, fences, walls, and
hedges may be permitted in any required yard, or along the edge of any yard,
provided that:
   1.   In a residential district, no fence, wall, or hedge in any front yard
shall exceed 48 inches in height; and no fence, wall, or hedge shall exceed 48
inches in height along the street side yard of a corner lot with the following
exception: for corner lots that abut the major streets outlined in Subsection
7, a six-foot tall fence may be constructed in the front yard along the street
side of the major street if setback 15 feet from the property line of the major
street. Said six-foot-tall fence shall not extend any closer to the minor
street than the rear wall line of the home. The landscaping requirements of
Subsection 6 apply to the area between the fence and right-of-way along the
major street or highway for the length of the fence. (See
Figure N).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2753.png]
 
Figure N
   2.   No fence or wall in any rear yard shall exceed six feet in height in a
residential district, or 10 feet in height in a commercial or industrial
district unless otherwise approved by the Board of Adjustment.
   3.   Every fence hereafter erected shall be done in the following manner:
posts, supporting rails, and other such supporting elements when located shall
be on and face the property on which the fence is located.
   4.   No person shall place, construct, or maintain, or cause to be placed,
constructed, or maintained any electric fence.
   5.   No person shall place, construct, or maintain, or cause to be placed,
constructed, or maintained any barbed wire or similar type material fence on
residential zoned property.
   6.   On “through lots,” also known as “double frontage lots,” within a
subdivision or plat of survey recorded after February 7, 2003 (but not corner
lots), no fence shall be closer than 15 feet from the major street or highway
right-of-way. The yard between the major street or highway right-of-way and the
15-foot setback shall include one hardwood deciduous tree (Ash: “Autumn
Purple,” Green [seedless]; Maple: Crimson King, Norway, Sugar; Oak: Burr,
English, Northern Red) and three shrubs for every 25 linear feet, or major
fraction thereof, of lot width along the major street or highway. The trees
shall be at least one and one-half inch caliper and the shrubs shall be at
least 18 to 24 inches in height. The property owner is required to maintain the
plantings and replace them as necessary with approved materials from the list
above. Whenever practical, existing trees and shrubs should be preserved and
incorporated into the overall design. This section does not replace the
screening requirements for commercial and industrial properties. (See
Figure L).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2751.png]
Figure L
   7.   The following streets are considered major streets or highways used in
correlation with Subsections 1 and 6:
      A.   Adventureland Drive NE and NW.
      B.   8 th Street SE and SW.
      C.   Edwin W. Skinner Parkway SE and SW.
      D.   36 th Street SE and SW.
      E.   1 st Avenue North and South.
      F.   14 th Avenue SE and NE.
      G.   17 th Avenue SW and NW.
      H.   34 th Avenue SW and NW.
167.03   STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED.
   No lot shall contain any building used, in whole or in part, for residence
purposes unless such lot abuts for at least 40 feet on at least one street, and
there shall be not more than one single-family dwelling for such frontage. The
Council may also allow, at its own discretion, the construction of a building
to be used, in whole or in part, for residence purposes on a lot which has an
exclusive unobstructed private easement of access at least 20 feet wide to a
street, for one single-family dwelling, if the Council determines that such
construction is not in conflict with the intent of the Zoning Code.
167.04   ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   No accessory building shall be erected in any required court or in any yard
other than a rear yard (for corner lots, see
Figure M). Only one detached garage and one yard shed shall be allowed in a
rear yard (this is not to be construed as not allowing gazebos, greenhouses,
shelters, and “children’s playhouses,” as long as the total aggregate building
area does not exceed 30 percent of the rear yard). In A-1, R-1, R-2, and R-
4 Zoned Districts and for one- and two-family dwelling lots in an R-3 and R-
5 Zoning District, accessory garages shall be no larger than 1,000 square feet
and yard sheds shall not be larger than 160 square feet. Accessory buildings
shall be distant at least three feet from alley lines, or lot lines of
adjoining lots. However, in no case shall any eave or overhang extend closer
than 12 inches to a rear or side yard line and no accessory structures, except
those permitted pursuant to the provisions of Section 167.02 shall be permitted
to be constructed, placed, located, or built in or on any easement. On “through
lots,” also known as “double frontage lots,” within a subdivision plat or plat
of survey recorded after February 7, 2003 (but not corner lots), no accessory
buildings shall be closer than 18 feet from the major street or highway right-
of-way. (See
Figure L). Accessory buildings must be erected separately from and six feet
distant (into rear yard) from the principle structure except in R-4 Districts
where accessory building shall be no closer than four feet to the principal
structure providing they meet all applicable fire and building codes as
adopted. Any building so connected to the principal building shall be
considered a part of the principal building and must meet the space
requirements thereof. Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 30 percent
of the rear yard and shall not exceed 14 feet in height in any R District. This
regulation shall not be interpreted to prohibit the construction of a minimum
440-square foot, detached garage on a rear yard. No accessory building shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the principal building has
been actually commenced, and no accessory building shall be used unless the
principal building on the lot is also being used. Accessory buildings exceeding
160 square feet in area shall be constructed of materials that are the same or
similar to the principal building. Accessory buildings may be connected to the
principal building by a breezeway with setbacks for the principal structure. An
addition may be made to an existing principal structure which extends past the
front of an existing legally established detached accessory structure, provided
no connection or attachment is made between the existing detached structure and
the addition unless setbacks can be met as required for a principal structure.
Exception: Those properties located along the east side of 26 th Avenue SW
between 10 th Street SW and 17 th Street SW shall be allowed to place accessory
structures in the easements (recorded Bk 5099 Page 518 and Book 2246 page 409)
located in the rear yard, if all of the following conditions are being met:
   1.   The property owner has obtained an encroachment agreement from the
owner of the easement, and
   2.   The property owner provides a copy of the encroachment agreement to the
City, and
   3.   The accessory structure is located as indicated on the encroachment
agreement, and
   4.   The accessory structure meets all of the other provisions listed within
this section
167.05   CORNER LOTS; SIDE YARDS.
   For corner lots platted after the effective date of the Zoning Code, the
street side yard shall be equal in width to the setback regulations of the lots
to the rear having frontage on the intersecting street.
167.06   BUILDING LINES ON APPROVED PLATS.
   Whenever the plat of a land subdivision approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and on record in the office of the County Recorder shows a building
line along any frontage for the purpose of creating a front yard or side street
yard line, the building line thus shown shall apply along such frontage in
place of any other yard line required in the Zoning Code unless specific yard
requirements in the Zoning Code require a greater setback.
167.07   EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS, AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   1.   Structures Permitted Above Height Limit. No permit will be issued for
any structure above height limits, except as specifically approved by the Board
of Adjustment.
   2.   Double Frontage Lots. Buildings on through lots and extending through
from street to street shall provide the required front yard on both streets.
   3.   Rear and Side Yards Adjacent to Alleys - How Computed. In computing the
depth of a rear yard or the width of a side yard where the rear or side yard
opens on an alley, one-half of the alley width may be included as a portion of
the rear or side yard as the case may be.
   4.   Other Exceptions to Yard Requirements. Every part of a required yard
shall be open to the sky unobstructed with any building or structure, except
for a permitted accessory building in a rear yard, and except for the
following:
      A.   Projections not exceeding 24 inches except for:
         (1)   Yards with a five-foot setback requirement no projection shall
be permitted except for a roof overhang not exceeding 24 inches. This includes
decks and stairs that are not considered accessory structures.
      B.   Decks that serve the principle structure; not constructed per the
requirements for accessory structures and that have a walking surface over 36
inches above grade shall be permitted to encroach into the rear yard a maximum
distance of 10 feet on properties with a platted rear yard of 25 feet or more.
      C.   Structures built over a deck or patio in a rear yard that have at
least 65 percent of the space between roof joists that are clear, open, and
unobstructed to the sky may encroach a maximum distance of 10 feet on
properties with a platted rear yard of 25 feet or more. If openings are less
than 65 percent of the space between roof joists, then the structure shall be
considered a roof and must meet the setback distances of that for the primary
structure. A membrane covered frame structure, meaning a building or structure
that is non-pressurized, movable, and not permanently secured and is comprised
of a rigid framework to support a tensioned membrane which provides a weather
barrier, is exempt from this requirement.
Notwithstanding the provisions noted above, no part of any structure or
building shall encroach into a recorded easement.
   5.   Billboards. No permit will be issued for any billboards except as
specifically approved by the Council.
   6.   Front Yard Exceptions. In areas where some lots are developed with a
front yard that is less than the minimum required for the district by this
Zoning Code or where some lots have been developed with a front yard greater
than required by the Zoning Code, the following rule shall apply. Any new
building or addition in front thereof shall not be closer to the street right-
of-way than the average of the front yard of the first building on each side
within a distance of 200 feet measured from building to building, except as
follows:
      A.   Buildings located entirely on the rear half of a lot shall not be
counted.
      B.   No residential dwelling shall be required to have a front yard
greater than 50 feet.
      C.   If no building exists on one side of a lot within 200 feet of the
lot in question, the minimum front yard shall be the same as the building on
the other side.
   7.   Zoning of Annexed Areas. Any land annexed to the City after the
effective date of the Zoning Code shall be zoned A-1 Agricultural until the
Planning and Zoning Commission and Council shall have studied the area and
adopted a final zoning plan for the area. Said final zoning plan shall be
adopted within six months of the date of annexation.
   8.   Single-family, Semi-attached. Single-family, semi-attached dwellings
are permitted only under the following terms and conditions:
      A.   A single-family, semi-attached dwelling is a building designed for
or occupied by one family only and which is erected on a separate lot and is
joined to another such residence on one side only by a wall located on the lot
line and has yards on the remaining sides. The joining wall must be a party
wall and must be a fire wall.
      B.   Must have an R-2 or R-3 zoning.
      C.   The lot width requirement where approved by plat approval by the
Council shall be 40 feet.
      D.   Each unit must have its own water service, sewer service, and
secondary storm sewer service.
      E.   The joining wall must be a party wall and must be a fire wall having
a one-hour rating.
      F.   The lot setback requirement shall be 35 feet.
167.08   OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES REQUIRED.
   In a C or M District, in connection with every building, or part thereof,
hereafter erected having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more,
which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display,
retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry
cleaning, data center, or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or
distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided
and maintained on the same lot with such building at least one off-street
loading space.
   1.   Each loading space shall be not less than 10 feet in width, 25 feet in
length.
   2.   Such space may occupy all or any part of any required yard or court
space.
167.09   OFF-STREET PARKING AREA REQUIRED.
   In all districts, in connection with every industrial, business,
institutional, recreational, or any other use, there shall be provided, at the
time any building or structure is erected or is enlarged or increased in
capacity, off-street parking spaces for automobiles in accordance with the
following requirements:
   1.   Automobile sales and service garages - one space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area.
   2.   Business and professional offices - one space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area.
   3.   Bowling alleys - five spaces for each alley, plus one space per 300
square feet of gross floor area used for purposes other than alley space.
   4.   Schools:
      A.   One space for each eight seats in a principal auditorium.
      B.   When no auditorium is involved, one space for every two employees.
   5.   Convenience stores - one space per 150 square feet of gross floor area.
   6.   Dance halls, assembly halls - one space for each 100 square feet of
floor area used for dancing or assembly.
   7.   Dwellings:
      A.   Single-family dwelling - two parking spaces accessible to the
street;
      B.   Duplex family dwelling - four parking spaces accessible to the
street;
      C.   Multi-family dwelling - for each one-bedroom unit - one and one-half
parking spaces; for each two bedroom unit, or larger - two parking spaces.
   8.   Funeral homes, mortuaries - one parking space for each five seats in
the principal auditorium.
   9.   Hotels and motels - one space for each room to be rented, plus
additional space (in accordance with other sections of this chapter) for
restaurant or other facilities.
   10.   Medical or dental clinic - five spaces for each staff doctor or
dentist.
   11.   Restaurants, bars, or nightclubs:
      A.   No substantial carry-out or delivery service, no drive-in service,
no service or consumption outside fully enclosed structure allowed - one space
per 100 square feet of gross floor area;
      B.   Carry-out and delivery service, drive-in service, service or
consumption outside fully enclosed structure allowed - one space per 100 square
feet of gross floor area plus, one space for every four outside seats, plus
reservoir lane capacity equal to five spaces per drive-in window.
   12.   Hospitals - two spaces per bed or one space per 150 square feet of
gross floor area, whichever is greater.
   13.   Nursing care institutions - three spaces for every five beds. Multi-
family units developed or sponsored by a public or nonprofit agency for limited
income families, or the elderly require only one space per unit.
   14.   Movie theaters - one space for every four seats.
   15.   Social, fraternal clubs, lodges, and similar uses - one space per 300
square feet of gross floor area.
   16.   Churches - one space for every 80 square feet of worship area, plus
one space for every two employees with sufficient space for safe and convenient
loading and unloading.
   17.   Banks - one space per 200 square feet of area within main building,
plus reservoir land capacity equal to five spaces per window (10 spaces if
window serves two stations).
   18.   Wholesale - one space per 400 square feet of gross floor area.
   19.   Retail sales and rental of goods, merchandise, and equipment:
      A.   No storage or display of goods outside fully enclosed building: one
space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
      B.   Low volume traffic with no storage or display of goods outside fully
enclosed building - one space per 400 square feet of gross floor area.
      C.   Storage and display of goods outside fully enclosed building
allowed:
         (1)   High volume traffic generation - one space per 200 square feet
of gross floor area.
         (2)   Low volume traffic generation - one space per 400 square feet of
gross floor area.
      D.   For projects in the C-7 Zoning District for which a site plan
approval has been issued allowing at least 275,000 square feet of gross floor
area, four and one-half parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of Gross Leaseable
Area (GLA). For purposes of determining allowable parking spaces hereunder, the
term “Gross Leasable Area” (“GLA”) shall mean the gross floor area, exclusive
of food court and other service and common areas.
   20.   Manufacturing plants, testing laboratories, bottling plants - one
space for each one and one-half plant employees, plus one space for each
managerial person, plus one visitor parking space for each 10 managerial
personnel or one space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area used for
manufacturing, whichever is greater.
   21.   Warehousing - one space per employee.
   22.   Sports arenas and auditoriums other than in schools - one space for
each six seats.
   23.   Car wash - one space per employee, plus one space for manager plus
space equaling five times the vehicle capacity of the wash.
   24.   Dry cleaner or Laundromat - one space per 200 square feet of gross
floor area.
   25.   Nursery schools or daycare centers - one space per employee, plus one
and a half spaces per 10 clients, plus one space per van.
   26.   Commercial greenhouse operation - one space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area.
   27.   Data center:
      A.   Office area - one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
      B.   Data storage - one space per employee (excluding office area
employees).
In case of any building, structure, or premises, the use of which is not
specifically mentioned herein, requirements for a use which is so mentioned and
to which said use is similar shall apply. In cases not specifically covered,
the City Administrator is authorized to determine the parking requirements
using a similar use as a guide.
167.10   DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF PARKING AREAS.
   All proposed off-street parking, including commercial parking lots and
automobile, trailer, or other vehicular sales lots, in conjunction with any
multi-family residential, commercial, industrial, public, or semi-public land
use, whether such use is existing or proposed, shall meet all of the required
development standards set forth in this section:
   1.   No part of any parking space shall be closer than three feet to any
established street right-of-way or alley line. In case the parking lot adjoins
an R District, it shall be set back at least 15 feet from the R District
boundary and shall be effectively screen planted by any one or approved
combination of the following options:
      A.   A buffer yard of 15 feet in width; a six-foot high masonry wall to
be designed with face brick, stucco, or similar finished surface facing toward
the residential district; or
      B.   A buffer yard of 35 feet or more in width; four-foot high earth berm
or opaque wood fence; and four overstory trees, six understory trees, six
coniferous trees, and 15 shrubs for each 100 lineal feet.
   The buffer yard shall be located on the entire common perimeter of the
contrasting uses, and extend to the lot lines. No part of any required buffer
shall be used for parking, storage, loading, active recreation, locating refuse
containers or similar activity which may create a nuisance. Where a
residentially zoned area has been subdivided, the developer of a vacant
commercial property shall be responsible for providing the buffer; where
commercial buildings exist or are under construction, the developer of a vacant
residential area shall provide the buffer.
   2.   Any off-street parking area, including any commercial parking lot,
shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or Portland cement binder pavement.
   3.   Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area, including
any commercial parking lots, shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away
from adjoining premises in any R District.
   4.   Off-street parking areas may be established in any R District that
immediately joins a C or M District, or is directly across an alley from a C or
M District, provided such parking shall be accessory to and for use of one or
more business or industrial establishments located in the adjoining C or M
District; provided, however, that such transitional use shall not extend more
than 100 feet from the boundary of the less restricted zone.
   5.   Where the Zoning Code and regulations specify parking space, that space
size shall be determined in accordance with the layout criteria and the table
of standard dimensions † 13  . Handicapped stalls shall be provided as required
by the Code of Iowa. The spaces shall be delineated to define their boundaries
exclusive of driveway and access drive areas, except for one- and two-family
dwelling units, and shall be shown as part of the parking lot plan on the site
plan drawing.
   6.   Where a parking area does not abut a public or private alley or
easement of access, there shall be provided a permanently surfaced drive, not
less than eight feet in width in case of a dwelling and not less than 16 feet
in width in all other cases, leading to the loading or unloading spaces and
parking or storage areas required under the provisions of this chapter in such
manner as to secure the most appropriate development of the property in
question; provided, however, such easement of access or access drive shall not
be located in any residence district, except where serving a permitted use in a
residence district.
   7.   When visible from a public street or land zoned for residential use,
the interior of such parking areas shall be developed as follows:
      A.   Not less than five percent shall be landscaped and continuously
maintained.
      B.   Planting along the perimeter of the parking area, whether required
for screening or general beautification will not be considered as part of the
five percent interior landscaping.
   8.   Parking spaces required shall be provided with bumper guards, raised
curbing, or equivalent, also lines marking stalls.
   9.   All commercial or industrial driveways installed, altered, changed,
replaced, or extended after April 17, 1989, shall meet the following
requirements:
      A.   Islands between successive driveway openings shall be a minimum of
12 feet with six feet between the driveway opening and the lot lines. All
distances are to be measured at the right-of-way line.
      B.   Openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall not exceed 35 feet
at the street line and 45 feet at the curb.
      C.   Vehicular entrances and exits to drive-in theaters, banks, and
restaurants, motels, funeral homes, vehicular sales, service, washing and
repair stations, garages, or public parking lots shall not be less than 200
feet from any pedestrian entrance or exit to a school, college, university,
church, hospital, park, playground, library, public emergency shelter, or other
place of public assembly.
   10.   Lots directly abutting arterial streets shall not exceed one drive
access onto each such arterial street except as provided below. Common drives
between adjacent landowners shall be encouraged in lieu of individual drives,
recommended to be located with the common property line as the centerline of
the drive and required to be located a minimum of 40 feet from any other drive
as measured from centerline to centerline. Where such common drive is provided
and joint access easements to parking areas are provided, required parking
spaces on each lot may be reduced in number by up to five percent.
   11.   Maintenance of parking lots:
      A.   All parking areas shall be paved and maintained in a dust-free
condition at all times.
      B.   If nonconforming (rock, gravel, grass, etc.), the parking lot must
be kept in a dust-free condition. (See Section
166.03).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2755.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2757.png]
 
Table of Standard Dimensions of Parking Areas
  One Way Two Way
  A       B       C A 1 B 1 C 1 D E F G H I
Table of Standard Dimensions of Parking Areas
                    One    Two
                    Way    Way
                    A      B      C      A 1    B 1    C 1    D      E      F      G    H        I
Angle of     Type   Depth  Aisle  Width  Depth  Aisle  Width  Curb   Width  Length      Depth of Auto
Parking      of     of     Width  of     of     Width  of     Width  of     of          Overhang Over-hang
             Space  Stall         Area   Stall         Area          Stall  stripe               Reduction
0° Parallel S      9’-6 12’-031’-09’-6 18’-037’-020’-09’-6 9’-6 0’-0'-0     0’-0
Parking
H            12’-012’-036’-012’-018’-042’-020’-012’-012’-00’-0 0’-0’-0
30°         S      18’-311’-047’-614’-118’-046’-219’-09’-6 36’-64’-4’-2   1’-0
H            20’-511’-051’-115’-218’-048’-424’-012’-040’-96’-0 5’-1’-0
45°         S      20’-113’-054’-817’-618’-053’-013’-59’-6 29’-66’-3’-4   1’-5
H            22’-813’-058’-418’-518’-054’-117’-012’-032’-08’-6 4’-1’-5
60°         S      22’-118’-062’-219’-818’-057’-411’-09’-6 25’-68’-2’-5   1’-9
H            23’-418’-064’-820’-418’-058’-813’-112’-026’-110’-53’-1’-9
90°         S      20’-020’-060’-020’-024’-064’-09’-6 9'-6   20’-09’-0’-0   2’-0
H            20’-020’-060’-020’-024’-064’-012’-012'-0  20’-012’-00’-2’-0
If the degree of angle of parking provided is not listed above, the aisle width shall be the next largest
angle of parking shown above.
 
Notes
13 †  EDITOR’S NOTE: See layout criteria figures and the table of standard
   dimensions at the end of this section.
167.11   TV DISH ANTENNAS.
   Any parabolic, spiracle, or other shaped structure used for, or intended to
be used for, reception of satellite transmissions, shall meet all of the
required development standards set forth in this section:
   1.   Prior to issuing a building permit, the following must be on file with
the City Building Inspection Department:
      A.   General placement diagram.
      B.   Manufacturer’s specifications.
      C.   Wind stress information.
   2.   No portion of an antenna array shall extend beyond the property lines
or into any front yard area, with the exception that any building mounted dish
antennae, 24 inches in diameter or less, may be located on any side of a
structure.
   3.   A maximum dish antenna height of 20 feet for freestanding dish
antennae.
   4.   To support dish antenna exceeding 24 inches in diameter, a three to
seven square foot concrete base must be provided.
   5.   Dish antennas shall be erected or maintained to the rear of the main
building, except in those instances when the subject property is a cul-de-sac
or corner lot where the side yard is larger than the rear yard in which case a
permit may be requested for a side yard antenna location.
   6.   Dish antennas shall not be located in any required setback area.
   7.   Dish antennas exceeding 24 inches in diameter shall not be permitted on
the roof unless engineering is provided for structural or wind load.
   8.   Every antenna must be adequately grounded per manufacturer’s
recommendation.
   9.   The dish antenna, including any guy wires, anchors, supporting
structures, and accessory equipment, shall be located and designed so as to
minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties and from public streets.
   10.   The dish antenna shall be removed upon the termination or revocation
of the permit. The permit shall terminate on the sale or transfer of ownership
of the property by the applicant.
   11.   All dish antennas shall be maintained in good condition and in
accordance with all requirements of this section.
   12.   All dish antennas shall be subject to periodic re-inspection. No
additions, changes, or modifications shall be made to an antenna, unless the
addition, change or modification is in conformity with the Building Code.
   13.   The applicant shall present documentation of the possession of any
required license by any federal, State, or local agency.
   14.   The owner of such a structure shall assume complete liability in case
of personal or property damage.
   15.   Failure to abide by and faithfully comply with this section or with
any and all conditions that may be attached to the granting of any building
permit shall constitute grounds for the revocation of the permit by the City.
   16.   A Conditional Use Permit must be issued for any dish antenna exceeding
six feet in diameter, prior to issuance of a building permit by the City
Building Inspection Department.
167.12   FREESTANDING COMMUNICATION TOWERS.
   Any freestanding communication tower located in any district shall meet all
of the required development standards set forth in this section:
   1.   Prior to issuing a building permit, the following must be on file with
the City Building Inspection Department:
      A.   General placement diagram.
      B.   Manufacturer’s specifications.
      C.   Wind stress information.
   2.   Maximum tower height to be 70 feet from tip to ground level with an
additional 25 feet for mast and antenna. Antenna and mast on the tower must
conform to sound engineering practices. Guy wires are to be installed per
manufacturer’s recommendations on applicable models, with a minimum quantity of
three guy wires.
   3.   Guy wire supports and anchors are to be located one foot inside
property boundaries or utility easement, and of design to conform to current
methods recommended by manufacturer’s specifications or other applicable
requirements.
   4.   The tower is to be mounted on a concrete pad twice the cross-sectional
area of the largest section. A minimum of four-square feet is required and
three feet deep. If the tower is to be installed in concrete, a gravel or sand
sub-layer is to be under the pad with the tower resting in this for drainage.
Where the tower goes through the concrete, a sealing substance (e.g., tar) is
to be applied. If the manufacturer’s recommendations are more strenuous, they
are to be followed.
   5.   An anti-climbing apparatus is to be installed to prevent unauthorized
ascension on all communication towers except all band vertical antennas.
   6.   Tower to be the height plus five feet angular distance from base to
overhead lines or permanent neighboring domicile. Exception: Towers with guy
wires that are rated for collapsible distance, the collapsible distance plus
five feet may be used.
   7.   If the tower is located near a recreation area, shelter buildings will
be considered as permanent domiciles.
   8.   Each location is permitted one tower over 20 feet, with a limit of two
additional communication towers 20 feet or less.
   9.   All towers shall be erected or maintained to the rear of the main
building, except in those instances when the subject property is a cul-de-sac
or corner lot where the side yard is larger than the rear yard in which case a
permit may be requested for a side yard tower location.
   10.   The tower is to be grounded per manufacturer’s recommendation.
   11.   The transmission lines must meet municipal requirements on
installation.
   12.   If property dimensions permit taller towers, an exception can be
obtained from the Board of Adjustment on the overall dimensions, if applicable
clearances are still met.
   13.   The freestanding communication tower, including any guy wires,
anchors, supporting structures, and accessory equipment shall be located and
designed so as to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties and from
public streets.
   14.   The freestanding communication tower shall be removed upon the
termination or revocation of the permit. The permit shall terminate on the sale
or transfer of ownership of the property by the applicant.
   15.   All freestanding communication tower shall be maintained in good
condition and in accordance with all requirements of this section.
   16.   All freestanding communication tower shall be subject to periodic re-
inspection. No additions, changes, or modifications shall be made to an
antenna, unless the addition, change, or modification is in conformity with the
Building Code.
   17.   The applicant shall present documentation of the possession of any
required license by any federal, State, or local agency.
   18.   The owner of such a structure shall assume complete liability in case
of personal or property damage.
   19.   Failure to abide by and faithfully comply with this section, or with
any and all conditions that may be attached to the granting of any building
permit, shall constitute grounds for the revocation of the permit by the City.
167.13   BUILDING SUPPORTED COMMUNICATION TOWERS.
   Any building supported communication tower located in any district shall
meet all of the required development standards set forth in this section:
   1.   Prior to issuing a building permit, the following must be on file with
the City Building Inspection Department:
      A.   General placement diagram.
      B.   Manufacturer’s specifications.
      C.   Wind stress information.
   2.   Towers and antenna may not be more than 30 feet above the utmost point
of building contact with an additional 25 feet for multiple antenna
connections.
   3.   The tower is to be strapped at least every five feet to said building
or per manufacturer’s instructions. The tripod type is to be attached via
connection to the building’s main structures.
   4.   An anti-climbing apparatus is to be installed to prevent unauthorized
ascension on all communication towers, except all band vertical antennas.
   5.   The tower is to be grounded per manufacturer’s recommendations.
   6.   There is to be an angular clearance of communication tower height from
tip to top building support, plus 15 feet to any neighboring domicile, overhead
lines, or buildings and shelter buildings located on recreational facilities.
   7.   Only two radio communication support towers per residential location,
with only one located per building side. They may not be located in the front
yard.
   8.   Transmission lines must meet municipal requirements on installation.
   9.   The building supported communication tower, including any guy wires,
anchors, supporting structures, and accessory equipment, shall be located and
designed so as to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties and from
public streets.
   10.   The building supported communication tower shall be removed upon the
termination or revocation of the permit. The permit shall terminate on the sale
or transfer of ownership of the property by the applicant.
   11.   All building supported communication tower shall be maintained in good
condition and in accordance with all requirements of this section.
   12.   All building supported communication tower shall be subject to
periodic re-inspection. No additions, changes, or modifications shall be made
to an antenna, unless the addition, change, or modification is in conformity
with the Building Code.
   13.   The applicant shall present documentation of the possession of any
required license by any federal, State, or local agency.
   14.   The owner of such a structure shall assume complete liability in case
of personal or property damage.
   15.   Failure to abide by and faithfully comply with this section or with
any and all conditions that may be attached to the granting of any building
permit shall constitute grounds for the revocation of the permit by the City.
167.14   SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS.
   The intent of this section is to balance the need for clean, renewable
energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare of the community. The City finds these regulations are necessary to
ensure that Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems are appropriately designed,
sited, and installed.
   1.   Definitions.
      A.   “Height, total system” means the height above grade of the system,
including the generating unit and the highest vertical extension of any blades
or rotors.
      B.   “Lot” or “Parcel” means any legally established lot or parcel which
contains or could contain a permitted or permitted conditional principal use as
provided by Chapter 167.
      C.   “Off grid” means an electrical system that is not connected to
utility distribution and transmission facilities or to any building or
structure that is connected.
      D.   “Shadow flicker” means changing light intensity caused by sunlight
through the moving blades of a wind energy conversion system.
      E.   “Small Wind Energy Conversion System” (SWECS) means a wind energy
conversion system which has a nameplate rated capacity of up 15 kilowatts for
residential uses and districts and up to 100 kilowatts for commercial, and
industrial districts and which is incidental and subordinate to a principal use
on the same parcel. A system is considered a SWECS only if it supplies
electrical power solely for use by the owner on the site, except that when a
parcel on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied
by a utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently
needed by the owner for on-site use may be used by the utility company in
accordance with Section 199, Chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa Administrative Code,
as amended from time to time.
      F.   “Small Wind Energy Conversion System, Building Mounted” means a
SWECS which is securely fastened to any portion of a principal building in
order to achieve desired elevation, whether attached directly to the principal
building or attached to a tower structure which is in turn fastened to the
principal building.
      G.   “Small Wind Energy Conversion System, Free Standing” means a SWECS
which is elevated by means of a monopole tower only and is not located on
another supporting structure, except that the tower shall have an appropriately
constructed concrete base. Guyed, lattice, or other non-monopole style towers
shall not meet this definition.
      H.   “Small Wind Energy Conversion System, Horizontal Axis” means a Small
Wind Energy Conversion System that has blades which rotate through a horizontal
plane.
      I.   “Small Wind Energy Conversion System, Vertical Axis” means a Small
Wind Energy Conversion System that has blades which rotate through a vertical
plane.
      J.   “Tower” means the vertical component of a wind energy conversion
system that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the
ground.
      K.   “Wind Energy Conversion System” (WECS) means an aggregation of parts
including the foundation, base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports, guy
wires, and accessory equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks,
etc., in such configuration as necessary to convert the power of wind into
mechanical or electrical energy, e.g., wind charger, windmill, or wind turbine.
      L.   “Wind turbine generator” means the component of a wind energy
conversion system that transforms mechanical energy from the wind into
electrical energy.
   2.   General Regulations.
      A.   Conditional Use. A Small Wind Energy Conversion System (SWECS) shall
be allowed only as a conditional use accessory use to a permitted principal use
or approved permitted conditional use principal use.
      B.   Zoning. SWECS may be allowed in all zoning districts subject to the
provisions contained herein and elsewhere within Code.
      C.   Permit Required. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install,
alter, or locate any SWECS within the City, unless a permitted Conditional Use
Permit has been obtained from the Board of Adjustment. The permitted
Conditional Use Permit may be revoked by resolution of the Board of Adjustment
any time the approved system does not comply with the rules set forth in this
section and the conditions imposed by the Board of Adjustment. The owner or
operator of the SWECS must also obtain any other permits required by other
federal, State, and local agencies or departments prior to constructing the
system.
      D.   Number of Systems per Zoning Lot.
         (1)   Residential Use. No more than one freestanding SWECS may be
placed on any parcel or lot zoned for residential use. Building mounted SWECS
shall be prohibited on any parcel or lot containing a one or two-family use.
         (2)   Commercial, Industrial, and Institutional Use. No more than one
freestanding SWECS may be placed on any parcel or lot with a commercial,
industrial, or institutional use that is taller than the tallest existing
principal building located on said parcel or lot. Additional freestanding SWECS
which conform to setback requirements contained herein and which are no taller
than the tallest existing principal building located on said parcel or lot may
be allowed. Additional building mounted SWECS may be allowed within the
parameters herein below. However, in no case shall the generating capacity of
aggregated SWECS exceed anticipated energy needs for on-site consumption.
         (3)   Mixed Use. Any building containing both residential and
commercial uses or described as a “Mixed Use” building, shall be considered to
be a commercial use for the purposes of this section.
      E.   Tower. Only monopole towers shall be permitted for freestanding
SWECS.
         Lattice, guyed, or towers of any other type shall not be considered to
be in compliance with this section.
      F.   Color. Freestanding SWECS shall be a neutral color such as white,
sky blue, or light gray. Building mounted SWECS shall match the color of the
building on which it is mounted. Other colors may be allowed at the discretion
of the Board of Adjustment. The surface shall be non-reflective.
      G.   Lighting. No lights shall be installed on the tower, unless required
to meet FAA regulations.
      H.   Signage. No signage or advertising of any kind shall be permitted on
the tower or any associated structures, except for warning signs addressed in
Subparagraph Q.
      I.   Climbing Apparatus. The tower must be designed to prevent climbing
within the first 10 feet.
      J.   Maintenance. Facilities shall be well maintained in accordance with
manufacturer’s specifications and shall remain in an operational condition that
poses no potential safety hazard nor is in violation of any provisions
contained within this section or elsewhere within the Code. Noise generated due
to wear shall deem the SWECS nonfunctional and inoperative and subject to
removal.
      K.   Displacement of Parking Prohibited. The location of the SWECS shall
not result in the net loss of required parking as specified elsewhere in the
Zoning Code.
      L.   Utility Notification. The City shall notify the utility of receipt
of an application to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-
grid systems shall be exempt from this notification requirement.
      M.   Interconnection. The SWECS, if not off-grid, shall meet the
requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth by the utility and
the Iowa Utilities Board. No permit of any kind shall be issued until the City
has been provided with a copy of an executed interconnection agreement. Off-
grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
      N.   Restriction On Use of Electricity Generated. A SWECS shall be used
exclusively to supply electrical power to the owner for on-site consumption,
except that excess electrical power generated by the SWECS and not presently
needed for use by the owner may be used by the utility company in accordance
with Section 199, Chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa Administrative Code, as may be
subsequently amended.
      O.   Noise. A SWECS shall be designed, installed, and operated so that
the noise generated does not exceed 55 decibels (dBA), as measured at the
nearest neighboring property line, except during short-term events including
utility outages and severe wind storms.
      P.   Shadow Flicker. No SWECS shall be installed and operated so to cause
a shadow flicker to fall on or in any existing residential structure.
      Q.   Safety Controls. Each SWECS shall be equipped with both an automatic
and manual braking, governing, or feathering system to prevent uncontrolled
rotation, over-speeding, and excessive pressure on the tower structure, rotor
blades, or turbine components. Said automatic braking system shall also be
capable of stopping turbine rotation in the event of a power outage so as to
prevent back feeding of the grid. Warning signs shall be posted where clearly
visible to warn of electrical and other hazards associated with the SWECS.
      R.   Shut Off. A clearly marked and easily accessible shut off for the
wind turbine will be required as determined by the Building Official.
      S.   Electromagnetic Interference. All SWECS shall be designed and
constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference. If it is
determined that the SWECS is causing electromagnetic interference, the owner or
operator shall take the necessary corrective action to eliminate this
interference, including relocation or removal of the facilities, subject to the
approval of the appropriate City authority. A permit granting a SWECS may be
revoked if electromagnetic interference from the SWECS becomes evident.
      T.   Wind Access Easements. The enactment of this section does not
constitute the granting of an easement by the City. The SWECS owner or operator
shall have the sole responsibility to acquire any covenants, easements, or
similar documentation to assure or protect access to sufficient wind as may or
may not be necessary to operate the SWECS.
      U.   Insurance. The owner or operator of a SWECS must demonstrate and
maintain liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000.00 coverage.
      V.   Engineer Certification. Applications for any SWECS shall be
accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the
tower, base, and footings. An engineering analysis of all components of the
SWECS showing compliance with the applicable regulations and certified by a
State licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted. Once construction
is completed, a State licensed professional engineer shall inspect and provide
certification of operation to the City, which verifies proper installation,
operation, and function of the structure and all components, including
electrical components and connections.
      W.   Installation. Installation must be done according to manufacturer’s
recommendations. All wiring and electrical work must be completed according to
the applicable building and electric codes. All electrical components must meet
code recognized test standards.
      X.   Removal. If the SWECS remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a
continuous period of six months, the system shall be deemed to be abandoned.
The SWECS owner or operator shall remove the abandoned system at their expense.
Removal of the system includes the entire structure, transmission equipment,
and fencing from the property excluding foundations. Non-function or lack of
operation may be proven by reports from the interconnected utility. For off-
grid systems, the City shall have the right to enter the property, at its sole
discretion, to determine if the off-grid system is generating power. Such
generation may be proven by use of an amp meter. The SWECS owner or operator,
and successors, shall make available to the Director of Community Development
all reports to and from the purchaser of energy from the SWECS if requested. If
removal of towers and appurtenant facilities is required, the Director of
Community Development shall notify the SWECS owner or operator. Removal shall
be completed within 90 days of written notice to remove being provided to the
owner or operator by the City.
      Y.   Right of Entrance. As a condition of approval of a Conditional Use
Permit an applicant seeking to install SWECS shall be required to sign a
petition and waiver agreement which shall be recorded and run with the land
granting permission to the City to enter the property to remove the SWECS
pursuant to the terms of approval and to assure compliance with the other
conditions set forth in the permit. Removal shall be at the expense of the
owner or operator and the cost may be assessed against the property.
      Z.   Feasibility Study. It is highly recommended that a feasibility study
be made of any site prior to installing a wind turbine. The feasibility study
should include measuring actual wind speeds at the proposed turbine site for at
least three months.
   3.   Bulk Regulations.
      A.   Setbacks.
         (1)   The minimum distance between any freestanding SWECS and any
property line shall be a distance that is equivalent to 150 percent of the
total system height. The setback shall be measured from the property line to
the point of the SWECS closest to the property line.
         (2)   The required setback for any building mounted SWECS shall be
equal to the required setback of the principal building to which the SWECS is
to be attached at such time that the application to install a building mounted
SWECS is received by the City.
      B.   Maximum Height. Height shall be measured from the ground to the top
of the tower, including the wind turbine generator and blades.
         (1)   For lots of more than one and fewer than three acres, the
maximum height shall be 65 feet.
         (2)   For lots of three to seven acres, the maximum height shall be 80
feet.
         (3)   For lots of more than seven acres, the maximum height shall be
100 feet.
         (4)   Building mounted SWECS may be a maximum of 10 feet higher than
the point of attachment to the building on which they are attached.
      C.   Minimum Lot Size.
         (1)   The minimum lot size for a freestanding SWECS shall be one acre.
         (2)   The minimum lot size for a building mounted SWECS shall be one
acre for any building mounted SWECS to be mounted on a building of less than
five stories in height.
         (3)   There shall be no minimum lot size for building mounted SWECS to
be mounted on buildings of five or more stories in height.
      D.   Clearance of Blade. No portion of a horizontal axis SWECS blade
shall extend within 30 feet of the ground. No portion of a vertical axis SWECS
shall extend within 10 feet of the ground. No blades may extend over parking
areas, driveways, or sidewalks. No blade may extend within 20 feet of the
nearest tree, structure, or above ground utility facilities.
      E.   Location.
         (1)   No part of a SWECS shall be located within or over drainage,
utility, or other established easements.
         (2)   A freestanding SWECS shall be located entirely in the rear yard.
         (3)   A SWECS shall be located in compliance with the guidelines of
applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations as amended from
time to time.
         (4)   No SWECS shall be constructed so that any part thereof can
extend within 20 feet laterally of an overhead electrical power line (excluding
secondary electrical service lines or service drops). The setback from
underground electric distribution lines shall be at least five feet.
         (5)   Building mounted SWECS shall be prohibited unless the owner has
obtained a written analysis from an Iowa licensed structural engineer
determining that installation of a SWECS will not cause damage to the structure
and that the SWECS can be securely fastened so as to not pose a hazard caused
by detaching from the structure.
   4.   Application Required. Application for SWECS shall be made on forms
provided by the City. No action may be taken regarding requests for SWECS until
completed applications have been filed and fees paid.
167.15   HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   “Home occupation” means any activity carried out for gain by a resident,
conducted in the resident’s dwelling unit. A Conditional Use Permit must be
applied for and received from the Board of Adjustment for any home occupation
that does not meet the requirements set forth in this section. Those
requirements are as follows:
   1.   The home occupation complies with the lot size, bulk regulations, and
parking requirements of the zoning district in which the home occupation is
located.
   2.   The only permitted home occupations are:
      A.   Homebound employment of physically, mentally, or emotionally
handicapped persons who are unable to work away from home by reason of their
disabilities.
      B.   Office facilities for salespeople, sales representatives, and
manufacturer’s representatives when no retail or wholesale sales are made or
transacted on the premises.
      C.   Studio or laboratory of an artist, musician, craftsman, writer,
tailor, seamstress, or similar person, provided that the existence of the home
occupation will not increase the number of average daily automobile trips
generated by the residence in which the home occupation is generated.
      D.   Daycare facilities, provided that no more than six children are on
the premises at any time.
   3.   Home occupations shall meet the following requirements:
      A.   No persons other than a member of the immediate family occupying
such dwelling shall be employed.
      B.   The home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed
living area of the dwelling unit provided that not more than one-fourth of the
area of one floor shall be used for such purposes.
      C.   In no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered or the
occupations within the residence be conducted in a manner which would cause the
premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of colors,
materials, construction, lighting, signs, or the emission of sounds, noise, or
vibrations.
   4.   In addition to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located, all home occupations shall comply with the following restrictions:
      A.   No stock in trade shall be displayed or sold on the premises.
      B.   There shall be no outdoor storage of equipment or materials used in
the home occupation.
      C.   No more than one vehicle shall be used in the conduct of the home
occupation.
      D.   Any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home
occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard.
      E.   There shall be no use of utilities or community facilities beyond
that normal to the use of the property for residential purposes.
      F.   No home occupation shall be permitted which is noxious, offensive,
or hazardous by reason of vehicular traffic, generation, or emission of noise,
vibration, smoke, dust, or other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat,
humidity, glare, refuse, radiation, or other objectionable emissions.
      G.   All home occupation requests must be presented in writing to the
Building Department. If the home occupation has not been specifically
identified by this section of the Zoning Code, the written request will be
filed by the Building Department for referral to the Board of Adjustment, for
its approval, before engaging in such business.
167.16   TEMPORARY USE PERMITS.
   These regulations are intended to prescribe the conditions under which
limited duration locally grown agricultural and existing on-site commercial
activities (e.g. truck gardens, Farmers Market, sidewalk sales, etc.) may be
conducted. The intent is to allow the display and marketing of merchandise on a
seasonal basis in an attractive manner to serve the desires of the general
public, but prevent creation of any nuisance or annoyance to the occupants of
adjacent buildings, premises or property, and the general public. It is also
the intent to establish minimum standards for the operation of temporary uses
in a manner that will provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the
patrons, employees, the general public, etc., that may utilize or be affected
by the establishment of the temporary use.
   1.   Application and Permit Processing. A Temporary Use Permit shall be
required for all temporary uses listed in this section. A Temporary Use Permit
must be issued prior to the commencement of any temporary use. The Director of
Community Development may, from time to time, specify the form of the Temporary
Use Permit application. Applications for said Temporary Use Permit shall be
secured from the Director of Community Development in the manner prescribed by
this section, who shall cause the application to be directed to all concerned
City departments and divisions. Affected departments or divisions shall comment
on the application. Temporary uses may be subject to additional permits, or
inspections as required by any applicable law or regulation.
   2.   Prior Determination for Temporary Use Permit Approval. The Director of
Community Development shall only approve an application for a Temporary Use
Permit, if all of the following findings can be made:
      A.   The proposed temporary use will be compatible with adjacent uses and
will not adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood by means of odor, noise,
dust, or other nuisance.
      B.   The additional parking required by the temporary use will be
provided on-site, if applicable, or adequate street parking is available in the
immediate area.
      C.   Increased traffic caused by the temporary use will not adversely
affect the surrounding neighborhood or City at large.
      D.   The proposed temporary use is consistent with all Comprehensive
Plan, Municipal Code, and City and State regulations.
   3.   Uses Permitted with a Temporary Use Permit.
      A.   The following uses are eligible for a Temporary Use Permit, provided
they meet the following criteria:
         (1)   Parking lot sales, sidewalk sales (private sidewalks only), and
clearance sales used for the temporary extension of existing on-site sales.
         (2)   Truck gardens and stands used for the sale of locally grown
agricultural products.
         (3)   Farmers Market.
      B.   Garage sales are exempt from these provisions, provided they do not
occur any more frequently than one three-day event four times per calendar
year. Garage sales occurring more frequently shall be considered a commercial
retail sales business in a residential zone, which is prohibited.
      C.   A “temporary use” may be defined as short-term or long-term. A
“short-term” use shall be defined as those uses with a maximum duration of four
consecutive days or less. A “long-term” use shall be defined as those uses with
a duration of more than four consecutive days.
   4.   General Regulations. Each temporary use shall:
      A.   Be described in a permit thereby issued by the Director of Community
Development prior to commencement of the sale. This permit shall be in addition
to all other licenses, permits, or approvals otherwise required by any
governmental entity.
         (1)   The number of additional parking spaces required, if any, and
the location of such additional parking spaces, for the temporary activity
shall be determined by the Director of Community Development. The number of
permanent parking spaces allowed to be used under the short-term Temporary Use
Permit shall be reviewed and determined by the Director of Community
Development.
         (2)   The maximum number of permanent parking spaces allowed to be
used for the operation of a long-term temporary use shall not exceed 20 percent
of the parking on a site plan that was approved by the City to be counted
toward the allowable size of the activity or 20 percent of the site area,
whichever is more restrictive.
      B.   All unimproved parking areas and main walk areas shall be kept damp
or shall be covered with a material to prevent rising of dust.
      C.   All sites shall be completely cleaned of debris and temporary
structures including, but not limited to: trash receptacles, signs, stands,
poles, electric wiring, or any other fixtures and appurtenances or equipment
connected therewith, within five days after the termination of the sale or
special event.
      D.   No area of public right-of-way may be used without obtaining
approval from the Director of Community Development, Police Chief, Fire Chief,
and Director of Community Services.
      E.   Proof of ownership, or a signed letter from either the property
owner or their authorized representative, for the property on which the
activity is to take place, shall be presented at the time the temporary permit
is requested.
      F.   All temporary structures, including, but not limited to,
greenhouses, trailers, mobile homes, etc., shall conform to the zoning setback
requirements or as directed by staff. Tents under 300 square feet may be
allowed within the front yard setback subject to approval of the Director of
Community Development.
      G.   Multiple concurrent temporary uses on the same property shall be
prohibited.
   5.   Specific Requirements.
      A.   Lot and Sidewalk Commercial Activities.
         (1)   Permitted zone locations - all commercial districts.
         (2)   Maximum duration - four consecutive days, not to exceed four
events in a 12-month period.
         (3)   Setbacks - all merchandise, trucks, trailers, etc. shall be
setback a minimum of 35 feet from all property lines.
         (4)   Area of operation - the area of the operation shall not exceed
800 square feet and no dimension shall exceed 40 linear feet.
         (5)   Transient merchants - transient merchants shall be subject to
the licensing requirements of Chapter 122. Said license shall be secured prior
to issuance of a Temporary Use Permit.
         (6)   Sale of fireworks are allowed in a tent as a temporary extension
of inside sales only. Area of operation (sales tent and storage) is limited to
the same 800 square feet combined, but does not include the roped off safety
area. Storage to be separated from sales area by at least 75 feet.
      B.   Agricultural Produce Truck Gardens and Stands.
         (1)   Permitted Zone Locations - any zoning district.
         (2)   Termination - all vehicles, produce, tents, stands and displays
shall be removed at the end of each day.
         (3)   Setbacks - tents, truck gardens, and stands shall be setback a
minimum of 35 feet from the front property lines.
         (4)   Area of operation - the area of the operation shall not exceed
800 square feet and no dimension shall exceed 40 linear feet.
         (5)   Permits are good for 60 calendar days. Up to two permits may be
issued in the same calendar year.
         (6)   Permits under this section cost $100.00 each.
      C.   Farmers Market.
         (1)   Permitted zone locations - any zoning district.
         (2)   Area of operation - allowed on public right-of-way and streets
with approval from the Council.
         (3)   Subject to conditions as may be placed upon it by the Council.
         (4)   Maximum duration - approved by Council.
   6.   Use of Tents and Canopies. Tents and canopies may be used, provided
they comply with Paragraphs A through E of this subsection as listed below:
      A.   Permit Required. The application for a permit shall include the
following information:
         (1)   Plot plan showing exact location of the tent or canopy and
traffic circulation when located in a parking lot. Adjacent parking areas must
also be shown.
         (2)   Size of the tent.
         (3)   Fire Retardency Certificate.
         (4)   Dates and time of use.
      B.   Fire Protection and existing requirements - tents and canopies of
any size shall conform in all respects with the International Fire Code as
adopted by the City.
      C.   Anchorage - tents and canopies shall be allowed if well anchored in
the opinion of the Building Department, so that they resist the wind loads as
specified in Section 1609, Wind Loads, of the International Building Code as
adopted by the City. Tents and canopies must be taken down each day at the end
of business if part of a truck garden or agricultural produce stand.
      D.   Location - the location of tents and canopies shall be in accordance
with the International Fire Code and in a location where they do not impair
visibility at intersections.
      E.   Size - tents and canopies shall be limited to 800 square feet in
area.
   7.   Conditions of Approval. The Director of Community Development may
impose such conditions on a Temporary Use Permit as is necessary to meet the
purposes of this chapter and protect the public health, safety, and welfare and
adjacent uses. Conditions which may be imposed may include, but are not limited
to:
      A.   Yard setback and open space requirements.
      B.   Parking.
      C.   Fences, walls, or other screening.
      D.   Signs.
      E.   Vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress.
      F.   Property maintenance during the course of the activity.
      G.   Control of illumination, noise, odor, vibration, or other nuisances.
      H.   Hours of operations.
   8.   Fees. The application fee for a Temporary Use Permit shall be $20.00
payable each year of operation.
   9.   Violations and Penalties. The operation of a temporary use is a
privilege allowed by this chapter. Failure to maintain a temporary use in
compliance with the conditions of approval and the regulations of this chapter
may be punished as set forth in Chapter 3. A written notice of a violation of
the Temporary Use Permit shall be sent to the operator of the temporary use and
the property owner, if different than the operator, and the operator shall have
a minimum of five days and a maximum of 10 days, as determined by the Director
of Community Development, to bring the site into compliance. If the operator
fails to correct the violation in the prescribed time, the City may revoke the
Temporary Use Permit and issue a cease-and-desist order for the temporary use.
There shall also be a one-year moratorium from that date on the issuance of any
other Temporary Use Permits on the property and a one-year probationary period
for the second year following the violation. During the probationary period, if
the operator of a temporary use fails to maintain the premises and the use in
conformance with the conditions of approval and this Code of Ordinances, after
the notification procedures noted above, the City may revoke the Temporary Use
Permit and no other Temporary Use Permits shall be issued on for the property
for a period of two years.
167.17   SWIMMING POOLS AND HOT TUBS.
   All outdoor swimming pools, including an in-ground, above ground, or on-
ground pool, wading pools, hot tub, or spa located in any zoned district shall
be surrounded by a six-foot high non-climbable barrier which shall comply with
the provisions as set forth in Chapter 155.
   1.   Exceptions.
      A.   Residential swimming pools shall be surrounded by a four-foot high
non-climbable barrier.
      B.   Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover which complies with ASTM F1346-
91 shall be exempt from the listed provisions.
CHAPTER 168
ZONING CODE - DISTRICT REGULATIONS
168.01 A-1 Agricultural 168.10 C-4 Village Commercial
168.01 A-1 Agricultural                 168.10 C-4 Village Commercial
168.02 R-1 Single-Family Residential    168.11 C-5 Office Park
168.03 R-2 One- and Two-Family          168.12 C-6 Commercial Entertainment or
Residential                             Recreational
168.04 R-3 Multi-Family Residential     168.13 C-7 Regional Commercial
168.05 R-4 Mobile Home Park Residential 168.14 M-1 Limited Industrial
168.06 R-5 Planned Unit Development     168.15 M-1A Commercial and Limited
(P.U.D.)                                Light Industrial Business Park
168.07 C-1 Transitional Commercial      168.16 M-2 Heavy Industrial
168.08 C-2 General Commercial            
168.09 C-3 Planned Commercial            
 
168.01   A-1 AGRICULTURAL.
   The A-1 Agricultural District is intended and designed to provide for
certain agricultural and undeveloped areas of the City now utilized primarily
for agricultural purposes and to prevent the establishment of scattered small
lot subdivisions which force the extension of urban services into areas more
appropriately suited for non-urban development at the present time.
   1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Only the uses of structures or land listed in
this section shall be permitted in the A-1 District.
      A.   Agriculture and usual agricultural buildings and structures, but not
including commercial livestock feed lots, poultry farms, grain storage, and
drying facilities.
      B.   One-family dwellings, to include manufactured homes and family
homes.
         (1)   Manufactured home, provided it is located and installed
according to the same standards for a foundation system, setback, and minimum
square footage which would apply to a site-built, single-family dwelling on the
same lot. “Manufactured home” means a structure built according to construction
standards promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development under authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403.
         (2)   Family homes, a community based residential home which is
licensed as a residential care facility or as a child foster care facility to
provide room and board, personal care, rehabilitation services, and supervision
in a family environment exclusively for not more than eight developmentally
disabled persons and any necessary support personnel.
      C.   Churches.
      D.   Public and parochial schools, elementary and secondary, and other
educational institutions having established current curriculum the same as
ordinarily given in the Southeast Polk Public School System, but excluding
boarding schools, nursery schools, and childcare centers provided that all
principal buildings are set back a minimum of 75 feet from all property lines.
      E.   Publicly owned parks, playgrounds, golf courses, and recreation
areas.
      F.   Private non-commercial recreational areas and centers including
country clubs, swimming pools, golf courses, and riding stables.
      G.   Cemeteries, including mausoleums.
      H.   Nurseries, greenhouses, and truck gardens.
      I.   Public water supply and sewage treatment facilities.
      J.   Electrical and liquefied product transmission and regulating
facilities.
   2.   Permitted Accessory Uses.
      A.   Uses of land and or structures customarily incidental and
subordinate to one of the principal permitted uses, unless otherwise excluded.
      B.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which
buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
      C.   TV dish antennas, see Section
167.11.
      D.   Home occupations, see Section
167.15.
   3.   Permitted Conditional Uses.
      A.   Home occupations which do not meet the requirements set forth in
Section 167.15. A Conditional Use Permit must be applied for and received from
the Board of Adjustment for any such home occupation.
      B.   Communication towers (freestanding type), see Section
167.12.
      C.   Communication towers (building-supported type), see Section
167.13.
      D.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS), see Section
167.14.
      E.   Bed and breakfast.
   4.   Bulk Regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed,
subject to the modifications contained in Section
167.07.
      A.   Lot area, dwellings - one acre; no minimum required for other
permitted uses.
      B.   Minimum Floor Area. Single-story dwellings - 1,150 square feet on
the first finished floor; if two or more stories, 1,350 square feet total
finished space, not including basement.
      C.   Lot width - 150 feet.
      D.   Front yard - 75 feet.
      E.   Side yards - dwellings - 10 feet. Residential-type accessory
buildings (as described and defined in Section
167.04) - three feet. Other permitted uses - 50 feet on each side; unless
otherwise indicated herein.
      F.   Rear yard - residential-type accessory buildings (as described and
defined in Section
167.04) - three feet. All other structures - 50 feet.
      G.   Maximum height - principal building - 35 feet; accessory building -
14 feet.
      H.   Maximum number of stories - principal building – two and one-half
stories; accessory building - one story. Accessory buildings for allowed
agricultural uses - no limit.
Summary of A-1 Bulk Regulations
Summary of A-1 Bulk Regulations
Minimum lot area   1 acre (43,560 square feet)
                   Other permitted uses - none
Maximum density    1 unit per acre
Minimum floor area 1,150 square feet/dwelling
                   1st floor minimum 800 square feet if > 2 story
Lot width          150 feet
Front yard         75 feet
                   10 feet
Side yard          Residential-type accessory buildings – 3 feet
                   Other permitted uses – 50 feet
Rear yard          Residential-type accessory buildings – 3 feet
                   Other structures – 50 feet
Maximum height     35 feet principal buildings
                   14 feet accessory buildings
                   2 ½ stories for principal buildings
Maximum stories    1 story for accessory buildings
                   No limit – agriculture accessory buildings
 
168.02   R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
   The R-1 District is intended and designed to provide for certain low-density
residential areas of the City now developed primarily with one-family detached
dwellings and areas where similar residential development seems likely to
occur.
   1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Only the uses of structures or land listed in
this section shall be permitted in the R-1 District.
      A.   One-Family Dwellings, to Include Manufactured Homes In Accordance
with the Following Definitions. Manufactured home, provided it is located and
installed according to the same standards for a foundation system, setback, and
minimum square footage which would apply to a site-built, single-family
dwelling on the same lot. Manufactured home means a structure built according
to construction standards promulgated by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development under authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403.
      B.   Churches, cathedrals, temples, and similar places of worship,
provided that all principal buildings be set back a minimum of 50 feet from all
property lines.
      C.   Museums, libraries, parks and playgrounds, community centers, and
similar uses operated by the City.
      D.   Golf courses, country clubs, tennis courts, and similar recreational
uses, provided that any such use be not operated primarily for commercial gain.
      E.   Private plant nurseries and greenhouses not exceeding 240 square
feet of floor area and not involving retail or wholesale sales.
      F.   Public and parochial schools, elementary and secondary, and other
educational institutions having established current curriculum the same as
ordinarily given in the Southeast Polk Public School System, but excluding
boarding schools, nursery schools, and childcare centers, provided that all
principal buildings are set back a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines.
   2.   Permitted Accessory Uses.
      A.   Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to
one of the principal permitted uses, unless otherwise excluded.
      B.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which
buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
      C.   Residential swimming pools when enclosed by a non-climbable barrier
at least four feet in height.
      D.   TV dish antennas in accordance with Section
167.11.
   3.   Permitted Conditional Uses.
      A.   Home Occupations. A Conditional Use Permit must be applied for and
received from the Board of Adjustment for a home occupation which does not meet
the requirements set forth in Section
167.15.
      B.   Family Homes. A family home is a community based residential home
that is licensed as a residential care facility or as a child foster care
facility to provide room and board, personal care, rehabilitation services, and
supervision in a family environment exclusively for not more than eight
developmentally disabled persons and any necessary support personnel.
      C.   Communication towers (freestanding type), see Section
167.12.
      D.   Communication towers of the building-supported type, see Section
167.13.
      E.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS), see Section
167.14.
      F.   Bed and breakfast.
      G.   Model Home. Shall not be operated at any time other than between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday and 12:00 p.m. to 5:
00 p.m. on Sunday. These hours may be reduced by the Board of Adjustment as a
condition of an approved Conditional Use Permit. This use does not include
offices for contractors, which are not allowed in residential zoning districts.
A model home Certificate of Occupancy is required for the term of the
conditional use. A Conditional Use Permit for a model home may be allowed for
up to an 18-month period.
   4.   Bulk Regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed,
subject to the modifications contained in Section
167.07.
      A.   Minimum lot area - 8,750 square feet, 20,000 square feet where
public sewer is not available.
      B.   Minimum floor area - single-story dwellings - 1,150 square feet on
the first finished floor; if two or more stories, 1,350 square feet total
finished space, not including basement.
      C.   Lot width - 70 feet; 85 feet for corner lots; 100 feet where public
sewer is not available. Minimum lot width at right-of-way line of 40 feet.
      D.   Front yard - 30 feet; 50 feet for permitted uses other than single-
family.
      E.   Side yards - 8 feet each side for single-family dwellings; 3 feet
for any other accessory building; 50 feet for permitted uses other than single-
family.
      F.   Rear yard - 35 feet for dwellings, and 3 feet for accessory
buildings; 50 feet for permitted uses other than single-family.
      G.   Maximum height - principal building - 35 feet; accessory building -
14 feet.
      H.   Maximum number of stories - principal building - 2½ stories;
accessory building - 1 story.
      I.   Accessory buildings - maximum area for accessory garage - 1,000
square feet; maximum area for yard shed - 160 square feet.
Summary of R-1 Bulk Regulations
Summary of R-1 Bulk Regulations
Minimum   8,750 square feet
lot area  20,000 square feet where sanitary not available
Minimum   Single-story dwellings – 1,150 square feet on the first finished floor; if 2
floor     or more stories 1,350 square feet total finished space not including basement
area
          70 feet
Lot width 85 feet for corner lots
          100 feet if no sanitary sewer not available
Front     30 feet for dwellings
yard      50 feet for any permitted use other than single-family
          8 feet each side
Side yard 3 feet accessory buildings
          50 feet for any permitted use other than single-family
          35 feet for single-family
Rear yard 3 feet accessory buildings
          50 feet for any permitted use other than single-family
Maximum   35 feet principal buildings
height    14 feet accessory buildings
Maximum   3 stories for principal buildings
stories   1 story for accessory buildings
Accessory 1,000 square feet – maximum area for accessory garage
buildings 160 square feet – maximum area for yard shed
          A basement, containing the square footage of at least 60% of the dwelling’s
          habitable first story square footage at the time of original Building Permit
Basements approval, is required in all single-family detached dwellings. This section
          applies to all R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5 District lots within preliminary plats
          approved after January 1, 2026.
 
(Subsection 4 – Ord. 10-20-2025_#02_(679) – Nov. 25 Supp.)
   5.   Off Street parking and loading - see Chapter 167.
168.03   R-2 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
   The R-2 District is intended and designed for certain medium density
residential areas of the City now developed with one-family and two-family
dwellings, and areas where similar residential development seems likely to
occur.
   1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Only the uses of structures or land listed in
this section shall be permitted in the R-2 District.
      A.   One-family dwellings, to include manufactured homes and family homes
in accordance with the following definition: Manufactured home, provided it is
located and installed according to the same standards for a foundation system,
setback, and minimum square footage which would apply to a site-built, single-
family dwelling on the same lot. Manufactured home means a structure built
according to construction standards promulgated by the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development under authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403.
      B.   Two-family dwellings.
      C.   Alterations and conversions of single-family dwellings into two-
family dwellings in accordance with the lot area, frontage, and yard
requirements as set forth in this section and the fire separation provisions of
the Building Code.
      D.   Churches, cathedrals, temples, and similar places of worship,
provided that all principal buildings be set back a minimum of 50 feet from all
property lines.
      E.   Museums, libraries, parks and playgrounds, community centers and
similar uses operated by the City.
      F.   Golf courses, country clubs, tennis courts, and similar recreational
uses, provided that any such use be not operated primarily for commercial gain.
      G.   Private plant nurseries and greenhouses not exceeding 240 square
feet of floor area and not involving retail or wholesale sales.
      H.   Public and parochial schools, elementary and secondary, and other
educational institutions having established current curriculum the same as
ordinarily given in the Southeast Polk Public School System, but excluding
boarding schools, nursery schools, and childcare centers, provided that all
principal buildings are set back a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines.
   2.   Permitted Accessory Uses.
      A.   Uses of land and or structures customarily incidental and
subordinate to one of the principal permitted uses, unless otherwise excluded.
      B.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which
buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
      C.   Residential swimming pools when enclosed by a non-climbable barrier
at least four feet in height.
      D.   TV dish antennas in accordance with Chapter
167.11.
      E.   Signs in accordance with Chapter 159.
   3.   Permitted Conditional Uses.
      A.   Home Occupations. A Conditional Use Permit must be applied for and
received from the Board of Adjustment for a home occupation which does not meet
the requirements set forth in Section
167.15.
      B.   Family Homes. A family home is a community based residential home
that is licensed as a residential care facility or as a child foster care
facility to provide room and board, personal care, rehabilitation services, and
supervision in a family environment exclusively for not more than eight
developmentally disabled persons and any necessary support personnel.
      C.   Communication towers (freestanding type), see Section
167.12.
      D.   Communication towers (building-supported type), see Section
167.13.
      E.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS), see section
167.14.
      F.   Bed and breakfast.
      G.   Model Home. Shall not be operated at any time other than between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Monday thru Saturday and 12:00 p.m. to 5:00
p.m. on Sunday. These hours may be reduced by the Board of Adjustment as a
condition of an approved Conditional Use Permit. This use does not include
offices for contractors, which are not allowed in residential zoning districts.
A model home Certificate of Occupancy is required for the term of the
conditional use. A Conditional Use Permit for a model home may be allowed for
up to an 18-month period.
   4.   Bulk Regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed,
subject to the modifications contained in Section
167.07.
      A.   Lot area - single-family dwelling - 8,750 square feet; two-family
dwelling - 10,500 square feet; without public sewer - 20,000 square feet.
      B.   Minimum floor area - single-story dwellings - single-family - 1,150
square feet; two-family - 900 square feet per unit; if building is two or more
stories, minimum total finished space, not including basement, 1,350 square
feet for single-family and 1,150 square feet for two-family.
      C.   Lot width - single-family dwelling - 70 feet; two-family dwelling -
85 feet; corner lot - 85 feet; without public sewer - 100 feet.
      D.   Front yard - dwelling - 30 feet. All other principal uses - 50 feet.
      E.   Side yards - eight feet each side for dwelling; three feet for any
accessory building. All other principal uses - 50 feet.
      F.   Rear yard - dwelling - 35 feet. All other principal uses - 50 feet.
      G.   Maximum height - principal building - 35 feet; accessory building -
14 feet.
      H.   Maximum number of stories - principal building – two and one-half
stories; accessory building - one story.
      I.   Accessory buildings - maximum area for accessory garage - 1,000
square feet; maximum area for yard shed - 160 square feet.
Summary of R-2 Bulk Regulations
Summary of R-2 Bulk Regulations
Minimum   8,750 square feet
lot area  10,500 square feet for two-family dwellings
          20,000 square feet where sanitary not available
Maximum   5 units per acre
density
Minimum   Single-story dwellings – single-family – 1,150 square feet; two-family – 900
floor     square feet per unit; if building is 2 or more stories, minimum total finished
area      space, not including basement, 1,350 square feet for single-family and 1,150
          square feet for two-family
          70 square feet – single-family
Lot width 85 feet – two-family
          85 feet for corner lots
          100 feet if no sanitary sewer not available
Front     30 feet for dwellings (25 feet)
yard      50 feet for any permitted use other than dwelling
          8 feet each side
Side yard 3 feet accessory buildings
          50 feet for any permitted use other than dwellings
          35 feet for single-family
Rear yard 3 feet for accessory buildings
          50 feet for any permitted use other than dwellings
Maximum   35 feet principal buildings
height    14 feet accessory buildings
Maximum   2 ½ stories for principal buildings
stories   1 story for accessory buildings
Accessory 1,000 square feet – maximum area for accessory garage
buildings 160 square feet – maximum area for yard shed
          A basement, containing the square footage of at least 60% of the dwelling’s
          habitable first story square footage at the time of original Building Permit
Basements approval, is required in all single-family detached dwellings. This section
          applies to all R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5 District lots within preliminary plats approved
          after January 1, 2026.
 
(Subsection 4 – Ord. 10-20-2025_#02_(679) – Nov. 25 Supp.)
   5.   Off Street Parking and Loading. See Chapter 167.
168.04   R-3 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
   The R-3 District is intended and designed to provide for certain medium
density residential areas of the City now developed with one-family, two-
family, and multiple-family dwellings, and areas where similar residential
development seems likely to occur.
   1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Only the uses of structures or land listed in
this section shall be permitted in the “R-3” District.
      A.   One-family dwellings, to include manufactured homes and family homes
in accordance with the following definitions:
         (1)   Manufactured home, provided it is located and installed
according to the same standards for a foundation system, setback, and minimum
square footage which would apply to a site-built, single-family dwelling on the
same lot. Manufactured home means a structure built according to construction
standards promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development under authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403.
         (2)   Family homes, a community based residential home which is
licensed as a residential care facility or as a child foster care facility to
provide room and board, personal care, rehabilitation services, and supervision
in a family environment exclusively for not more than eight developmentally
disabled persons and any necessary support personnel.
      B.   Two-family dwellings.
      C.   Multiple-family dwellings, including row housing, cooperative
apartment houses, and condominium units. Maximum of six units per row.
      D.   Alterations and conversions of single-family dwellings into two-
family dwellings in accordance with the lot area, frontage, and yard
requirements as set forth in this section and the fire separation provisions of
the Building Code.
      E.   Churches, cathedrals, temples, and similar places of worship,
provided that all principal buildings be set back a minimum of 50 feet from all
property lines.
      F.   Museums, libraries, parks and playgrounds, community centers, and
similar uses operated by the City.
      G.   Golf courses, country clubs, tennis courts, and similar recreational
uses, provided that any such use be not operated primarily for commercial gain.
      H.   Public and parochial schools, elementary and secondary, and other
educational institutions having established current curriculum the same as
ordinarily given in the Southeast Polk Public School System, but excluding
boarding schools, nursery schools, and childcare centers, provided that all
principal buildings are set back a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines.
      I.   Zero lot line dwellings, including semi-detached duplex and
townhomes, of not more than six units in a continuous row.
      J.   Nursing, convalescent, and retirement homes.
      K.   Childcare centers and nursery schools.
   2.   Permitted Accessory Uses.
      A.   Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to
one of the principal permitted uses, unless otherwise excluded.
      B.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which
buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
      C.   Swimming pools when enclosed by a non-climbable barrier at least six
feet in height, and residential swimming pools when enclosed by a non-climbable
barrier at least four feet in height.
      D.   Private plant nurseries and greenhouses not exceeding 240 square
feet of floor area and not involving retail or wholesale sales.
      E.   TV dish antennas in accordance with Chapter
167.11.
      F.   Accessory uses in the R-3 District are exempt from the size
limitations contained in Section
167.04
      G.   Signs in accordance with Chapter 159.
   3.   Permitted Conditional Uses.
      A.   Home Occupations. A Conditional Use Permit must be applied for and
received from the Board of Adjustment for a home occupation which does not meet
the requirements set forth in Section
167.15.
      B.   Communication towers (freestanding type), see Section
167.12.
      C.   Communication towers (building-supported type), see Section
167.13.
      D.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS), see section
167.14.
      E.   Bed and breakfast.
      F.   Model Home. Shall not be operated at any time other than between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday and 12:00 p.m. to 5:
00 p.m. on Sunday. These hours may be reduced by the Board of Adjustment as a
condition of an approved Conditional Use Permit. This use does not include
offices for contractors, which are not allowed in residential zoning districts.
A model home Certificate of Occupancy is required for the term of the
conditional use. A Conditional Use Permit for a model home may be allowed for
up to an 18-month period.
   4.   Bulk Regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed,
subject to the modifications contained in Section
167.07.
      A.   Minimum lot area - 9,000 square feet.
      B.   Maximum density - 20 dwelling units per acre.
      C.   Minimum floor area - single-story dwellings - single-family - 1,150
square feet; two-family - 900 square feet per unit; if building is two or more
stories, minimum total finished space not including basement, 1,350 square feet
for single-family and 1,150 square feet for two-family; multiple-family – no
living space requirements.
      D.   Lot width - single-family - 70 feet; two-family - 85 feet; multi-
family - 85 feet; corner lot - 85 feet.
      E.   Front yard - single-family and two-family - 30 feet; all other uses
- 50 feet..
      F.   Side yards - single-family and two-family – eight feet on each side;
multiple-family - 11 feet on each side; other principal permitted uses - 50
feet.
      G.   Rear yard - single-family and two-family - 35 feet; other principal
permitted uses - 50 feet.
      H.   Maximum height - principal building - 45 feet; accessory building -
14 feet.
      I.   Maximum number of stories - principal building - three stories;
accessory building - one story.
      J.   Additional requirements for multi-family dwellings:
         (1)   Site Plan submittal per Section
171.01.
         (2)   Twenty percent open space as a minimum.
         (3)   Landscaping per Sections
167.10 and
171.02.
         (4)   Public improvements per City specifications.
         (5)   Public streets and utilities required for townhomes.
         (6)   Private drives, parking, and utilities allowed for condominiums.
         (7)   Thirty-foot buffer where adjacent to single-family or two-family
residential.
         (8)   Multi-family dwellings only permitted on platted lots of record.
Summary of R-3 Bulk Regulations
Summary of R-3 Bulk Regulations
Minimum   9,000 square feet
lot area
Maximum   20 units per acre
density
          Single-story dwellings - single-family - 1,150 square feet; two-family - 900
Minimum   square feet per unit; if building is 2 or more stories, minimum total
floor     finished space not including basement, 1,350 square feet for single-family
area      and 1,150 square feet for two-family; multiple-family - no living space
          requirements
          70 feet for single-family
          85 feet for two-family
Lot width 85 feet for multi-family
          5 feet for corner lots
          100 feet if no sanitary sewer available
Front     30 feet for dwellings
yard      50 feet for any permitted use other than dwellings
          8 feet each side for single-family, two-family
Side yard 11 feet each side for multi-family
          3 feet for accessory buildings
          50 feet for all other permitted uses
          35 feet for single- and two-family
Rear yard 3 feet for accessory buildings
          50 feet for any permitted use other than single- and two-family
Maximum   35 feet for principal buildings
height    14 feet for accessory buildings
Maximum   3 stories for principal buildings
stories   1 story for accessory buildings
          A basement, containing the square footage of at least 60% of the dwelling’s
          habitable first story square footage at the time of original Building Permit
Basements approval, is required in all single-family detached dwellings. This section
          applies to all R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5 District lots within preliminary plats
          approved after January 1, 2026.
Maximum   35 feet for principal buildings
height    14 feet for accessory buildings
Maximum   3 stories for principal buildings
stories   1 story for accessory buildings
 
(Subsection 4 – Ord. 10-20-2025_#02_(679) – Nov. 25 Supp.)
   5.   Off Street Parking and Loading. See Chapter 167.
   6.   Zero Lot Line Requirements. Townhomes, condominiums, and semi-detached
duplexes, cooperatives, or any other form of attached real property transfer
which utilize shared walls as part of the structure shall conform with the
following requirements:
      A.   Covenants must be submitted which address all legal implications
associated with shared walls.
      B.   Prior to construction, a registered land surveyor shall precisely
stake the location of the structures. Verification shall be submitted to the
building department prior to receiving a building permit.
      C.   Filing Requirements.
         (1)   Townhomes or any shared wall units where the property is
transferred is subject to the following: Prior to filing or recording any
documents relating to townhome ownership with the State or County officers, the
declarant shall file with the City the townhome instruments, including any
Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions, Articles of Incorporation, and By-
Laws.
         (2)   Condominiums or any shared wall units where the property is not
transferred is subject to the following: Prior to filing or recording any
documents relating to townhome ownership with the State or County officers, the
declarant shall file with the City the condominium instruments including the
Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions, By-Laws, Plats, and Condominium
Disclosure Statement or Articles of Cooperation.
168.05   R-4 MOBILE HOME PARK RESIDENTIAL.
   The R-4 District is intended to provide for certain medium density
residential areas of the City which, by reason of their design and location,
are suitable for mobile home development and which are compatible with
surrounding residential areas. For this section only, the term “park” shall
refer to the entire mobile home park area and the term “lot” shall refer to an
individual mobile home stall rented within the park.
   1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Mobile home parks, in accordance with
regulations of the State and minimum requirements contained herein, but not
including mobile home sales and display areas. No part of any park shall be
used for non-residential purposes except such uses that are required for the
direct servicing and well-being of park residents, such as a community
building, and for the management and maintenance of the park. This shall in no
way prohibit the sale by a resident owner of a mobile home located on a mobile
home stand and connected to the pertinent utilities.
   2.   Accessory Uses.
      A.   Accessory uses may include common facility service buildings which
provide laundry facilities, accessory supplies, vending machines, etc.; also
park management buildings, maintenance buildings, community buildings, and
other uses of a similar nature. All such buildings shall be located within the
central park area, shall be restricted to the use of the park occupants and
shall be subject to approval of the Council.
      B.   Signs in accordance with Chapter 159.
   3.   Plan Submittal. Each petition for a change to the R-4 zoning
classification shall be accompanied by a sketch plan. The sketch plan shall
show each mobile home space, the water, electrical, and sewer lines serving
each mobile home space, the location of garbage receptacles, water hydrants,
service buildings, driveways, walkways, recreation areas, playgrounds, required
yards, existing and proposed grading, parking facilities, storm shelter,
lighting, landscaping, and the location of existing trees, buildings, or other
significant features. Prior to development, a Site Plan must be submitted. The
Site Plan will be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the
Council, who may approve or disapprove the plan or require such changes thereto
as deemed necessary. The Site Plan shall be accompanied by a covenant to run
with the land, in favor of the City and all persons having a possessory
interest in any portion of the mobile home park, that the owner or owners of
the park, or their successors in interest, will maintain all interior streets,
parking areas, sidewalks, and plantings in compliance with City ordinances and
the Site Plan as approved by the Council, which covenant shall be recorded in
the office of the County Recorder.
   4.   Bulk Requirements. (See
Figure K.)
      A.   Minimum Park Area. A proposed mobile home park shall have a minimum
area of five acres.
      B.   Maximum Park Density. The maximum density allowed for the gross
development area shall be seven mobile home units per gross acre.
      C.   Park Setbacks. A mobile home park shall have a perimeter yard
setback of not less than 35 feet. No part of any mobile home lot shall be
located in the perimeter setback. In addition, no part of any mobile home lot
shall be located closer than 75 feet to any public street upon which the park
adjoins. Interior park streets may be located within the setback areas.
      D.   Minimum Lot Area. Each individual mobile home lot shall contain not
less than 5,000 square feet in area with a minimum depth of 100 feet.
      E.   Front Yard. Each lot shall have a front yard not less than 20 feet
in depth measured from the edge of the surfaced private street to the closest
point of the lower face of the mobile home.
      F.   Side Yard. Side yards of each individual mobile home lot shall not
be less than seven feet for mobile homes.
      G.   Rear Yard. Rear yards of each individual mobile home lot shall not
be less than 10 feet for mobile homes.
      H.   Open Space. A minimum of 250 square feet for each lot shall be
provided for one or more open spaces which shall be easily accessible to all
park residents. The required yards and setbacks, including the perimeter
setback, shall not be computed as part of the required open space area. An open
space is defined as land which is specifically set aside for leisure or
recreational uses.
      I.   Height Regulations. Maximum height of 20 feet for mobile or modular
homes; 35 feet for service buildings, park offices, maintenance buildings,
community buildings, and storm shelters; 14 feet for accessory buildings such
as garages.
      J.   Accessory Buildings. Maximum area for accessory garage - 1,000
square feet; maximum area for yard shed - 160 square feet.
Summary of R-4 Bulk Regulations
Summary of R-4 Bulk Regulations
Minimum park area    5 acres (217,800 square feet)
Maximum park density 7 units per acre
Park setbacks        35 feet yard required around perimeter of park
                     75 feet setback from adjoining streets
Minimum lot area     5,000 square feet
                     100 feet depth minimum
Front yard           20 feet
Side yard            Minimum building separation of 25 feet
                     7 feet side yard
Rear yard            Minimum building separation of 25 feet
                     10 feet rear yard
Open space           250 square feet per lot
                     20 feet mobile or modular units
Maximum height       35 feet service, maintenance, and community buildings
                     14 feet accessory structures
Accessory buildings  1,000 square feet – maximum area for accessory garage
                     160 square feet – maximum area for yard shed
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6a43282d2a678a695d43270b2092f87b29150e83/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2759.png]
 
Figure K
   5.   Parking. A minimum of two off-street car spaces directly accessible to
the private street for each mobile home lot shall be provided. Garage stalls
shall not count toward the minimum off-street parking requirements. These
required parking spaces, or parking areas, shall be so located as to provide
convenient access to the mobile homes, but shall not exceed a distance of 200
feet from the mobile home that it is intended to serve. All parking areas shall
be constructed with a concrete or asphaltic concrete surface. Parking stalls
shall be a minimum of nine and one-half feet in width by 20 feet in length.
   6.   Streets. The entrance road connecting the park streets with a public
street shall have a minimum road pavement width of 31 feet, measured back to
back of curbs. All interior streets shall be not less than 26 feet in width,
measured back to back of curbs. All streets shall be constructed in accordance
with appropriate ordinances and specifications of the City.
   7.   Anchoring and Skirting.
      A.   Tie-downs or anchors shall be provided on every mobile home stand.
Each tie-down or anchor must be able to sustain a minimum tensile strength of
2,800 pounds.
      B.   Skirting of a permanent type material and construction shall be
installed within 90 days to enclose the open space between the bottom of a
mobile home floor and the grade level of the mobile home stand. This skirting
shall be maintained in an attractive manner consistent with the exterior of the
mobile home and to preserve the appearance of the mobile home park.
   8.   Utilities. Sewer and water facilities shall be provided for each mobile
home lot in accordance with the requirements of the Iowa State Department of
Health. All units shall be individually metered in accordance with City
regulations. All mobile home developments must be connected to the municipal
sanitary sewer system and the municipal water system. All electrical and
telephone lines shall be placed underground. All gas lines shall be black
steel, 120#. Each unit shall have an accessible water shut-off valve as
approved by the Water Department.
   9.   Storm Shelters. Mobile homes are extremely vulnerable to tornadoes and
other high wind conditions. The greatest number of casualties in tornadoes
generally come from mobile home developments. This is primarily due to the fact
that the mobile home is usually not anchored to as firm of a foundation as a
regularly constructed building and cannot take the impact of the extremely high
winds and the accompanying flying debris. Tie-downs do not greatly increase the
stability in extremely high wind or tornado type conditions, though may be
fully adequate for lesser wind and thunderstorm conditions. Another concern in
mobile home developments is the closeness of the units which causes additional
damage. When one home is destroyed by the winds, the debris is forced into the
next subsequent unit and thereby weakening them in a domino type effect,
increasing both the loss to property and the residents. Every mobile home park
of 10 or more lots which is constructed after March 15, 1999, shall be provided
with above or below-grade storm shelters that conform to the following
requirements:
      A.   A minimum floor area of 12 square feet shall be provided for each
lot located in the mobile home park.
      B.   Shelters shall be centrally located to provide a minimum travel
distance of not more than 600 feet from any mobile home space. It may be
necessary to provide more than one shelter.
      C.   Shelters shall not be located in flood prone areas.
      D.   Shelters shall be designed and constructed to meet all applicable
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
      E.   Shelters shall be designed by a licensed structural engineer or
architect and built in accordance with plans sealed by said structural engineer
or architect.
      F.   A shelter may be utilized for other purposes which are allowed as
accessory uses in this district; with the exception that the required minimum
floor area shall not be infringed, nor shall the function of the structure as a
storm shelter be limited in any way.
      G.   Shelters shall remain accessible at all hours.
      H.   For any addition of 10 or more lots to any existing mobile home
park, a storm shelter which complies with the general requirements of this
chapter shall be provided to serve such additional lots. For any addition of
fewer than 10 lots to an existing mobile home park which otherwise complies
with the requirements of this section, there is no requirement that an
additional shelter be provided to serve such additional lots. Provided,
however, that when two or more such additions occur, which result in a
cumulative addition of 10 or more lots, a storm shelter shall be provided to
serve such additional lots.
168.06   R-5 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (P.U.D.).
   The R-5 District is intended and designed to provide a means for the
development of large tracts of ground on a unit basis, allowing greater
flexibility and diversification of land uses and building locations than the
conventional single lot method provided in other sections of this Zoning Code.
It is the intent of this section that the basic principles of good land use
planning, including an orderly and graded relationship between various types of
uses, be maintained and that the sound zoning standards as set forth in this
Zoning Code and statutes concerning population density, adequate light and air,
recreation and open space, and building coverage be preserved. Planned Unit
Developments shall be permitted on any five acre or larger tract of land that
has been zoned or rezoned for P.U.D. purposes by the Council.
   1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Buildings and permitted conditional uses
shall be used only for residential purposes; occupant garages, occupant storage
space, and similar accessory uses; non-commercial recreational facilities, and
community activities, including churches and schools, with the following
exception; on a tract of land in excess of 80 acres or more, up to five percent
of the total net area may be developed for commercial uses such as those found
in the C-1 classification district. The following is a description of permitted
uses:
      A.   One-family dwellings, to include manufactured homes in accordance
with the following definition: Manufactured home, provided it is located and
installed according to the same standards for a foundation system, setback, and
minimum square footage which would apply to a site-built, single-family
dwelling on the same lot. Manufactured home means a structure built according
to construction standards promulgated by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development under authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403.
      B.   Two-family dwellings.
      C.   Multiple-family dwellings, including row housing cooperative
apartment houses and condominium units.
      D.   Churches, cathedrals, temples, and similar places of worship,
provided that all principal buildings be set back a minimum of 50 feet from all
property lines.
      E.   Museums, libraries, parks and playgrounds, community centers, and
similar uses operated by the City.
      F.   Golf courses, country clubs, tennis courts, and similar recreational
uses, provided that any such use not be operated primarily for commercial gain.
      G.   Public and parochial schools, elementary and secondary, and other
educational institutions having established current curriculum the same as
ordinarily given in the Southeast Polk Public School System, but excluding
boarding schools, nursery schools, and childcare centers, provided that all
principal buildings are set back a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines.
      H.   Any use that is approved and made a part of the Development Plan,
subject to any conditions attached thereto, shall be permitted.
   2.   Permitted Accessory Uses.
      A.   Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to
one of the principal permitted uses, unless otherwise excluded.
      B.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which
buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
      C.   Swimming pools when enclosed by a non-climbable barrier at least six
feet in height, and residential swimming pools when enclosed by a non-climbable
barrier at least four feet in height.
      D.   TV dish antennas in accordance with Chapter
167.11.
   3.   Permitted Conditional Uses.
      A.   Home Occupations. A Conditional Use Permit must be applied for and
received from the Board of Adjustment for a home occupation which does not meet
the requirements set forth in Section
167.15.
      B.   Communication towers (freestanding type), see Section
167.12.
      C.   Communication towers of the building-supported type, see Section
167.13.
      D.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS), see Section
167.14.
      E.   Model Home. Shall not be operated at any time, other than between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday and 12:00 p.m.
to 5:00 p.m. on Sunday. These hours may be reduced by the Board of Adjustment
as a condition of an approved Conditional Use Permit. This use does not include
offices for contractors, which are not allowed in residential zoning districts.
A model home Certificate of Occupancy is required for the term of the
conditional use. A Conditional Use Permit for a model home may be allowed for
up to an 18-month period.
   4.   Bulk Regulations. Although a P.U.D. is intended to promote and permit
flexibility of design and thereby may involve modifications of conventional
regulations or standards, certain requirements which are set forth below shall
be applied to ensure that the development is compatible with the intent of this
chapter. Height, setback, bulk, and other requirements set out in the
Development Plan shall constitute the basis for and become the zoning
requirement for that particular P.U.D., provided that refinements may be made
through final plan approval, if not defined as a substantial modification. In
addition, the following minimum requirements shall be observed.
      A.   The minimum lot and yard requirements of the original zoning
designation of the development need not apply. The Council may require open
space or screenings be located along all or a portion of the development
boundaries.
      B.   The height requirements of the zoning district directly adjacent to
the development boundary shall apply within 125 feet of the development
boundary and land.
      C.   All public streets, water mains, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer
facilities shall comply with appropriate ordinances and specifications of the
City.
      D.   “Common land”, as referred to in this section, refers to the land
retained in private ownership for the use of all residents of the development,
or to land dedicated to the general public.
      E.   Any land gained within the development because of the reduction in
lot sizes below minimum Zoning Code requirements shall be placed in common land
to be dedicated to the City or retained in private ownership to be managed by a
homeowner’s association.
      F.   The requirements of this Zoning Code relating to off-street parking
and loading shall apply to all R-5 Districts.
      G.   The final plan shall comply with the density requirements set forth
in the Development Plan, but shall in no case exceed 20 units per acre.
      H.   Project phases shall be substantially and functionally self-
contained and self-sustaining with regard to access, parking, utilities,
required open space, screening, and transitional elements and other support
features, and be capable of supporting required operation and maintenance
activities; temporary provisions, such as turnarounds or access easements, may
be required for this purpose; the initial phases generally should not be
comprised of the most intensive portions of the P.U.D., unless the City concurs
this is the most feasible means of developing the property in terms of access,
sewer service, or similar physical constraints, or will permit earlier
development of common amenities.
      I.   Attention shall be given to mitigation of existing or potential land
use conflicts through proper orientation, open space, setbacks, landscaping and
screening, grading, traffic circulation, and architectural compatibility. It is
the intent of this chapter to recognize that appropriate use of the design
techniques will provide the require mitigation, and thereby eliminate the need
for certain conventional regulations or standards. As examples and not
requirements: orienting views, access, and principal activities away from the
land use needing protection, placing those least compatible activities farthest
from the common boundary and those most compatible nearest, can create an
effective buffer; setbacks in conjunction with landscaping can mitigate
conflicts by providing a visual buffer, controlling pedestrian access,
softening visual contrast by subduing the differences in architecture and mass,
and reducing heat, and dense landscaping can reduce the width of physical
separation needed for such purposes; proper grading will control drainage, can
alter views and subdue sound, and channel access; fences, walls, and berms will
channel access and control visual, sound, and light pollution; proper
architectural use of color, bulk, materials, and shape will enhance
compatibility and reduce contrast, although details added to the building for
aesthetic purpose without consideration to form and surroundings may be
detrimental rather than helpful; and proper design of pedestrian ways, streets,
and points of congestion and safety hazards, and help prevent introduction of
noise, pollutants, and other conflicts into areas with less intensive land use.
Other techniques may also be used.
      J.   There shall be a minimum setback of 20 feet for any garage whose
opening faces the street.
      K.   Permanent care and maintenance of open space, recreation amenities,
and other common elements shall be provided in a legally binding form. Any of
these items, not dedicated to the City or held in single ownership, will
require the submittal of proposed bylaws of a homeowner’s association fully
defining the functions, responsibilities, and operating procedures of the
association. The applicant shall file the proposed documents governing the
association for review by legal counsel for compliance with the following
requirements at the time the final plat or site plan is filed;
         (1)   Membership shall be mandatory for each home buyer and any
successive buyer.
         (2)   The open space restrictions shall be in perpetuity, or
automatically renewable, and shall not terminate except by approval of both the
homeowners’ association and the City.
         (3)   The homeowners’ association shall be responsible for liability
insurance, local taxes, and the maintenance of recreational and other
facilities.
         (4)   Homeowners shall pay their pro rata share of the cost or the
assessment levied by the association shall become a lien on the property.
         (5)   The association shall be able to adjust the assessment to meet
changes as needed.
         (6)   No change in open space use or dissolution of homeowners’
association shall occur without approval by the City.
         (7)   Additionally, the proposed bylaws shall include, but not be
limited to, the following provisions:
            a.   Automatically extending membership in the association to all
owners of dwelling units within the development;
            b.   Limiting the uses of the common property to those permitted by
the final development;
            c.   Granting to each owner of a dwelling unit within the
development the right to use and enjoyment of the common property;
            d.   Giving every owner of a dwelling unit voting rights in the
association; and
            e.   If the development will combine rental and for-sale dwelling
units, stating the relationship between the renters and the homeowner’s
association and the rights renters shall have to the use of the common land.
      L.   Private open space shall be provided adjacent and accessible to each
dwelling consisting of balconies, deck, or yard. Required open space on the
ground level shall generally have a minimum dimension of 15 feet and minimum
area of 400 square feet, and one-half of the required area shall not exceed a
slope of five percent. Private open space for dwelling units located entirely
above the ground floor shall generally have a minimum dimension of six feet and
minimum area of 60 square feet.
      M.   Performance bonds may be required to ensure completion of
recreational amenities provided in lieu of public facilities, or for mitigating
elements such as screening or public improvements.
      N.   Except where the City agrees to other arrangements, a P.U.D. shall
be comprised of a single owner, or a group of owners acting as a partnership or
corporation with each agreeing in advance to be bound by the conditions which
will be effective in the P.U.D.
      O.   Covenants to run with the land, in favor of the City and all persons
having a proprietary interest in any portion of the development premises,
verifying that the owner of the land, or successors in interest, will maintain
all interior streets, parking areas, sidewalks, common land, parks, and
plantings which have not been dedicated to the City in compliance with City
ordinances.
      P.   Any additional agreements required by the Council at the time of
Development Plan approval.
      Q.   A final plat shall be submitted for each phase of the final plan.
The subdivider shall also submit a site plan for that part of the final plan
that is multi-family or commercial, per the Site Plan Ordinance. (See Chapter
171).
      R.   Signs in accordance with Chapter 159.
      S.   Basement Required. A basement, containing the square footage of at
least 60% of the dwelling’s habitable first story square footage at the time of
original Building Permit approval, is required in all single-family detached
dwellings. This section applies to all R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5 District lots within
preliminary plats approved after January 1, 2026.
(Paragraph S – Ord. 10-20-2025_#02_(679) – Nov. 25 Supp.)
   5.   Procedure.
      A.   Pre-application Conferences. In order to eliminate unnecessary
expenditures of time and money, the developer shall first schedule a pre-
application conference with the Community Development Director, who shall
involve representatives of other departments as deemed appropriate. The
Community Development Director may require submittal of a generalized sketch
plan providing such information as follows:
         (1)   Location and size of the overall site, and of the individual
types of development of uses proposed within the site.
         (2)   Existing topography, indicating major earth-work areas,
stormwater runoff and detention considerations, floodplains, and any problem
areas.
         (3)   Existing tree masses and other geological and environmentally
important characteristics.
         (4)   Generalized vehicular and pedestrian systems and parking areas.
         (5)   Generalized building locations.
         (6)   Approximate gross density, and number and types of dwelling
units in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan; approximate gross floor areas
of commercial land uses, where permitted.
         (7)   Generalized utility line considerations with sanitary sewer
capacity limitations so noted.
         (8)   Generalized public and private ownership boundaries, including
common ownership areas, if any.
         (9)   Generalized building locations for small P.U.D. proposals.
   The Department of Community Development shall have 15 days in which to
review and comment on the pre-application sketch plan. Following the
Department’s review, the developer may request an informal consideration of the
proposal by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Said consideration shall be
non-binding on either party.
      B.   Rezoning or Development Plan Application. Following the pre-
application conference, the applicant shall submit a petition for rezoning in
accordance with standard City procedures for rezonings, accompanied by a
Development Plan and related documents, as described in Subsection 6.
         (1)   The petition and Development Plan shall be referred to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for study and report, and for public hearing as
required by this chapter for rezonings. The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall review the Development Plan for conformity to the standards of this
section, and may approve the Development Plan as submitted; require the
petitioner to modify, alter, adjust, or amend the Development Plan as deemed
necessary to preserve the intent and purpose of this section to promote public
health, safety, morals, and general welfare; or recommend that it be denied.
The action of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be reported to the
Council, where upon the Council may approve or disapprove the petition and
Development Plan as reported or may require such changes thereto as deemed
necessary to effectuate the intent and purpose of this chapter.
         (2)   The Department of Community Development shall schedule all
required public hearings as soon as possible after all required information has
been submitted. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall report their findings
to the Council in a timely manner. In the event they fail to take action within
60 days after the date of public hearing, the petitioner or anyone located
within the notification area as defined for rezonings may request in writing
that the Planning and Zoning Commission complete their considerations. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall then take action within the next 30 days
and report their findings to the Council for consideration by the Council,
unless the Council expressly grants the Planning and Zoning Commission
additional time to complete negotiations, studies, or other items as necessary.
      C.   Final Plans. Final plans for the Planned Unit Development shall be
comprised of site plans or preliminary and final subdivision plats as
appropriate to the situation due to requirements of the site planning and
subdivision ordinances or specific provisions of the Development Plan. Such
site plans and plats shall contain all information and be processed in the
manner set forth in said ordinances, in addition to complying with any specific
provisions of the Development Plan, and shall generally comply with the
development concepts outlined in the Development Plan. No public notice or
hearing shall be required for Final Plans unless required by the Development
Plan or caused to be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Council
as deemed appropriate. Provided that deviation from the Development Plan may be
permitted as refinements to the design and planning if not defined by this
chapter as substantial modification requiring amendment to the Development
Plan. Substantial modifications shall be submitted for approval by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and Council.
         (1)   Final plans may cover all or part of the Planned Unit
Development, provided that a final plan covering only a part of a P.U.D. is
hereby defined as a phase irrespective of contrary provisions by the
Development Plan and shall demonstrate the ability to be self-sustaining in
terms of access, services, utilities, open space, economic viability, and other
major consideration.
         (2)   If it is the desire of the petitioner, preliminary plat or final
Site Plan approval may be obtained at the time of Development Plan approval by
expressly declaring such intent and filing all information required by the
subdivision and site planning ordinances. Final Site Plan approval shall not be
granted for an unplatted parcel unless an accurate property survey is also
filed as part of the preliminary plat, if a plat is required, or as a certified
property survey in the event a plat is not required.
         (3)   The final plan shall include proposed housing, types of housing,
locations, density, building clearances, and documents, per the bulk
requirements section of this chapter, so that the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Council can adequately review all aspects of the proposed P.U.D.
         (4)   Upon approval of final plans, building permits shall be issued
in the same manner as for building permits generally. In any event where
platting is required, no building permits shall be issued until the final plat
is approved and recorded and all other requirements complied with. Final plans
shall be binding on the petitioner, and any and all successors in title, so
long as P.U.D. zoning applies to the land, unless amended in accordance with
the procedures set forth.
      D.   Amendments or Modifications. Substantial modifications to the Master
Plan shall be processed in the same manner as a rezoning and additionally shall
comply with the application process for a P.U.D. as set forth in this chapter.
Notice and public hearing requirements, and the effect of a denial shall be the
same as for rezoning, provided that the notification area shall be those
property owners proximate to the parcel covered by the amendment, as opposed to
the entire P.U.D.
   Further provided that, in the event a requested amendment for a portion of
the entire P.U.D. is denied, such action shall not create any limitations under
rezoning procedure on the filling of an amendment to another portion of the
P.U.D. having a substantially different notification area. Any ambiguities or
disputes between this section and procedures for rezonings shall be resolved in
favor of the more restrictive requirements.
         (1)   Substantial modifications are hereby defined to include, but are
not limited to, the following: increased density; intensification of use by
changing to a higher classification, with conventional single-family being the
lowest classification and progressing to attached single-family, multiple-
family, public facilities or uses, approved conditional uses, commercial (where
permitted); addition of uses, or elimination of conditions or restrictions on a
use or uses; increased floor area ratios, or other modifications considered
probable to generate increased traffic, sewage, waste consumption, or other
detrimental conditions; significant modifications to peripheral buffering or
screening, setbacks, height, location of buildings, drives, or other
improvements, which were intended for protection of proximate properties,
provided that substitution of equivalent screening materials shall not be
considered a substantial modification; modifications to the street pattern,
such as that of major streets or continuations of existing streets which will
have a demonstrable impact on traffic flow such as to effectively change the
functional classification of the street; modifications to access which may lead
to increased congestion, or to additional commercial or industrial traffic on a
local residential street; or other changes deemed substantial by the Director
of Community Development.
         (2)   Modifications to final plans shall follow the procedures of the
site planning or subdivision ordinances, as appropriate, except in the case of
a substantial modification as defined above.
   6.   Information Required on the Development Plan Application. The following
information, plans, and maps shall be submitted as part of the application for
a Planned Unit Development:
      A.   Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of owners, developer, and
designer; name of development, date, north point, and scale;
      B.   Legal description of the P.U.D., and map of the boundary of the
proposed P.U.D. as well as interior boundaries of proposed development phases,
and of any existing separate ownerships;
      C.   Sufficient information on adjacent properties to indicate
relationships to the proposed development, including such information as land
divisions, land use, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, significant natural
features or physical improvements, and drainage pattern;
      D.   Existing site conditions including contours at intervals sufficient
to indicate topographic conditions (generally two feet), drainage ways and 100
year floodplains, floodways, heavy woods, or other significant natural areas,
and existing structures;
      E.   General locations of proposed lots and attached residential,
multiple family, commercial (where permitted), recreational facilities; further
delineating areas with different uses or building types, and gross density per
acre;
      F.   General location and size of areas to be dedicated or reserved for
common open space, park, schools, recreation area, and similar uses, and how
any private facilities are proposed to be maintained;
      G.   Existing and proposed general circulation systems, including
streets, pedestrian ways, major off-street parking and loading areas, and major
points of access;
      H.   Existing and proposed general sanitary and storm sewer systems,
water mains, and drainageways;
      I.   Proposed development standards, including uses, density, floor area
ratios for non-residential developments, lot areas and widths, setbacks, and
exceptions or variances from general requirements of zoning and other
ordinances;
      J.   Sewer usage computations in accordance with the criteria of the
sewer district;
      K.   Treatment of transitional zones around the perimeter of the project
for protection of adjoining properties, including setbacks and buffer areas,
landscaping, fences, or other screening, height limitations, or other
provisions;
      L.   A narrative or graphic explanation of the planning and design
concepts and objectives the owner intends to follow in implementing the
proposed development, including a description of the character of the proposed
development; the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made; the
compatibility with the surrounding area; and design considerations for
architecture, engineering, landscaping, open space, and so forth;
      M.   A statement of intent with regard to selling or leasing all or
portions of the proposed development;
      N.   Proposed energy conservation methods, such as siting or design of
structures; and
      O.   Proposed phasing timetable.
   The Director may require any additional information which may be needed to
evaluate the proposed P.U.D. on the basis of special or unforeseen
circumstances, or may waive any of the above requirements if it is found that
such information is unnecessary to properly evaluate the proposed P.U.D.
   The above information should be shown in a clear and logical manner in a
legible scale. Sheet size should not exceed 36 inches by 48 inches. Generally,
existing conditions should be illustrated on a separate sheet for the sake of
clarity, although existing topography, access, utility, and sewer lines and
other items that are appropriate for understanding the proposal should also
appear on the proposed Development Plan. It is strongly recommended that an
architect, landscape architect, and civil engineer be employed to prepare the
plans.
   7.   Referral to Council. The Final Plan and required documents shall be
reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission for compliance with the R-
5 District standards and substantial compliance with the Development Plan. The
Planning and Zoning Commission’s recommendations and report on the Final Plan
shall be referred to the Council for final approval. The Final Plan, consisting
of a final subdivision plat or site plan shall be approved by the Council
before any building permit is issued.
   8.   Contingent Approval. The Council may make the approval of the
Development Plan contingent upon the completion of construction and
improvements within a reasonable period of time; provided, however, that in the
determination of such period, the Council shall consider the scope and
magnitude of the development project and any schedule of construction and
improvements submitted by the developer. Failure to complete all construction
and improvements within said period of time shall be deemed sufficient cause
for the Council to rezone the unimproved property to the classification
effective at the time of original submission of the Development Plan, unless an
extension as recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by
the Council for due cause is shown. Any proposed change in the Development
Plan, after approval by the Counci,l shall be resubmitted and considered in the
same manner as the original proposal. The term “unimproved” property shall mean
all property situated within a stage or stages of the final development plan
upon which the installation of improvements has not been commenced.
   9.   Continuing to Second and Subsequent Stages. In no event shall the
installation of any infrastructure improvements be commenced in the second or
subsequent stages of the final Development Plan until such time as 90 percent
of all improvements have been completed and approved by the City for any prior
stage. In the event the first development phase has not commenced within two
years after the date of rezoning, or if subsequent phases are delayed more than
two years beyond the indicated development schedule, the developer shall file
appropriate information detailing the reasons for the delay with the Department
of Community Development. The Director shall review the circumstances and
prepare report recommending appropriate action to be taken concerning the
P.U.D.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission and Council shall review the matter, and
may continue the P.U.D. zoning with revised time limits; require that
appropriate amendments be made or action taken, such amendments to comply with
the procedures of this section if deemed substantial; continue the P.U.D.
zoning for part of the area, with or without revised time limits, and initiate
rezoning or the remainder to an appropriate district; or initiate rezoning of
the entire parcel to an appropriate district, provided that the rezoning shall
not be to a zone more restrictive than that applied immediately prior to the
rezoning to P.U.D. except after comprehensive planning analysis. The Planning
and Zoning Commission and Council may schedule such public hearings as deemed
appropriate. Approval of a final Site Plan or preliminary plat shall be deemed
to commence development, provided that the permanent placement of construction
materials shall have started and be proceeding without delay within two years
after the date of Site Plan approval, and a Final Plat approved within one year
after the date of preliminary plat approval in the event a Site Plan is not
required. Failure to comply with this provision shall void the Site Plan and
preliminary plat approvals, and make the P.U.D. subject to review as provided
above. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to comply with all
prescribed time limits without notice from the City.
   10.   Zoning Density of R-5 Districts. The zoning density of R-5 Districts
shall be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation as
approved, or amended, or finally passed by the Council; and the density shall
be established and interpreted by the administration of the Zoning Code upon
the basis of the plan for the overall development of the tract as the plan is
approved and filed with the Council on final passage. In determining the
density of the R-5 District, it shall be considered what the zoning is of
adjoining property and the use of adjoining property and density of adjoining
property; however, this policy shall not be binding on the Council in setting
the final density for the R-5 District zoned properties. In no case shall an
average density be approved which exceeds 20 dwelling units per acre. Each
parcel of real estate that is zoned R-5 District must have its density
determined on the merits of each case. Any real estate zoned R-5 District prior
to the enactment of the ordinance codified herein shall be bound by the density
that is shown in the plans as accepted and approved by the Council for the
development of said real estate.
168.07   C-1 TRANSITIONAL COMMERCIAL.
   The C-1 District is intended and designed to provide space for limited
professional, retail, and service activities which serve adjacent residential
areas with reasonable proximity for the satisfaction of daily consumer needs.
   1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Only the uses of structures or land listed in
this section shall be permitted in the C-1 District.
      A.   Residential uses, if attached to a permitted commercial use.
Residential units not permitted on first floor of structure.
      B.   Hospitals, clinics, group medical centers, or the office of a
doctor, dentist, osteopath, or similar profession.
      C.   Business and professional offices including the following: law,
engineering, real estate, insurance, and similar uses.
      D.   Funeral homes or mortuaries.
      E.   Personal service businesses such as beauty and barber shops, shoe
repair, and similar uses.
      F.   Retail business or service establishments, such as the following:
         (1)   Clothes cleaning and laundry pickup stations.
         (2)   Drug stores.
         (3)   Gift shops.
         (4)   Photographic studios.
         (5)   Post office substations.
         (6)   Movie rental.
         (7)   Combinations of the above uses.
   2.   Permitted Accessory Uses.
      A.   Uses of land and or structures customarily incidental and
subordinate to one of the principal permitted uses, unless otherwise excluded.
      B.   Signs in accordance with Chapter 159.
      C.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, said
buildings shall be removed upon the completion of construction or abandonment
of the construction site.
      D.   TV dish antennas in accordance with Chapter
167.11.
   3.   Permitted Conditional Uses.
      A.   Home Occupations. A Conditional Use Permit must be applied for and
received from the Board of Adjustment for a home occupation which does not meet
the requirements set forth in Section
167.15.
      B.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS), see section
167.14.
   4.   Bulk Regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
subject to the modifications contained in Section
167.07.
      A.   Minimum lot area - 9,000 square feet.
      B.   Maximum density - 10 units per acre.
      C.   Lot width - commercial uses - no minimum; commercial with attached
dwelling units - 85 feet; corner lots - 85 feet; no public sanitary sewer - 100
feet.
      D.   Front yard - 30 feet.
      E.   Side yards - 11 feet on each side for principal building; four feet
for accessory buildings.
      F.   Rear yard - 40 feet, and three feet for accessory buildings.
      G.   Maximum height - principal building - 35 feet; accessory building -
14 feet.
      H.   Maximum number of stories - principal building - two and one-half
stories; accessory building - one story.
      I.   A minimum of 15 percent of the lot area shall be retained as
landscaped open space to include such items as walks, trees, shrubs, fountains,
or other ornamental features.
Summary of C-1 Bulk Regulations
Summary of C-1 Bulk Regulations
Minimum lot area   9,000 square feet
Maximum density    10 units per acre
                   Commercial – no minimum (unless a corner lot)
Lot width          Commercial with dwelling units – 85 feet
                   Corner lot – 85 feet
                   Without public sanitary sewer – 100 feet
Front yard setback 30 feet
Side yard setback  Principal building – 11 feet/side
                   Accessory building – 4 feet
Rear yard setback  Principal building – 40 feet
                   Accessory building – 3 feet
Maximum height     Principal building – 35 feet
                   Accessory building – 14 feet
Maximum stories    Principal building – 2 ½ stories
                   Accessory building – 1 story
Open space         15 percent of lot area
168.08   C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL.
   The C-2 District is designed to provide space for the general retail and
professional office uses and efficient development of major retail shopping
areas (other than shopping centers in the C-3 District). The uses permitted are
intended to accommodate both the general retail consumer and the needs and
services of the automobile traveling consumer. Since such areas will be along
major entrances to the City and heavily traveled arterial streets, it is
essential to maintain an aesthetically pleasing appearance through proper
design, site layout, and landscaping, and to minimize interference with through
traffic.
   1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Only the uses of structures or land listed in
this section shall be permitted.
      A.   Retail or service such as the following:
         (1)   Antique shops.
         (2)   Apparel shops.
         (3)   Art shops.
         (4)   Auto and home supply stores.
         (5)   Automotive service stations.
         (6)   Baby and children’s stores.
         (7)   Bakeries and baker outlets - retail sales only.
         (8)   Bicycle shops, sales, and repairs.
         (9)   Book stores.
         (10)   Camera stores.
         (11)   Car washes.
         (12)   Clubs and lodges.
         (13)   Collection office of public utility.
         (14)   Confectionery stores, including ice cream or snack bars.
         (15)   Consumer retail uses, personal services, or business.
         (16)   Convenience or quick stop stores.
         (17)   Dairy stores - retail only.
         (18)   Dance studios.
         (19)   Delicatessens.
         (20)   Dry goods stores.
         (21)   Florist shops and greenhouses.
         (22)   Funeral homes.
         (23)   Furniture stores.
         (24)   Grocery stores including supermarkets.
         (25)   Hardware stores.
         (26)   Hobby shops.
         (27)   Hotels and motels.
         (28)   Household appliances - sales and repair.
         (29)   Jewelry stores and watch repair shops.
         (30)   Key shops.
         (31)   Launderettes; dry-cleaning or pressing establishments.
         (32)   Leather goods store.
         (33)   Meat market for storage and retail sales only.
         (34)   Medical, dental, osteopathic, and clinics.
         (35)   Music stores.
         (36)   Music studios.
         (37)   Paint and wallpaper stores.
         (38)   Plumbing, heating, and air conditioning shops.
         (39)   Printing shops.
         (40)   Professional offices.
         (41)   Public buildings and utilities, including administrative and
sales office, equipment storage buildings, and enclosed storage.
         (42)   Radio and television sales and repair shops.
         (43)   Real estate, insurance, and financial institutions.
         (44)   Refrigeration and air conditioning service and repair,
electrical.
         (45)   Restaurants, nightclubs, cafes, taverns.
         (46)   Shoe and hat repair shops.
         (47)   Tailor and dressmaking shops.
         (48)   Toy stores.
         (49)   Variety stores.
         (50)   Veterinarian clinics or hospitals, including overnight boarding
and lodging.
      B.   Combinations of the above uses.
   2.   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures.
      A.   Uses of land and or structures clearly subordinate and customarily
incidental to the principal uses, including storage of merchandise and
preparation of certain products, shall be permitted subject to the standards
set forth in Subsection 5.
      B.   Signs in accordance with Chapter 159.
      C.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, said
buildings shall be removed upon the completion of construction or abandonment
of the construction site.
      D.   TV dish antennas in accordance with Section
167.11.
      E.   Storage of merchandise incidental to the principal use, but not to
exceed 40 percent of the floor area utilized for such use.
      F.   Automotive fuel sales as an accessory use to convenience stores or
quick stop stores, and automotive service stations.
   3.   Permitted Conditional Uses.
      A.   Light manufacturing, assembly, or treatment of articles or
merchandise from the following previously prepared material: canvas,
cellophane, cloth, fiber, glass, leather, paper, clay, plastic, precious or
semiprecious metals, textiles, and yarn, provided that the entire operation is
conducted within a building and that no raw materials or manufactured products
are stored outside the building and, further providing, that such use is not
noxious or offensive by reason of vibration or noise beyond the confines of the
building or emissions of dust, fumes, gas, odor, or smoke.
      B.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS), see Section
167.14.
   4.   Bulk Regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
subject to the modifications contained in Section
167.07.
      A.   Lot area – none.
      B.   Front yard - 50 feet.
      C.   Side yard - none except where side yard is adjacent to an R
District, in which case a buffer yard shall be provided. (See Section
168.08(5)(F)).
      D.   Rear yard - 25 feet.
      E.   Maximum height - 65 feet.
      F.   Maximum Number of Stories - 4.
      G.   A minimum of 15 percent of the lot area shall be retained as
landscaped open space to include such items as walks, trees, shrubs, fountains,
or other ornamental features.
      H.   Off-street parking and loading - see Chapter 167.
Summary of C-2 Bulk Regulations
Summary of C-2 Bulk Regulations
Minimum lot area   None
Front yard setback 50 feet
Side yard setbacks None
                   Buffer, if adjacent to R District
Rear yard setback  25 feet
Maximum height     65 feet
Maximum stories    4
Open space         15 percent
   5.   Performance Standards.
      A.   Outdoor activities shall be limited to display of merchandise for
retail sale and storage, provided that such storage shall be fully enclosed and
screened from view from adjacent streets and residentially zoned parcels by a
six-foot high masonry fence supplemented by coniferous plantings as necessary
to further screen such storage; further provided, that no display or storage
shall be permitted in the required front yard unless expressly allowed.
      B.   Certain products such as bakery goods may be produced on the
premises provided that:
         (1)   Such production shall be clearly accessory to the retail use of
the premises;
         (2)   All such products shall be sold at retail on the premises on
which they are produced, provided that such provision shall not be construed to
prohibit operation of a catering service or limited wholesale of goods produced
and clearly accessory to the retail use of the premises.
      C.   No noise, vibration, hazard, glare, air pollutants, such as fumes or
dust odor other than that which might originate from food preparation by a
bakery or restaurant, or electromagnetic disturbances shall be generated.
      D.   The intent of this section is to discourage large scale wholesale
operations; therefore, bulk shipments and deliveries. Goods and products sold
at wholesale shall be subordinate to and clearly accessory to retail use of the
premise.
      E.   All refuse collection areas shall be fully enclosed by a six-foot
high structure constructed of the same primary material as the exterior of the
principal building and an opaque gate.
      F.   Where property zoned C-2 District is adjacent to any property zoned
for residential use, a buffer shall be provided by any one or approved
combination of the following options:
         (1)   A buffer yard of 15 feet in width; one six-foot high masonry
wall to be designed with face brick, stucco, or similar finished surface facing
toward the residential district; or
         (2)   A buffer yard of 26 feet or more in width; four-foot high earth
berm; and five overstory trees, 10 understory trees, and 20 shrubs for each 100
lineal feet; or
         (3)   A buffer yard 35 feet or more in width; six-foot high opaque
wood fence; and four overstory trees, six coniferous trees, and 15 shrubs for
each 100 lineal feet.
The buffer yard shall be located on the entire common perimeter of the
contrasting uses, and extend to the lot lines. No part of any required buffer
shall be used for parking, storage, loading, active recreation, locating refuse
containers, or similar activity which may create a nuisance. Where a
residentially zoned area has been subdivided, the developer of a vacant
commercial property shall be responsible for providing the buffer; where the
commercial buildings exist or are under construction, the developer of a vacant
residential area shall provide the buffer.
      G.   For those properties in nonconformance with this chapter, refer to
Chapter 166.
168.09   C-3 PLANNED COMMERCIAL.
   The C-3 District is intended to provide for the development of shopping
centers. For the purposes of this section, the term “shopping center” means a
planned retail and service area under single ownership, management, or control
characterized by a concentrated grouping of stores and compatible uses, with
various facilities designed to be used in common, such as ingress and egress
roads, extensive parking accommodations, etc. Since shopping center
developments, whether large or small, have a significant effect upon the
comprehensive plan for the development of the City, extensive authority over
their development is retained by the Council and the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Many matters relating to the shopping center’s design, its
potential for success or failure, and its effect upon surrounding neighborhoods
must be considered by the Council and Planning and Zoning Commission in order
to be reasonably assured that the area will not eventually become blighted. It
is further intended that, in the event of an applicant’s failure to construct a
shopping center in accordance with a reasonable time schedule, the Council
shall enact the necessary legislation to reclassify the area to another
classification consistent with the surrounding neighborhood. Such action would
also, because of the reduction in commercial zoning in a given area, provide
conditions whereby it could be reasonable for the Council to classify other
areas in the vicinity for shopping center use.
   1.   Procedures. The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area
of not less than five acres may submit to the Council a petition requesting a
change to the C-3 zoning district classification. The petition shall be
accompanied by a plan for the commercial use and development of the tract for
the purposes of meeting the requirements of this section and by evidence of the
feasibility of the project and its effects on surrounding property, including
each of the following:
      A.   A site plan defining the areas to be developed for buildings, the
areas to be developed for parking, the location of sidewalks and driveways and
the points of ingress and egress, including access streets where required, the
location and height of walls, existing and proposed grades, the location and
type of landscaping and the location, size and number of signs, type or style
of architecture, building material, color, or other significant feature.
      B.   An analysis of market conditions in the area to be served, including
types and amount of service needed and general economic justification.
      C.   A traffic analysis of the vicinity indicating the effect of the
proposed shopping center on the adjacent streets.
      D.   A statement of financial responsibility to assure construction of
the shopping center, including landscaping, in accordance with the plan and the
requirements of this section.
   The Development Plan shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for study and report. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the
conformity of the proposed development with the standards of the Comprehensive
Plan, and with recognized principles of civic design, land use planning, and
landscape architecture. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve the plan
as submitted or, before approval, may require that the applicant modify, alter,
adjust, or amend the plan as the Planning and Zoning Commission deems necessary
to the end that it preserve the intent and purpose of this Zoning Code to
promote public health, safety, morals, and general welfare. The Development
Plan as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall then be reported
to the Council, whereupon the Council may approve or disapprove said plan as
reported or may require such changes thereto as it deems necessary to
effectuate the intent and purpose of this Zoning Code.
   2.   Principal Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in the C-3 District shall
include only the uses of structures or land listed in this section, provided
however, the Council may consider any additional restrictions proposed by the
owner.
      A.   Retail or service establishments such as the following:
         (1)   Antique shops.
         (2)   Apparel shops.
         (3)   Art shops.
         (4)   Auto and home supply stores.
         (5)   Baby and children’s stores.
         (6)   Bakeries and baker outlets - retail sales only.
         (7)   Bicycle shops, sales, and repairs.
         (8)   Book stores.
         (9)   Camera stores.
         (10)   Car washes.
         (11)   Cinema or movie theater.
         (12)   Clubs and lodges.
         (13)   Collection office of public utility.
         (14)   Confectionery stores, including ice cream or snack bars.
         (15)   Consumer retail uses, personal services, or business.
         (16)   Convenience or quick stop stores.
         (17)   Dairy stores - retail only.
         (18)   Dance studios.
         (19)   Delicatessens.
         (20)   Drug stores.
         (21)   Dry goods stores.
         (22)   Florist shops and greenhouses.
         (23)   Furniture stores.
         (24)   Gas stations.
         (25)   Gift shops.
         (26)   Grocery stores including supermarkets.
         (27)   Hardware stores.
         (28)   Hobby shops.
         (29)   Hotels and motels.
         (30)   Household appliances - sales and repair.
         (31)   Jewelry stores and watch repair shops.
         (32)   Key shops.
         (33)   Launderettes; coin-operated dry-cleaning establishments; and
dry-cleaning or pressing establishments.
         (34)   Leather goods store.
         (35)   Meat market for storage and retail sales only.
         (36)   Music stores.
         (37)   Music studios.
         (38)   Paint and wallpaper stores.
         (39)   Printing shops.
         (40)   Professional offices.
         (41)   Public buildings and utilities, including administrative and
sales office, equipment storage buildings, and enclosed storage.
         (42)   Radio and television sales and repair shops.
         (43)   Real estate, insurance, and financial institutions.
         (44)   Restaurants, nightclubs, cafes, taverns.
         (45)   Shoe and hat repair shops.
         (46)   Tailor and dressmaking shops
         (47)   Toy stores
         (48)   Variety stores
      B.   Business and professional offices including the following: law,
engineering, real estate, insurance, and similar uses.
      C.   Hospitals, clinics, group medical centers, or the office of a
doctor, dentist, osteopath, or similar profession.
      D.   Photographic studios.
      E.   Personal service businesses such as beauty and barber shops, shoe
repair, and similar uses.
      F.   Post office substations.
      G.   Combinations of the above uses.
   3.   Permitted Accessory Uses.
      A.   Uses of land and or structures customarily incidental and
subordinate to one of the principal permitted uses, unless otherwise excluded.
      B.   Signs in accordance with Chapter 159.
      C.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, said
buildings shall be removed upon the completion of construction or abandonment
of the construction site.
      D.   TV dish antennas in accordance with Chapter
167.11.
      E.   Storage of merchandise incidental to the principal use, but not to
exceed 40 percent of the floor area utilized for such use.
   4.   Bulk Regulations. The bulk regulations of the C-2 District shall be
considered minimum for the C-3 District; however, it is expected that these
minimums will be exceeded in all but exceptional situations. Buildings may be
erected to heights no greater than 90 feet, with a maximum number of six
stories.
   5.   Landscaping. A minimum of 15 percent of the area shall be returned as
landscaped open space to include such items as walks, trees, shrubs, fountains,
or other ornamental features.
   6.   Signs. Signs in accordance with Chapter 159.
   7.   Off-street parking and loading - see Chapter 167.
168.10   C-4 VILLAGE COMMERCIAL.
   The C-4 District is intended to accommodate the variety of retail stores and
related activities which occupy the prime area within the Central Business
District. It is intended that this district not be mapped outside the original
business core.
   1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Only the uses of structures or land listed in
this section shall be permitted.
      A.   Retail or service such as the following:
         (1)   Antique shops.
         (2)   Apparel shops.
         (3)   Art shops.
         (4)   Auto and home supply stores.
         (5)   Baby and children’s stores.
         (6)   Bakeries and baker outlets - retail sales only.
         (7)   Bicycle shops, sales, and repairs.
         (8)   Book stores.
         (9)   Camera stores.
         (10)   Car washes.
         (11)   Clubs and lodges.
         (12)   Collection office of public utility.
         (13)   Confectionery stores, including ice cream or snack bars.
         (14)   Consumer retail uses, personal services, or business.
         (15)   Dairy stores - retail only.
         (16)   Dance studios.
         (17)   Delicatessens.
         (18)   Dry goods stores.
         (19)   Florist shops and greenhouses.
         (20)   Funeral homes.
         (21)   Furniture stores.
         (22)   Grocery stores including supermarkets.
         (23)   Hardware stores.
         (24)   Hobby shops.
         (25)   Hotels and motels.
         (26)   Household appliances - sales and repair.
         (27)   Jewelry stores and watch repair shops.
         (28)   Key shops.
         (29)   Launderettes; coin-operated dry-cleaning establishments; and
dry-cleaning or pressing establishments.
         (30)   Leather goods store.
         (31)   Meat market for storage and retail sales only.
         (32)   Medical, dental, osteopathic, and clinics.
         (33)   Music stores.
         (34)   Music studios.
         (35)   Paint and wallpaper stores.
         (36)   Plumbing, heating, and air conditioning shops.
         (37)   Printing shops.
         (38)   Professional offices.
         (39)   Public buildings and utilities, including administrative and
sales office, equipment storage buildings, and enclosed storage.
         (40)   Radio and television sales and repair shops.
         (41)   Real estate, insurance, and financial institutions.
         (42)   Refrigeration and air conditioning service and repair,
electrical.
         (43)   Restaurants, nightclubs, cafes, taverns.
         (44)   Shoe and hat repair shops.
         (45)   Tailor and dressmaking shops.
         (46)   Toy stores.
         (47)   Variety stores.
         (48)   Veterinarian clinics or hospitals, including overnight boarding
and lodging.
      B.   Combinations of the above uses.
   2.   Permitted Accessory Uses.
      A.   Uses clearly subordinate and customarily incidental to the principal
uses, including storage of merchandise and preparation of certain products,
shall be permitted. Outside storage must be located in the rear yard and must
be completely obstructed from view by means of an enclosure and landscaping, as
required by Section
171.02.
      B.   Dwelling units, provided that said units are not located on the
first floor and are conforming with the bulk requirements of this section.
      C.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, said
buildings shall be removed upon the completion of construction or abandonment
of the construction site.
      D.   Storage of merchandise incidental to the principal use, but not to
exceed 40 percent of the floor area utilized for such use.
   3.   Permitted Conditional Uses.
      A.   Light manufacturing, assembly, or treatment of articles or
merchandise from the following previously prepared material: canvas,
cellophane, cloth, fiber, glass, leather, paper, clay, plastic, precious or
semiprecious metals, textiles, and yarn, provided that the entire operation is
conducted within a building and that no raw materials or manufactured products
are stored outside the building other than for loading and unloading operations
and further providing that such use is not noxious or offensive by reason of
vibration or noise beyond the confines of the building or emissions of dust,
fumes, gas, odor, or smoke.
      B.   Signs in accordance with Chapter 159.
      C.   Home occupations are not an allowed conditional use.
      D.   Contractors offices, including general contractors, plumbers,
electricians, drywall, heating, ventilating, and air conditioning contractors,
masons, painters, refrigeration contractors, roofing contractors, and other
such construction occupations. All merchandise, materials, and equipment (other
than street licensed vehicles) shall not be stored outside the building.
   4.   Bulk Regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
subject to the modifications contained in Section
167.07.
      A.   Lot area – none.
      B.   Front yard - none.
      C.   Side yard - none except where side yard is adjacent to an R
District, in which case the yard shall be at least 15 feet.
      D.   Rear yard - none.
      E.   Maximum height - 65 feet.
      F.   Maximum number of stories - 4.
 
Summary of C-4 Bulk Regulations
Minimum lot area   None
Front yard setback None
Side yard setbacks None
                   15 feet if adjacent to R District
Rear yard setback  None
Maximum height     65 feet
Maximum stories    4
 
   5.   Performance Standards.
      A.   Have a maximum setback of 10 feet from the property line. Properties
with two or more street frontages are exempt from this regulation.
      B.   The street side façade of the building shall incorporate 40 percent
or more window area.
      C.   Buildings shall meet the Architectural Design Standards.
      D.   Buildings should frame the street and shall maintain minimal street
setback for over 50 percent of its primary street frontage. Buildings with two
or more street frontages are exempt from this regulation.
      E.   Commercial buildings with over 50 feet of frontage, the building
wall shall be broken into bays with fenestration, structural elements, etc.
      F.   Off-Street Parking.
         (1)   Shared parking arrangements (e.g. office or apartment is allowed
and encouraged).
         (2)   Minimum parking requirement as determined in Section
167.09 is now maximum allowed. On-street parking spaces may be counted in
parking.
         (3)   No parking shall be allowed in front of the building, not
including on-street parking.
         (4)   Tandem parking for employees is allowed.
      G.   Outdoor activities shall be limited to display of merchandise for
retail sales only if such display is completely contained on the property,
located in the front yard, and not on the public right-of-way.
168.11   C-5 OFFICE PARK.
   The purpose of the C-5 District is to provide areas for the development of
primarily professional and administrative offices, and some service uses. It is
intended that this district be mapped primarily along arterial or collector
streets in new, developing areas to reduce, limit, and contain strip retail
development which has a more dynamic character, thereby enhancing proper
movement of traffic, with appropriate setbacks, landscaping, and architecture
to make such development reasonably compatible with nearby residential.
   1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Only the uses of structures or land listed in
this section shall be permitted.
      A.   Office or service such as the following:
         (1)   Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping services.
         (2)   Actuaries, chemists, and other miscellaneous services.
         (3)   Advertising agencies and radio, television, and publishers’
advertising representatives.
         (4)   Banking.
         (5)   Blood banks.
         (6)   Blueprinting and photocopying services.
         (7)   Business associations, professional membership associations, and
other membership organizations.
         (8)   Civic, social, and fraternal associations.
         (9)   Commercial photography, art, and graphics
         (10)   Computer programming and other software services, and data
processing services.
         (11)   Consumer credit reporting agencies, mercantile reporting
agencies, and adjustment and collection agencies.
         (12)   Credit agencies other than banks.
         (13)   Engineering, architectural, and surveying services, including
landscape architects.
         (14)   Insurance agents, brokers, and service.
         (15)   Insurance.
         (16)   Legal services.
         (17)   Management, consulting, and public relations services.
         (18)   Medical and dental laboratories.
         (19)   News syndicates.
         (20)   Noncommercial educational, scientific, and research
organizations.
         (21)   Noncommercial museums and art galleries.
         (22)   Offices of manufacturers’ sales representatives, subject to no
outside display or storage of stock in trade. Indoor storage and display
limited to 10 percent of total floor area of building.
         (23)   Offices of physicians, dentists, osteopathic physicians,
chiropractors, optometrists, and other health practitioners.
         (24)   Personnel supply services.
         (25)   Photographic studios, portrait.
         (26)   Political and religious organizations.
         (27)   Real estate.
         (28)   Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges, services,
holding, and other investment offices.
         (29)   Travel agencies and bureaus.
   2.   Permitted Accessory Uses.
      A.   Food and beverage services, cocktail lounges, apothecaries, barber
shops or beauty salons, drafting or quick printing services, optical shop,
recreational facilities primarily for use of employees, or similar uses shall
be permitted where it can be demonstrated that the number of employees or
clientele of the principal uses on the lot are sufficient to support such uses,
subject to the following criteria in addition to all other requirements of this
chapter:
         (1)   Such incidental or accessory use may be a separate tenant but
shall be incorporated within the principal building and designed to serve the
employees of the principal building or their clientele. Such use shall not have
any direct access from the exterior, but shall access through a principal use
or from a common enclosed mall or courtyard.
         (2)   Total area of all accessory uses shall not exceed 25 percent of
the total floor area or gross leasable floor area of the building.
         (3)   No signage or merchandise shall be displayed where visible to
the general public from outside the building.
      B.   Uses of land and or structures customarily incidental and
subordinate to one of the principal permitted uses, unless otherwise excluded.
      C.   Signs in accordance with Chapter 159.
      D.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, said
buildings shall be removed upon the completion of construction or abandonment
of the construction site.
      E.   TV dish antennas in accordance with Section
167.11.
   3.   Permitted Conditional Uses.
      A.   General medical and surgical hospitals.
      B.   Extended care, intermediate care, or rehabilitation or residential
care nursing facilities.
      C.   Outpatient care facilities.
      D.   Colleges, universities, and professional schools, junior colleges,
and technical institutes.
      E.   Business and secretarial schools.
      F.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS), see Section
167.14.
   4.   Bulk Regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
subject to the modifications contained in Section
167.07.
      A.   Minimum lot area - 20,000 square feet.
      B.   Minimum lot width - 100 feet.
      C.   Front yard setback - 50 feet.
      D.   Side yard setback - 15 feet, except where side yard is adjacent to
an R District, in which case the yard shall be at least 50 feet.
      E.   Rear yard setback - 25 feet.
      F.   Maximum height - 65 feet
      G.   Maximum number of stories - 4
      H.   A minimum of 20 percent of the lot area shall be retained as
landscaped open space to include such items as walks, trees, shrubs, fountains,
or other ornamental features.
Summary of C-5 Bulk Regulations
Summary of C-5 Bulk Regulations
Minimum lot area   20,000 square feet
Front yard setback 50 feet
Side yard setbacks 15 feet
                   50 feet if adjacent to R District
Rear yard setback  25 feet
Maximum height     65 feet
Maximum stories    4
Open space         20 percent
 
   5.   Performance Standards.
      A.   No stock in trade shall be stored or displayed outside nor shall any
assembly or manufacturing activities be conducted on the premises.
      B.   Parking or loading areas located in the front yard or yard adjacent
to a street shall be screened from observation by traffic on any and all public
thoroughfares within 1,000 feet of such areas.
      C.   All refuse collection areas shall be fully enclosed by a six-foot
high structure constructed of the same primary material as the exterior of the
principal building and an opaque gate. Recycling facilities must be
incorporated into the refuse collection area.
      D.   Where the lot abuts property zoned for residential uses, a 50-foot
buffer shall be provided.
      E.   Lots directly abutting arterial streets shall not exceed one drive
access onto each such arterial street except as provided below. Common drives
between adjacent landowners shall be encouraged in lieu of individual drives,
recommended to be located with the common property line as the centerline of
the drive and required to be located a minimum of 125 feet from any other drive
as measured from centerline to centerline. One additional drive access may be
permitted for a lot with continuous frontage in excess of 300 feet, or two
additional drive accesses for continuous frontage in excess of 600 feet, if
proper spacing is provided.
168.12   C-6 COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT OR RECREATIONAL.
   The C-6 District is intended to allow a variety of land uses comprised of
services that have entertainment or recreational value serving local
populations as well as regional. Lot development may vary from single-use or
single-building to multiple-use or multi-building complexes. It is intended
that this district be located in close proximity to Interstate 80 -
concentrated in the northwest business district along Adventureland Drive. In
the C-6 District, the following regulations shall apply, except as otherwise
provided herein:
   1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Only the uses of structures or land listed in
this section shall be permitted.
      A.   Entertainment or recreational uses such as the following:
         (1)   Amusement parks.
         (2)   Campgrounds.
         (3)   Casinos.
         (4)   Convention or conference centers.
         (5)   Horse racing facilities.
         (6)   Hotel or motels.
         (7)   Movie theaters.
         (8)   Restaurants.
   2.   Permitted Accessory Uses.
      A.   Multiple-family dwellings or dorms for seasonal personnel employed
on-site.
      B.   Outdoor Events. The Council may grant permits for outdoor events
such as athletic competitions, concerts, circus, theatrical programs (family
oriented), or other entertainment or recreational activities that may not be
found obtrusive to the health, safety, and general welfare of persons residing
or working in adjoining or surrounding property. This section is for events
considered ancillary to, and not integral of the principle permitted uses
outlined in Subsection 1. An outdoor event activity shall not be held within
500 feet of any residentially zoned property. Permit process: An application
shall be submitted to the Clerk requesting an Outdoor Event Permit at least 45
days prior to the event date, but not more than 270 days prior. Information
required for consideration will be:
         (1)   Date, time, and duration of event;
         (2)   Location map showing area designated for event;
         (3)   Detailed description of activities; and
         (4)   Estimated and maximum permitted attendees.
   The Council shall take into consideration recommendations from the City
Administrator, Building Code Official, Public Works Director, Zoning
Administrator, Police Chief, Fire Chief, or any other department supervisor in
charge of municipal services, local ordinances, or any other applicable rules
and regulations. The Council may also take into consideration public input or
other information pertinent to the requested event.
   3.   Bulk Regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
subject to the modifications contained in Section
167.07. Setback requirements are for all buildings as well as other structures
anchored to the ground in a permanent or temporary fashion (excluding
utilities).
      A.   Minimum lot area - 10 acres.
      B.   Minimum lot width - 300 feet.
      C.   Front yard - 150 feet if property fronts on or is adjacent to an
arterial street or R District; 50 feet if property is located on a local
service street (Prairie Meadows Drive is considered a local service street per
this chapter).
      D.   Side yard - 50 feet for principal buildings, 10 feet for accessory
buildings. If the side yard is adjacent to an R District, the setback shall be
100 feet.
      E.   Rear yard - 50 feet for principal buildings, 10 feet for accessory
buildings. If the rear yard is adjacent to an R District, the setback shall be
100 feet.
      F.   Maximum height - no limit.
      G.   A minimum of 15 percent of the lot area shall be retained as
landscaped open space to include such items as walks, trees, shrubs, fountains,
or other ornamental features.
      H.   Screening of a sufficient height and density to obscure structures
and activities shall be erected at all locations immediately adjacent to an R
District.
   4.   Signs. Signs in accordance with Chapter 159.
   5.   Off-Street Parking and Loading. Parking areas shall be located on the
premises to adequately and conveniently serve the intended facilities. (See
Chapter 167).
168.13   C-7 REGIONAL COMMERCIAL.
   The C-7 District is intended to provide aesthetically pleasing and
harmoniously designed developments that serve a larger regional trade area that
extends well beyond the City. Importance and detail is to be given as to the
developments layout, architecture, streetscapes, landscaping, and public
spaces. The C-7 District, as designated on the Comprehensive Plan land use map,
provide commercial establishments that offer a variety of goods and services to
consumers. The C-7 District is primarily intended for establishments that have
a large customer draw (e.g. regional pull), generate significant traffic and
parking need, and require close access to arterial (or higher functional class)
streets. High intensity uses that include large structures and sites are
encouraged, as is redevelopment and infill. The C-7 District is oriented
primarily to automobile traffic, although the design shall also include
adequate facilities for pedestrians, bicyclists, and public transit. The C-
7 District is a Planned Unit Development Commercial District. A Development
Plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Council. The Development Plan shall
be characterized by a planned or concentrated grouping of buildings and
compatible uses, with various facilities designed to be used in common, such as
ingress and egress roads, extensive parking accommodations, etc. Since regional
commercial developments, whether large or small, have a significant effect upon
the development of the City, extensive authority over their development is
retained by the Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission. Many matters
relating to the areas design, its potential for success or failure, and its
effect upon surrounding neighborhoods must be considered by the Council and
Planning and Zoning Commission in order to be reasonably assured that the area
will not eventually become blighted.
   1.   Procedures. The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area
of not less than 100 acres initially may submit to the Council a petition
requesting a change to the C-7 District classification. Amendments may be
allowed in as little as five-acre increments. The massing and clustering of
similar and compatible uses shall be done to maximize and maintain synergy for
maximum customer draw. The petition shall be accompanied by a plan for the
commercial use and development of the tract for the purposes of meeting the
requirements of this section and by evidence of the feasibility of the project
and its effects on surrounding property, including each of the following:
      A.   A Development Plan (also known as a Design Criteria Manual) defining
the areas to be developed for buildings, the areas to be developed for parking,
the design and location of sidewalks and driveways and the points of ingress
and egress, including access streets where required, the location and height of
walls, existing and proposed grades, the location and type of landscaping and
the location, size and number of signs, site and street lighting, type or style
of architecture, building material, color, or other significant feature.
      B.   An analysis of market conditions in the area to be served, including
types and amount of service needed and general economic justification.
      C.   A traffic analysis of the vicinity indicating the effect of the
proposed shopping center on the adjacent streets.
      D.   A statement of financial responsibility to assure construction of
the shopping center, including landscaping, in accordance with the plan and the
requirements of this section.
      E.   A plan for phasing of the development is desired and necessary due
to size.
   The Development Plan shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for study and report. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the
conformity of the proposed development with the standards of the Comprehensive
Plan, and with recognized principles of civic design, land use planning, and
landscape architecture. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve the plan
as submitted or, before approval, may require that the applicant modify, alter,
adjust, or amend the plan as the Planning and Zoning Commission deems necessary
to the end that it preserve the intent and purpose of this Zoning Code to
promote public health, safety, morals, and general welfare. The Development
Plan, as either recommended for approval or denial by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, shall then be reported to the Council, whereupon the Council may
approve or disapprove said plan as reported or may require such changes thereto
as it deems necessary to effectuate the intent and purpose of this Zoning Code.
   2.   Principal Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in the C-7 District shall
include only the uses of structures or land listed in this section, provided
however, the Council may consider any additional restrictions proposed by the
owner.
      A.   Retail or service establishments such as the following:
         (1)   Apparel shops.
         (2)   Appliances, household and electronics.
         (3)   Art shops and art galleries.
         (4)   Baby and children’s stores.
         (5)   Bakeries and baker outlets - retail sales only.
         (6)   Bicycle shops, sales, and repairs.
         (7)   Book stores.
         (8)   Business and professional offices including the following: law,
engineering, real estate, insurance, banks and credit unions (only FDIC or NCUA
insured allowed), and similar uses.
         (9)   Camera stores.
         (10)   Cinemas or movie theater.
         (11)   Coffee shops – if stand alone, then structure shall be minimum
1,500 square feet in size.
         (12)   Confectionery stores, including ice cream or snack bars.
         (13)   Consumer retail uses, personal services, or business.
         (14)   Convenience or quick stop stores.
         (15)   Drug stores.
         (16)   Florist shops.
         (17)   Furniture stores.
         (18)   Gift shops.
         (19)   Hobby shops.
         (20)   Hotels and motels.
         (21)   Jewelry stores and watch repair shops.
         (22)   Leather goods store.
         (23)   Museums.
         (24)   Music stores.
         (25)   Natural or specialty food stores, including general grocery up
to a maximum of 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
         (26)   Paint and wallpaper stores.
         (27)   Photographic studios.
         (28)   Radio and television sales and repair shops.
         (29)   Restaurants, delicatessens, and cafes (drive through service
only permitted if specifically outlined in the Development Plan).
         (30)   Shoe and hat repair shops.
         (31)   Tailor and dressmaking shops.
         (32)   Toy stores.
         (33)   Variety stores.
         (34)   Passenger vehicle sales and ancillary uses such as repair and
service, provided that the parcel is the licensed principal place of business
for a new motor vehicle dealership selling one or more new motor vehicle line-
makes. Allowed vehicle sales is only for passenger vehicles with an unladen
weight of 10,000 pounds or less and does not include boats, RV’s, trailers,
farm machinery, construction equipment, or semi-tractors or trailers.
         (35)   Car washes.
         (36)   Combinations of the above uses.
   3.   Permitted Accessory Uses.
      A.   Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to
one of the principal permitted uses, unless otherwise excluded.
      B.   Signs in accordance with Chapter 159 and as approved in the
Development Plan.
      C.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, said
buildings shall be removed upon the completion of construction or abandonment
of the construction site.
      D.   TV dish antennas in accordance with Chapter
167.11, except all dish antennas shall be roof-mounted and screened.
      E.   Interior storage of merchandise incidental to the principal use, but
not to exceed 40 percent of the floor area utilized for such use.
      F.   Automatic Teller Machines (ATMs) if attached to or enclosed within a
principal structure. No freestanding ATMs shall be allowed.
      G.   Outdoor Events. The Council may grant permits for outdoor events
such as athletic competitions, concerts, circus, theatrical programs (family
oriented), food vendors, sidewalk retailers (on private walks only), or other
entertainment or recreational activities that may not be found obtrusive to the
health, safety, and general welfare of persons residing or working in adjoining
or surrounding property. This section is for events considered ancillary to and
not integral of the principle permitted uses outlined in Subsection 2. An
outdoor event activity shall not be held within 500 feet of any adjacent
residentially zoned district. Permit process: An application shall be submitted
to the Clerk requesting an Outdoor Event Permit at least 45 days prior to the
event date, but not more than 270 days prior. Information required for
consideration will be:
         (1)   Date, time, and duration of event;
         (2)   Location map showing area designated for event;
         (3)   Detailed description of activities; and
         (4)   Estimated and maximum permitted attendees.
   The Council shall take into consideration recommendations from the City
Administrator, Building Code Official, Public Works Director, Zoning
Administrator, Police Chief, Fire Chief, or any other department supervisor in
charge of municipal services, local ordinances, or any other applicable rules
and regulations. The Council may also take into consideration public input or
other information pertinent to the requested event.
      H.   Automobile repair and service, and tire sales and service, provided
that such facility is an accessory use to a retail store greater than 20,000
square feet in size.
      I.   Dwelling units, provided that said units are not located on the
first floor and are conforming with the bulk requirements of this section.
   4.   Bulk Regulations. The bulk regulations of the C-7 District shall be
considered minimum; however, it is expected that these minimums may be reduced
or exceeded to meet the design intent of the development plan.
 
Summary of C-7 Bulk Regulations
Minimum lot area   None
Front yard setback 50 feet
Side yard setback  None; buffer if adjacent to R District
Rear yard setback  25 feet
Maximum height     90 feet
Maximum stories    6
 
   5.   Off Street Parking and Loading. Parking lots containing 500 parking
stalls or greater, designed using 90-degree head-in stalls, are allowed parking
stall widths of a minimum of nine and one-half feet wide and 18 feet deep,
regardless, even if overhang is present. (See Chapter 167).
   6.   Development Standards. At a minimum, the following items shall be
addressed in the Development Plan:
      A.   Architecture. A common architectural style and theme shall be
developed for the area. The buildings shall meet the architecture design
standards of Chapter 171. All building elevations shall substantially
incorporate elements of the common architecture style to be applied within the
area.
      B.   Open Space or Landscaping.
         (1)   It is the intent for the area to be more than adequately
landscaped and for a theme to be developed and described in the Development
Plan. Complimentary materials shall be used.
         (2)   A minimum of 35 percent of the total site area of the C-
7 District shall be open space and a minimum of 20 percent of each lot within
the C-7 District shall be open space. The 35 percent is all inclusive and
includes the parking area landscaping of islands and medians within parking
area. Feature lakes, detention ponds, easements for public amenities, sidewalks
within open areas, pedestrian plazas (if they include amenities such as
benches, artwork, fountains, plantings, etc.), parking area landscaping and
paved outdoor spaces (excluding parking lots) shall be counted towards open
space requirements. Public right-of-way and boulevard median areas may be
counted, but only to the extent and in such area as contain improvements and
amenities such as benches, artwork, fountains, plantings, and hardscape greater
than standard City practice. Pedestrian plazas and other common or shared paved
pedestrian spaces may count at one and one-half times their area toward the 35
percent open space requirements. However, in the case of pedestrian plazas and
other paved pedestrian spaces, such areas shall not count if dedicated as a
patron use area for a specific business, e.g. outdoor seating for a restaurant.
         (3)   Trees and shrubs shall be provided at a minimum of one landscape
unit per 3,000 square feet of open space with one landscape unit consisting of
two trees and six shrubs or three trees and three shrubs. Up to 30 percent of
the landscape units may be substituted with an alternative specialty plant
material (such as drought resistant varieties which meet LEED principles), or
appropriate three-dimensional artwork as approved within the Development Plan.
There shall be a minimum of one landscape unit per building lot.
         (4)   Minimum plant material sizes shall meet the following minimum
sizes:
            a.   Deciduous trees - one and one-half inch caliper.
            b.   Coniferous trees - six-foot height.
            c.   Shrubs - 24 inches height.
      C.   Signage. A master or common sign plan shall be submitted to
encompass all signage within the development. The signs shall be in accordance
with Chapter 159 and shall address design style, materials, colors, common
elements, locations, etc. One regional commercial marker sign shall be allowed
per development. This sign is approved with the Development Plan.
      D.   Outdoor Storage and Product Display. No outside storage of
merchandise, materials, or equipment shall be allowed except as illustrated on
the approved site plan and shall not block required pedestrian pathways,
vehicular circulation routes, or parking areas, and shall not negatively impact
public safety.
      E.   Bulk Regulations. Largely dependent upon the intended visitors,
design of the area, and the layout of the development, there may be instances
where the building setbacks are reduced or exceeded. Building scale will be an
important element in this standard. Height of structures shall be addressed and
the building scale and the route of access for customers shall be taken into
account.
      F.   Cart Corrals. If cart corrals are necessary, they shall be permanent
fixtures and constructed with materials similar to or complimentary of the
principal structure, and shall not include any advertising signage.
      G.   Lighting. All lighting shall be directed downward, inward, and away
from public rights-of-way and adjoining uses. All lighting shall be shielded so
that the direct illumination shall be confined to the property boundaries and
shall not spill off the property. Design of all fixtures shall be approved with
the Development Plan. All site lighting shall be “dark sky” compliant.
Spotlights and floodlights whose point source of light is visible to
neighboring uses are prohibited except as specifically and individually
approved for flag or artwork illumination. Exceptions may be allowed for wall
sconce accent lighting.
      H.   Parking. Every permitted use shall provide off-street automobile
parking and truck loading and unloading as required in Chapter 167. All parking
lots shall be set back at least seven feet from any property line with the
exception of neighboring properties where larger lots may be combined for
better use of space.
      I.   Site Circulation. The emphasis of circulation shall be for maximum
convenience and safety. Internal pedestrian site circulation shall provide safe
pedestrian walkways that interconnect entrance doors of establishments, and
connect to transit stops and to the public sidewalk along public streets.
Amenities such as benches, sitting areas, art, public squares, and spaces shall
be provided. Auto circulation shall utilize shared entrances and connections
between parking lots to allow better internal flow of traffic and to limit use
of public and private streets.
      J.   Loading Areas and Refuse Receptacles. Trash, recycling and grease
receptacles, service area, and loading docks shall be screened from adjacent
residential properties and public rights-of-way. The use of walls made part of
the principal building shall be used. Refuse receptacles shall use an enclosed
opaque visual barrier matching the principal building materials no lower than
two feet above the highest point of the receptacles. The enclosure shall also
be screened. Screening may include landscaping, walls, fences, topographic
changes, or any combination thereof. Overhead doors and loading docks shall be
located at the functional rear of the building and shall not be visible
directly from development entrances, arterial or collector street. Overhead
doors may be permitted on the front of a building consistent with passenger
vehicle sales and service as set forth in Section 168.13(2)(A)(34).
      K.   Convenience Stores. The façade or roof of the gas canopy shall match
the architectural style of the principal building and Development Plan of the
area. The canopy shall be located outside of a front yard. The canopy posts
shall be wrapped with similar materials to the principal building. All pump
stations shall be located within the roof support system of the canopy and be
architecturally screened. Canopy lighting shall be flush mounted.
      L.   Parking Area Landscaping and Buffers. Parking areas shall be
effectively landscaped and screened with the introduction of permanent earth
berming of an adequate height or additional landscape plantings to accomplish
this goal. All landscaping, shading trees, and open space used as parking area
landscaping shall also count towards the 20 percent lot open space and 35
percent open space requirements.
         (1)   All parking areas shall include landscape areas, islands,
screens, etc. equal to not less than 10 percent of the total paved area.
Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have ground cover of grass
(i.e. sod), shrubs, or other acceptable living plant life, unless an alternate
ground cover is specifically approved as part of the Development Plan review by
the City.
         (2)   Landscape islands shall not be less on average than a minimum of
eight feet in width from back of curb to back of curb and no parking space
shall be greater than 75 feet from a landscaped open space with a minimum of
250 square feet.
         (3)   Parking spaces shall be screened and separated from any
adjoining roadway by a landscaped island separation a minimum seven feet in
width. Acceptable screens shall consist of berms, hedges, trees, shrubs, stone,
or rock groupings, sculptures, ornamental grasses or alternative plant
materials, and combinations thereof. The screen shall be a minimum semi-opaque
screen with intermittent visual obstruction from the ground to a height of
three feet.
         (4)   Parking areas shall be required to provide natural shading,
through the use of deciduous trees, in an amount equal to eight percent of the
parking area. Overstory trees used for this purpose shall be presumed to shade
a circular area covering 650 square feet. Understory trees shall be presumed to
shade a circular area covering 475 square feet. Trees located within 20 feet of
the perimeter of the parking area shall count for one-half of the shading area
for the corresponding tree.
168.14   M-1 LIMITED INDUSTRIAL.
   The M-1 District is intended and designed to provide for increased
flexibility in the location of certain manufacturing and industrial uses while
maintaining protection for nearby residential districts. It allows selected
industries of a non-nuisance character to locate in areas within reasonable
proximity of residential uses. The M-1 District is characterized by large lots,
with landscaped grounds and ample provision for off-street parking and loading
spaces, and structures not more than two stories in height. Generation of noise
within the M-1 District, up to and including 65 decibels, in connection with
the conducting of business for a permitted use within that district shall be
permitted and shall not be considered a nuisance. Generation of noise from
power generators in excess of 65 decibels shall be permitted during emergency
circumstances, such as power outages, and shall also be permitted for the
purposes of testing and maintenance of said power generators and generation of
such noise shall not be considered a nuisance.
   1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Only the uses of structures or land listed in
this section shall be permitted in the M-1 District, provided, however, that
all manufacturing, assembling, compounding, processing, packaging, or other
comparable treatment, including storage of any and all materials and equipment
shall take place within completely enclosed buildings, except for parked motor
vehicles and off-street parking and loading as required by Sections
167.08 and
167.09. No dwelling or dwelling unit is permitted except for those employees
having duties in connection with any premises requiring them to live on said
premises, including families of such employees when living with them. In
addition, all open areas not used for off-street parking or loading shall be
planted with grass, shrubs, and trees, properly maintained, and kept free from
refuse and debris.
      A.   Assembly of small electrical appliances, small industrial and
electronic instruments and devices, radios, phonographs and television sets,
including the manufacture of small accessory parts only, such as coils,
condensers, transformers, crystal holders, and similar products.
      B.   Automotive and farm implement display, sales, service, and repair,
including retail automotive fuel sales.
      C.   Boat dealers.
      D.   Body repair shops, including painting.
      E.   Commercial trade schools.
      F.   Compounding and packaging of drugs, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics,
perfumes, and toiletries.
      G.   Laboratories; research, experimental, and testing.
      H.   Manufacturing, assembling, compounding, processing, packaging, or
other comparable treatment of the following:
         (1)   Bakery goods, candy, and food products except the following:
            a.   Cereals.
            b.   Dairy Products.
            c.   Fish and meat processing.
            d.   Flour milling (production).
            e.   Rendering or refining of fats and oils.
            f.   Sauerkraut.
            g.   Stock feed.
            h.   Vinegar.
            i.   Yeast.
         (2)   Cameras and other photographic equipment.
         (3)   Electric and neon signs, outdoor advertising signs.
         (4)   Medical, dental, and drafting instruments.
         (5)   Musical instruments, toys, novelties, and rubber and metal hand
stamps.
         (6)   Pottery and other ceramic products using only previously
pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
         (7)   Products from the following previously prepared materials: bone,
canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, rope, cord, twine, cardboard, feathers, felt,
fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, metal pipe, rods, strips or wire,
paper, plastics, precious and semi-precious metals or stones, rubber (natural
and synthetic), shells, textiles, tobacco, wax, wood, and yarns, provided that
the entire operation is conducted within a building and that no raw materials
or manufactured products are stored outside the building other than for loading
and unloading operations, and further providing that such use is not noxious or
offensive by reason of vibration or noise beyond the confines of the building
or emissions of dust, fumes, gas, odor, or smoke.
         (8)   Small precision instruments, such as barometers, clocks,
watches, and compasses.
         (9)   Manufacture or assembly of computers and computer-related
hardware.
      I.   Beverage bottling, distribution, and warehousing facilities.
      J.   Contractors offices and storage buildings (not including outside
storage yards); including general contractors, plumbers, electricians, heating,
ventilating, and air conditioning contractors, masons, painters, refrigeration
contractors, roofing contractors, and other such construction occupations.
      K.   Data center.
      L.   Dry cleaning and laundry facilities.
      M.   Ice production, storage, sales, and distribution facilities. Cold
storage facilities; creamery, and ice cream manufacturing.
      N.   Lumberyards and building materials sales yards, provided that
outside storage not be located in the front yard and that it is opaquely
screened from view.
      O.   Machine shops.
      P.   Mail order and distribution centers.
      Q.   Motor vehicle dealers - new and used.
      R.   Motorcycle dealers and snowmobiles.
      S.   Office buildings.
      T.   Office warehouses.
      U.   Printing, lithographing, or film processing plants.
      V.   Public utility facilities.
      W.   Publicly owned storage, warehouse, and maintenance facilities.
      X.   Radio and television broadcasting stations and studios.
      Y.   Recreational and utility trailer dealers.
      Z.   Sawmill and planing mill, including manufacture of wood products not
involving chemical treatment.
      AA.   Tire vulcanizing, retreading recapping, service, and sales.
      BB.   Truck rental establishments.
      CC.   Truck terminals, delivery services, moving and storage facilities,
and truck maintenance facilities.
      DD.   Warehouses for storage of merchandise or material in connection
with the uses permitted in this district only.
   2.   Permitted Accessory Uses.
      A.   Accessory uses of land or structures customarily incidental and
subordinate to any of the above principal uses.
      B.   Dwellings for watchman or caretaker.
      C.   Employee cafeteria or other food concession in conjunction with
permitted use.
      D.   Signs in accordance with Chapter 159.
      E.   TV dish antennas and communication towers in accordance with Section
167.11.
      F.   Retail food sales such as confectionery stores - including ice cream
or snack bars, delicatessens, or restaurants for consumption on-site or
carryout.
      G.   Solar Energy Systems and fuel cell generators used to generate power
for onsite use.
   3.   Permitted Conditional Uses.
      A.   Outside storage yards, accessory or principal in use, and provided
that they are fenced and screened in their entirety such that no materials
stored are visible from the street or another property.
      B.   Public detention and correctional institutions, including penal
institutions, residential correction facilities, medical detention facilities,
or other similar facilities provided they are located at least 500 feet from
any residential use.
      C.   Home occupations are not an allowed conditional use.
      D.   Indoor sports and recreation facilities.
      E.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) for on-site use, see Section
167.14.
   4.   Bulk Regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
subject to the modifications contained in Section
167.07.
      A.   Front yard - 50 feet from all streets or public ingress or egress
easements.
      B.   Side yard - 20 feet; provided that where adjacent to an R or C-
1 District, a side yard of 25 feet shall be required.
      C.   Rear yard - 50 feet.
      D.   Maximum height - 65 feet.
      E.   Maximum number of stories - 4.
      F.   A minimum of 15 percent of the lot area shall be retained as
landscaped open space to include such items as walks, trees, shrubs, fountains,
or other ornamental features.
      G.   Screening of a sufficient height and density to obscure structures
and activities shall be erected at all locations where an Industrial M District
is immediately adjacent to a Residential R District.
Summary of M-1 Bulk Regulations
Summary of M-1 Bulk Regulations
Front yard setback 50 feet
Side yard setbacks 20 feet
                   25 feet if adjacent to street, R or C-1 District
Rear yard setback  50 feet
Maximum height     65 feet
Maximum stories    4
Open space         15 percent
Screening
 
168.15   M-1A COMMERCIAL AND LIMITED LIGHT INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS PARK.
   The M-1A District is intended to define areas for activities and produce
flex spaces for uses of general retail, professional office, and limited light
industrial. This allows selected businesses and industries of a non-nuisance
character to locate in areas in general proximity to residential uses but also
where access to commercial corridors is important. These buildings are
generally thought of as having a commercial front and an industrial back where
loading docks and overhead service doors are common. The development has
architectural character with well landscaped areas, and where uses, materials,
and storage are entirely enclosed within the buildings, except for parked motor
vehicles and licensed trailers parked in the immediate vicinity of the service
doors and loading areas.
   1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Only the uses of structures or land listed in
this section shall be permitted in the M-1A District, provided, however, that
all manufacturing, assembling, compounding, processing, packaging, or other
comparable treatment, including storage of any and all materials and equipment,
shall take place within completely enclosed buildings, except for parked motor
vehicles and off-street parking and loading as required by Sections
167.08 and
167.09 and parked licensed trailers in the vicinity of loading docks and
service doors. In addition, all open areas not used for off-street parking or
loading shall be planted with grass, shrubs, and trees, properly maintained,
and kept free from refuse and debris.
      A.   Assembly of small electrical appliances, small industrial and
electronic instruments and devices, radios, phonographs and television sets,
including the manufacture of small accessory parts only, such as coils,
condensers, transformers, crystal holders, and similar products.
      B.   Watercraft with indoor display and storage only.
      C.   Automotive secondary service uses including the sale and
installation of after-market vehicle accessories, windshield repair, dent
removal, detailing and the installation, repair, and maintenance associated
with other vehicle secondary services.
      D.   Commercial trade schools.
      E.   Compounding and packaging of drugs, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics,
perfumes, and toiletries.
      F.   Laboratories; research, experimental, and testing
      G.   Manufacturing, assembling, compounding, processing, packaging, or
other comparable treatment of the following:
         (1)   Bakery goods, candy, and food products.
         (2)   Cameras and other photographic equipment.
         (3)   Electric and neon signs, outdoor advertising signs.
         (4)   Medical, dental, and drafting instruments.
         (5)   Musical instruments, toys, novelties, and rubber and metal hand
stamps.
         (6)   Pottery and other ceramic products using only previously
pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
         (7)   Products from the following previously prepared materials: bone,
canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, rope, cord, twine, cardboard, feathers, felt,
fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, metal pipe, rods, strips or wire,
paper, plastics, precious and semi-precious metals or stones, rubber (natural
and synthetic), shells, textiles, tobacco, wax, wood, and yarns, provided that
the entire operation is conducted within a building and that no raw materials
or manufactured products are stored outside the building, other than for
loading and unloading operations, and further providing that such use is not
noxious or offensive by reason of vibration or noise beyond the confines of the
building or emissions of dust, fumes, gas, odor, or smoke.
         (8)   Small precision instruments, such as barometers, clocks,
watches, and compasses.
         (9)   Manufacture or assembly of computers and computer-related
hardware.
      H.   Micro brewing, coffee roasting, wine, and distillery uses including
tasting room, bottling, distribution, and warehousing facilities.
      I.   Contractors offices (not including outside storage yards); including
general contractors, plumbers, electricians, heating, ventilating, and air
conditioning contractors, masons, painters, refrigeration contractors, roofing
contractors, and other such construction occupations. All equipment stored
indoors.
      J.   Data center.
      K.   Dry cleaning and laundry facilities.
      L.   Building materials sales and showrooms, provided no outdoor storage
of materials.
      M.   Mail order and distribution centers.
      N.   Motorcycle dealers and snowmobiles with indoor display and storage
only.
      O.   Office buildings.
      P.   Office warehouses.
      Q.   Printing, lithographing, or film processing plants.
      R.   Public utility facilities.
      S.   Radio and television broadcasting stations and studios.
      T.   Delivery services, moving, and storage facilities and truck
maintenance facilities.
      U.   Indoor sports and recreation facilities.
      V.   Retail or service businesses such as those found in the C-2 (General
Commercial) Zoning District, except the following uses which would not be
permitted in this district:
         (1)   Automotive service stations.
         (2)   Car washes.
         (3)   Convenience or quick stop stores.
         (4)   Dairy stores retail only.
         (5)   Delicatessens.
         (6)   Hotels and motels.
         (8)   Public buildings and utilities, including administrative and
sales office, equipment storage buildings, and enclosed storage.
      W.   Combination of above uses.
   2.   Permitted Accessory Uses.
      A.   Warehouses only as part of offices or showroom for storage of
merchandise or material in connection with the uses permitted in this district
only.
      B.   Employee cafeteria or other food concession in conjunction with
permitted use.
      C.   Signs in accordance with Chapter 159.
      D.   TV dish antennas and communication towers in accordance with Chapter
167.11.
      E.   Solar energy systems and fuel cell generators used to generate power
for onsite use.
   3.   Permitted Conditional Uses.
      A.   Indoor self-storage.
      B.   Cold product production, storage, sales maintained within the
principal building.
      C.   Restaurant and food or beverage service as part of a permitted use.
   4.   Bulk Regulations.
      A.   Front yard - 50 feet from all streets or public ingress or egress
easements.
      B.   Side yard - 20 feet; provided that where adjacent to an R or C-
1 District, a side yard of 50 feet shall be required.
      C.   Rear yard - 50 feet.
      D.   Maximum height - 50 feet.
      E.   Maximum number of stories - 4.
      F.   A minimum of 15 percent of the lot area shall be retained as
landscaped open space to include such items as walks, trees, shrubs, fountains,
or other ornamental features.
      G.   Screening of a sufficient height and density to obscure structures
and activities shall be erected at all locations where a Commercial and Limited
Industrial M-1A District is immediately adjacent to a Residential R District.
 
Summary of M-1A Bulk Regulations
Front yard setback 50 feet
Side yard setback  20 feet
                   50 feet if adjacent to R or C-1 District
Rear yard setback  50 feet
Maximum height     50 feet
Maximum stories    4
Open space         15 percent
 
   5.   Performance Standards:
      A.   Parking of vehicles and licensed trailers, other than passenger
vehicles, needs to be interior to the development, not in the front yard, and
screened from view of residential neighbors.
      B.   No noise, vibration, hazard, glare, air pollutants such as fumes or
dust, odor other than that which might originate from food preparation by a
bakery or restaurant, or electro-magnetic disturbances shall be generated. All
lighting shall utilize horizontally mounted cut-off luminaries, and all lights,
which illuminate the building or parking lots, shall be “dark sky” compliant
whether pole or ground lights, and shall shine away from residential districts.
      C.   Landscaped buffer yards with a minimum width of 50 feet shall be
provided along the boundary between residential districts where buildings or
parking lots are located. The buffer yard shall consist of an earth berm with a
height of no less than five feet and two rows of coniferous trees and
supplemented with shrubs and understory trees.
      D.   The predominate building material for buildings shall be masonry or
concrete tilt-up panels. Metal panels are not allowed on the public sides or
residential sides of the building. The panels should be, at a minimum, painted
and incorporate color, texture, height, and wall variation to moderate the
scale of long, tall walls. Side and rear panels visible from public streets
shall be comprised of substantially the same materials and be of reasonably
similar character and quality to the front of the buildings, but may be
simplified in terms or detailing. The “front” of the building shall incorporate
35 percent glazing elements into the façade.
168.16   M-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL.
   In the M-2 District, the following regulations shall apply, except as
otherwise provided herein:
   1.   Principal Permitted Uses.
      A.   Uses permitted in M-1 Districts, provided that no dwelling or
dwelling unit is permitted except those for employees having duties in
connection with any premises requiring them to live on said premises, including
families of such employees when living with them.
      B.   Any other use not otherwise prohibited by law, provided, however,
that the following uses shall be permitted subject to approval by the Council
after public hearing and after report and recommendation by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The Council shall consider all of the following provisions
in its determination upon the particular use at the location requested:
         (1)   That the proposed location, design, construction, and operation
of the particular use adequately safeguards the health, safety, and general
welfare of persons residing or working in adjoining or surrounding property;
         (2)   That such use shall not impair an adequate supply of light and
air to surrounding property;
         (3)   That such use shall not unduly increase congestion in the
streets, or public danger of fire and safety;
         (4)   That such use shall not diminish or impair established property
values in adjoining or surrounding property; and
         (5)   That such use shall be in accord with the intent, purpose, and
spirit of this Zoning Code and the Comprehensive Plan of the City. No permit
will be issued in M-2 District other than the requirements listed in M-
1 District, except as specifically approved by the Council.
      C.   Special uses - see Section
170.10.
   2.   Permitted Conditional Uses.
      A.   Salvage yards and junkyards - see Chapter 124.
      B.   Outside storage yards, accessory or principal in use, and provided
that they are fenced and screened in their entirety such that no materials
stored are visible from the street or another property.
      C.   Public detention and correctional institutions, including penal
institutions, residential correction facilities, medical detention facilities,
or other similar facilities provided they are located at least 500 feet from
any residential use.
      D.   Home occupations are not an allowed conditional use.
   3.   Required Conditions.
      A.   The best practical means known for the disposal of refuse matter or
water-carried waste, the abatement of obnoxious or offensive odor, dust, smoke,
gas, noise, or similar nuisance shall be employed.
      B.   All principal buildings and all accessory buildings or structures,
including loading and unloading facilities, shall be located at least 100 feet
from any R District boundary, except where separated by an adjoining railroad
right-of-way. No setback is required where adjacent to an active railroad
right-of-way.
   4.   Bulk Regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
subject to the modifications contained in Section 167.07.
      A.   Lot area - no minimum.
      B.   Lot width - no minimum.
      C.   Front yard - 150 feet, if property fronts on or is adjacent to a
major thoroughfare (collector rating or higher) or R District; 50 feet, if
property is located on an interior street (local) within an industrial park.
      D.   Side yard - 50 feet, except where adjacent to an R District in which
case not less than 100 feet as specified in Subsection 3.
      E.   Rear yard - 40 feet, unless adjoining an active railroad, in which
case no rear yard is required.
      F.   Maximum height - no limit, except Conditional Use Permit required
for any structure exceeding 65 feet in height.
      G.   A minimum of 15 percent of the lot area shall be retained as
landscaped open space to include such items as walks, trees, shrubs, fountains,
or other ornamental features.
      H.   Screening of a sufficient height and density to obscure structures
and activities shall be erected at all locations where an Industrial M District
is immediately adjacent to a Residential R District.
Summary of M-2 Bulk Regulations
Summary of M-2 Bulk Regulations
Minimum lot area   None
Minimum lot width  None
Front yard setback 150 feet if adjacent to major thoroughfare or R District
                   50 feet if located in industrial park on an interior street
Side yard setbacks 50 feet
                   100 feet if adjacent to R District
Rear yard setback  40 feet
                   None if adjacent to railroad
Maximum height     No limit, except Conditional Use Permit over 65 feet
Open space         15 percent
Screening          Where adjacent to R District
 
   5.   Signs. Signs in accordance with Chapter 159.
   6.   Off-street parking and loading - see Chapter 167.
CHAPTER 169
ZONING CODE - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
 
169.01 Administration and Enforcement  169.05 Expiration of Permit
169.02 Building Permits Required       169.06 Conformity to Application, Plans,
                                       Permit
169.03 Application for Building Permit  
169.04 Certificates of Zoning
Compliance for New, Altered, or         
Nonconforming Uses
                                       
 
169.01   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   An Administrative Official, designated by the Council, shall administer and
enforce this Zoning Code. Such Administrative Official may be provided with the
assistance of such other persons as the Council may direct. If the
Administrative Official shall find that any of the provisions of this Zoning
Code are being violated, such Administrative Official shall notify, in writing,
the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The Administrative
Official shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or
structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions,
alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work
being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this Zoning Code to
insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
169.02   BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or
structurally altered without a permit therefore, issued by the Administrative
Official. No Building Permit shall be issued except in conformity with the
provisions of this Zoning Code, except after written order from the Board of
Adjustment or Council. (See Section
170.12 for schedule of fees).
169.03   APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
   All applications for Building Permits shall be accompanied by plans in
duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot
to be built upon; the exact sizes and location on the lot of buildings already
existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or
alteration. The application shall include such other information as lawfully
may be required by the Administrative Official, including existing or proposed
building or alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the
number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is
designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters
as may be necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the
enforcement of this Zoning Code. The Administrative Official shall require
plans and specifications to be prepared and designed or certified by an
engineer or architect licensed by the State to practice as such, except as
allowed pursuant to the adopted Building Code. (See Chapter 155 and Chapters
542B and 544A of the Code of Iowa).
169.04   CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE FOR NEW, ALTERED, OR NONCONFORMING
USES.
   1.   It is unlawful to use or occupy, or permit the use or occupancy, of any
building or premises or both in part thereof hereafter created, erected,
changed, or converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or
structure until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall have been issued
therefor by the Administrative Official stating that the proposed use of the
building or land conforms to the requirements of this Zoning Code.
   2.   No nonconforming structure or use shall be maintained, renewed,
changed, or extended until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall have been
issued by the Administrative Official. The Certificate of Zoning Compliance
shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use differs from the
provisions of this Zoning Code, provided that upon enactment or amendment of
this Zoning Code, owners or occupants of nonconforming uses or structures shall
have one year to apply for Certificate of Zoning Compliance. Failure to make
such application within one year shall be presumptive evidence that the
property was in conforming use at the time of enactment or amendment of this
Zoning Code.
   3.   Certificates of Zoning Compliance shall be applied for coincidentally
with the application for a Building Permit, and shall be issued within 10 days
after the lawful erection or alteration of the building is completed in
conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Code.
   4.   A temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance may be issued by the
Administrative Official for a period not exceeding six months during
alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided
that such temporary certificate may require such conditions and safeguards as
will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. The Administrative
Official shall maintain a record of all Certificates of Zoning Compliance and
copies shall be furnished upon request to any person.
   5.   Failure to obtain a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be a
violation of this Zoning Code and punishable under Section 171.05.
   6.   See Section 170.12 for schedule of fees.
169.05   EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   All permits shall expire in accordance with the provisions as set forth in
the adopted Building Code. (See Section
155.03.5).
169.06   CONFORMITY TO APPLICATION, PLANS, PERMIT.
   Building Permits or Certificates of Zoning Compliance issued on the basis of
plans and applications, approved by the Administrative Official, authorize only
the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and
applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement,
or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of
this Zoning Code, and punishable as provided by Section
171.05 hereof.
CHAPTER 170
ZONING CODE - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND OTHER PROCEDURES
 
170.01 Board Created                 170.07 Powers; Variances
170.02 Meetings                      170.08 Decisions of the Board
170.03 Appeals                       170.09 Appeals from Decision of the Board
170.04 Hearing; Notice               170.10 Exceptions to Prohibited Uses
170.05 Powers; Administrative Review 170.11 Duties on Matters of Appeal
170.06 Powers; Conditional Uses      170.12 Schedule of Fees
 
170.01   BOARD CREATED.
   A Board of Adjustment is hereby established which shall consist of five
members. The terms of office of the members of the Board of Adjustment and the
manner of their appointment shall be as provided by statute. Two unexcused
absences, or three total absences from regularly scheduled meetings in any one
calendar year, are grounds for dismissal from the Board of Adjustment.
170.02   MEETINGS.
   Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson, and at such other times as the Board of Adjustment may determine.
Such Chairperson, or in the absence of the Chairperson, the acting Chairperson,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of
the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public. The Board of Adjustment
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Board of Adjustment and shall be a
public record. The presence of three members shall be necessary to constitute a
quorum. A majority of the members of the Board of Adjustment shall be persons
representing the public at large and shall not be involved in the business of
purchasing or selling real estate.
170.03   APPEALS.
   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved, or
by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City affected by any
decisions of the Administrative Official. Such appeal shall be taken within 10
days by filing with the Administrative Official and with the Board of
Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The
Administrative Official shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. An
appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless
the Administrative Official certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after notice
of appeal shall have been filed with said Administrative Official, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of the
Administrative Official, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such
case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on
application or notice to the Administrative Official, and on due cause shown.
170.04   HEARING; NOTICE.
   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing on the
appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any
party may appear in person or by agent, or by attorney. Before an appeal is
filed with the Board of Adjustment, the appellant shall pay the appropriate
appeal fee. For any person, firm, or corporation who requests a hearing before
the Board of Adjustment, a notification sign shall be erected at all of the
street frontages of the property. The notification sign will be provided by the
City and the message will be as prescribed by City staff, and intended to
inform the public of the proposed item and the time and place of the hearing on
said item. Such signs shall be installed by the City no less than 10 days
before the hearing before the Board of Adjustment.
170.05   POWERS; ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Administrative Official in the enforcement of this
Zoning Code.
170.06   POWERS; CONDITIONAL USES.
   1.   The Board of Adjustment may permit the following conditional uses to
the district regulations set forth in this Zoning Code, subject to the
requirements of this section:
      A.   Erection and use of a building, or the use of premises, or variance
in the height and the regulations in any location for a public service
corporation for public utility purposes, or for purposes of public
communication, which the Board of Adjustment determines is reasonably necessary
for the public convenience or welfare.
      B.   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide only such other
conditional uses as the Board of Adjustment is specifically authorized to pass
on by the terms of this Zoning Code.
   2.   The Board of Adjustment shall decide such questions as are involved in
determining whether conditional uses should be granted; and to grant
conditional uses with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under
this Zoning Code, or to deny conditional uses when not in harmony with the
purpose and intent of this Zoning Code. A conditional use shall not be granted
by the Board of Adjustment unless and until:
      A.   A written application for conditional use is submitted indicating
the section of this Zoning Code which the conditional use is sought and stating
the grounds on which it is requested.
      B.   Notice of public hearing shall be given at least 10 days in advance
of public hearing. The owner of the property for which conditional use is
sought, or any agent of said owner, and any other affected property owners
shall be notified by mail. Notice of hearing shall also be posted on the
property for which conditional use is sought.
      C.   The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or
by agent or attorney.
      D.   The Board of Adjustment shall make a finding that it is empowered
under the section of this Zoning Code described in the application to grant the
conditional use, and that granting of the conditional use will not adversely
affect the public interest.
      E.   Standards. No conditional use shall be granted by the Board of
Adjustment unless the Board of Adjustment shall find:
         (1)   That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the
conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare;
         (2)   That the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already
permitted, and will not substantially diminish and impair property values
within the neighborhood;
         (3)   That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede
the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property
for uses permitted in the district;
         (4)   That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, or necessary
facilities have been or are being provided;
         (5)   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide
ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public
streets;
         (6)   That the conditional use shall, in all other respects, conform
to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located; and
         (7)   That the proposed use shall be consistent with the comprehensive
plan.
   3.   In granting any conditional use, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Zoning Code.
Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this
Zoning Code and punishable under Section
171.05. The Board of Adjustment may prescribe a time limit within which the
action for which the conditional use is required shall be begun or completed,
or both. Failure to begin or complete, or both, such action within the time
limit set shall void the conditional use.
170.07   POWERS; VARIANCES.
   The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to authorize, upon appeal in
specific cases, such variances from the terms of this Zoning Code as will not
be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this Zoning Code would result in
unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this Zoning Code shall not
be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless and until:
   1.   A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating:
      A.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar
to the land, structure, or building involved, and which are not applicable to
other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district;
      B.   That literal interpretation of the provisions of this Zoning Code
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same district under the terms of this Zoning Code;
      C.   That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant;
      D.   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Zoning Code to other
lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.
   No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the
same district, and no permitted use of land, structures, or buildings in other
districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
   2.   Notice of public hearing shall be given in advance of public hearing.
The owner of the property for which the variance is sought, or any agent, and
any other affected property owners shall be notified by mail.
   3.   The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person,
agent, or by attorney.
   4.   The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of
this section have been met by the applicant for a variance.
   5.   The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the reasons
set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the
variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of
the land, building, or structure.
   6.   The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting
of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
Zoning Code, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise
detrimental to public welfare.
   In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Zoning Code. Violation of
such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Zoning Code and
punishable under Section
171.05. Under no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment grant a variance
to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Zoning Code in the
district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the
terms of this Zoning Code in said district.
170.08   DECISIONS OF THE BOARD.
   In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may, so
long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this Zoning Code,
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements,
decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have
powers of the administrative officials from whom the appeal is taken. The
concurring vote of three members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary
to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
Administrative Official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under this Zoning Code, or to effect any
variation in this Zoning Code.
170.09   APPEALS FROM DECISION OF THE BOARD.
   Any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City, or
any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the
Board of Adjustment, may present to a court of record a petition, duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part,
specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to
the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the
Board of Adjustment. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may
modify the decision brought up for review.
170.10   EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITED USES.
   The Board of Adjustment may, by special permit after public hearing
authorize the location of any of the following buildings or uses in any
district from which they are prohibited by this Zoning Code. Notice of time and
place of hearing shall be given to all affected property owners at least 10
days in advance by placing notices in the United States mail:
   1.   Any public building erected and used by any department of the City,
Township, County, State, or federal government.
   2.   Airport or landing field.
   3.   Community building or recreation center.
   4.   Hospitals, non-profit fraternal institutions provided they are used
solely for fraternal purposes, and institutions of an educational, religious,
or philanthropic character, provided that the building shall be set back from
all yard lines a distance of not less than the yard requirements for the
district in which located.
   5.   Public cemetery.
170.11   DUTIES ON MATTERS OF APPEAL.
   It is the intent of this Zoning Code that all questions of interpretation
and enforcement shall be first presented to the Administrative Official, and
that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on
appeal from the decision of the Administrative Official, and that recourse from
the decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by
law and particularly by statute. It is further the intent of this Zoning Code
that the duties of the Council in connection with this Zoning Code shall not
include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that
may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this
section and this Zoning Code. Under the Zoning Code, the Council shall have
only the duties of:
   1.   Considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal
of this Zoning Code, as provided by law, and
   2.   Establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in Section
170.12.
170.12   SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   The Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses, and a
collection procedure for Certificates of Zoning Compliance, appeals, and other
matters pertaining to this Zoning Code. The schedule of fees listed below shall
be posted in the office of the Administrative Official, and may be altered or
amended only by the Council. No certificate, special exception or variance
shall be issued unless or until such costs, charges, fees, or expenses listed
below have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken on proceedings
before the Board of Adjustment unless or until preliminary charges and fees
have been paid in full.
   1.   Certificate of Zoning Compliance - New Structure. The building permit
fee shall include the Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
   2.   Certificate of Zoning Compliance - Change of Use. Residential Use -
$25.00; any use other than residential - $50.00.
   3.   Conditional Use Permits. Board of Adjustment appearance - $150.00.
   4.   Appeal - Board of Adjustment appearance. Residential Use - $50.00; any
use other than residential - $100.00.
   5.   Rezoning Fees. Agriculture and residential fees - less than one acre -
$100.00; greater than one acre - $100.00, plus $5.00 per additional acre;
Commercial and Industrial fees - less than one acre - $125.00; greater than one
acre - $125.00, plus $10.00 per additional acre.
   6.   Plan Review Fees. Planned Unit Development Plan fees - $100.00 and an
additional $10.00 per acre exceeding five acres. Site Plan fees - Residential
fees - less than one acre - $100.00; greater than one acre - $100.00 plus
$20.00 per additional acre; Commercial and Industrial fees - less than one acre
- $150.00; greater than one acre - $150.00 plus $20.00 per additional acre;
additions are $100.00 for less than one acre and $100.00 plus $10.00 per
additional acre for tracts that are greater than one acre.
CHAPTER 171
ZONING CODE - ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS
 
171.01 Site Plans               171.04 Amendments
171.02 Screening                171.05 Complaints Regarding Violations
171.03 Certificate of Occupancy 171.06 Enforcement; Penalties
 
171.01   SITE PLANS.
   To assure that the design and location of commercial and industrial areas
will be in conformance with the zoning standards of this Zoning Code and are
properly related to and in harmony with the existing and future business and
industrial development of the City, including generally accepted principles of
commercial, industrial and civic design, a detailed Site Plan shall be
submitted showing the proposed use and development of all commercial and
industrial sites for recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission to
the Council for their approval.
   1.   Procedure.
      A.   A Site Plan Review is required whenever a person or other group
wishes to develop any tract or parcel of land within all zoning districts,
except for:
         (1)   Any detached single-family residence and two-family residences
including any accessory structure thereto;
         (2)   Agriculturally zoned property;
         (3)   New construction of non-residential accessory buildings less
than 1,000 square feet in gross floor area;
         (4)   Additions to existing non-residential buildings when the
addition is less than 10 percent of the existing building’s gross floor area or
the addition does not exceed 1,000 square feet, whichever is more restrictive;
         (5)   Changes to a project that has already obtained Site Plan
approval where such change is identified by the Council’s Site Plan approval as
an allowed change requiring only administrative review by the planning staff;
         (6)   Also where no new curb cuts are required; and
         (7)   Where new construction does not reduce existing parking or
significantly modify existing on-site circulation as determined by the City
Engineer.
   Said person shall cause to be prepared a Site Plan of such development and
shall submit 14 copies of said Site Plan to the Clerk. The provisions of this
section shall be applicable to the redevelopment, enlargement, or extension of
any commercial or industrial uses or structures existing at the time of
adoption of the ordinance codified herein.† 14  The Site Plan shall contain
such information and data as outlined here.
      B.   The Clerk shall refer a copy of the Site Plan to the City Engineer,
or such other person as shall be designated, from time to time, by the Council,
who shall review said Site Plan as to its compliance with the ordinances of the
City, its effect upon public utilities and the public street system, and submit
findings as soon as possible to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      C.   The Clerk shall also forward a copy of the Site Plan to each member
of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall, after receiving the engineer’s report, review the Site Plan for
conformity with the regulations and design standards contained herein, and may
confer with the developer on changes deemed advisable in such Site Plan.
      D.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its recommendation
of action to the Clerk within 45 days of the date of submission of the Site
Plan. If the Planning and Zoning Commission does not act within 45 days, the
Site Plan shall be deemed to be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
unless the developer agrees to an extension of time.
      E.   The Planning and Zoning Commission may, in its discretion, hold a
public hearing on the Site Plan of the proposed development and prescribe the
notice thereof and to whom such notice shall be given.
      F.   The Council shall, upon receipt of the recommendation of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, either approve or disapprove the Site Plan of
the proposed development.
      G.   No Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy for any structure
within any distance within which a Site Plan is required shall be issued until
the Site Plan has been approved as provided herein.
      H.   Upon final action by the Planning and Zoning Commission on any Site
Plan, a copy of said Site Plan, with the action of the Planning and Zoning
Commission noted thereon and signed by the chairman of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, shall be filed with the Clerk.
      I.   If the Administrative Official finds that any construction or
proposed construction or occupancy of a development on a tract of land for
which a Site Plan has been approved will not substantially comply with the Site
Plan as approved, or if the Administrative Official finds that the construction
and development of the tract is not being carried out in accordance with the
development schedule filed with the Site Plan, the Administrative Official
shall suspend all Building Permits for the development and order all
construction stopped until such time as the owner of the project or any
successors in interest shall have provided the Administrative Official with
proof satisfactory to said Administrative Official that the Site Plan will be
complied with. The Administrative Official shall not issue a Certificate of
Occupancy for any structure within the development while the Building Permit
for the development has been suspended pursuant to this paragraph. Any person
aggrieved by any decision or action of the Administrative Official under this
paragraph may appeal such action or decision to the Board of Adjustment.
      J.   If the owner or developer of a tract of land for which a Site Plan
has been approved determines that an extension of time is necessary or that a
modification of the Site Plan would provide for a more appropriate or more
practicable development of the site, the owner or developer may apply for an
amendment of the Site Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant an
extension of time or a modification of a previously approved Site Plan if it
determines that such modification of the Site Plan would provide for a more
appropriate development of the site.
      K.   Pre-application Conference. Whenever any person, partnership,
corporation, or any other group, public or private, proposed to develop any
tract or parcel of land or modify any existing development which requires a
Site Plan submittal, a request shall be made to the Department of Community
Development for a Pre-Application Conference. The Pre-Application Conference
shall include the applicant or representative, the Director of Community
Development, the City Engineer, City Building Inspector, and the Public Works
Director. The purpose of the conference shall be to acquaint the City staff
with proposed development and to acquaint the applicant or representative with
the procedures and with any special problems that might relate to the
development. The applicant shall furnish a legal description of the property to
be developed at the time of requesting the Pre-Application Conference, and the
Pre-Application Conference shall be held within 15 days of such request.
   2.   Design Standards. The standards of design are intended as minimum
requirements so that the general arrangement and layout of the development
requiring the Site Plan may be adjusted to a wide variety of circumstances.
      A.   All proposed developments for which Site Plans are required shall
conform to the Comprehensive Plan of the City; the provisions of this Zoning
Code, the Subdivision Regulations, if applicable; and all other applicable City
ordinances and statutes and regulations of the State.
      B.   The proposed development shall have such entrances and exits upon
public streets as are necessary for safety and the general welfare and shall
have such interior drives as are necessary for free movement of emergency
vehicles; and shall have such pedestrian walkways as are necessary for safety
and general welfare. The proposed development shall have such entrances and
exits upon adjacent streets and such internal traffic circulation pattern as
will not unduly increase congestion on adjacent or surrounding public streets
or create undue hazards to traffic safety.
      C.   The proposed development shall be designed with a proper regard to
topography, surface drainage, natural drains and streams, wooded areas, and
other natural features which will lend themselves to proper, harmonious, and
attractive development of the site. The design of the proposed improvements
shall make adequate provisions for surface and subsurface drainage, for
connections to water and sanitary sewer lines, each so designed as to neither
overload existing public utility lines nor increase the danger of erosion,
flooding, landslide, or other endangerment of adjoining or surrounding
property.
      D.   The proposed development shall be designed with adequate water
mains, provisions for sanitary sewage facilities, storm sewers (storm sewers to
be designed for five-year storm calculations) and drains and flood control, in
accordance with the ordinances and regulations of the City and statutes and
regulations of the State and good engineering practice to protect the public
health and welfare and not overload any existing public utilities. Surface
drainage shall be directed to storm sewers wherever practical, including the
requirement to extend public storm sewer, if deemed necessary.
      E.   The proposed development shall be designed and the buildings and
improvements located in such a manner as not to unduly diminish or impair the
use and enjoyment of adjoining or surrounding property and to such end shall
have such buffers, screen fences, and landscaping as may be proper and shall
minimize the adverse effects on such adjoining property from automobile
headlights, illuminations of required perimeter yards, refuse containers, and
impairment of light and air. For the purpose of this section, the term “use and
enjoyment of adjoining property” means the use and enjoyment presently being
made of such adjoining property, unless such property is vacant. If vacant, the
term “use and enjoyment of adjoining property” means those uses permitted under
the zoning districts in which such adjoining property is located.
      F.   The proposed development shall not unduly increase the public danger
of fire or diminish the public safety, and shall be designed to adequately
safeguard the health, safety, and general welfare of the public and of persons
residing and working in the development and in the adjoining or surrounding
property.
      G.   The proposed development and all structures therein shall be
designed in such a manner as to create a quality environment and to such end
shall be architecturally and aesthetically harmonious and attractive.
      H.   To such end as may be necessary and proper to accomplish the Design
Standards of this section, a landscaping plan prepared by a registered
landscape architect, nursery person, or such other knowledgeable person shall
be provided, along with plans which address erosion control and other
applicable requirements of this chapter and other City regulations.
      I.   Building Orientation. The orientation of any proposed building shall
be carefully scrutinized so as to mitigate the visual and audible impact of
service areas, loading docks, loading areas, or similar operations on the
adjoining properties and general public.
         (1)   Buildings shall not be designed or oriented to expose loading
docks, service areas, or nonresidential overhead doors to the public rights-of-
way.
         (2)   Buildings proposed in commercial districts that are adjacent to
residential developments shall not be designed or oriented to expose loading
docks, service areas, or similar operations toward the adjacent residential
developments.
         (3)   If it is not feasible to design or orient the loading docks,
service areas, or similar operations away from the residential developments,
additional landscape buffering, screening walls, fences, and setbacks may be
approved by the Council.
      J.   Architectural Elements. In order to reduce the negative aesthetic
impacts of large buildings, additional architectural elements shall be
incorporated into the overall building design.
         (1)   Non-single-family buildings proposed in residential districts
shall incorporate residential design elements such as pitched roofs, dormers,
cupolas, or other similar roof elements into the building design in order to
minimize the aesthetic impact of the differing uses.
         (2)   Buildings proposed in commercial districts that are adjacent to
residential developments are recommended to include an articulated roofline,
giving emphasis to architectural elements that will help divide the mass of a
large building into smaller, identifiable pieces. Flat roof buildings shall
only be approved by the Council.
         (3)   Commercial buildings shall incorporate architectural design
elements, materials, and colors into the side and rear building elevations
similar to those used in the front building elevation.
         (4)   Commercial buildings shall incorporate façade modulation in all
building elevations in order to preserve building scale and reduce the
aesthetic impact of long, large expansive wall surfaces. The variation in wall
surfaces can be accomplished either by physical offsets or by the use of color,
pattern, or texture.
         (5)   Roof-mounted mechanical units, satellite dishes, or other
similar equipment shall be screened from public view by the extension of a
parapet wall or other roof-mounted equipment, point-in-place screening shall be
required. Such screening shall have similar design features as the building
including material, shape, and color considerations. Wooden fences shall not be
considered appropriate.
         (6)   Buildings proposed or redeveloped in the “Old Town” area, as
designated in the Comprehensive Plan, shall maintain the historic nature, and
incorporate architectural elements and designs which complement and preserve
the character of the area.
      K.   Exterior Material Selection. The building’s exterior material
selection shall be compatible with other buildings and structures in adjoining
developments. The minimum requirements shall be as follows:
         (1)   In all R Zoning Districts, all non-dwelling, principal permitted
structures shall incorporate at a minimum, 50 percent brick, stone, or similar
substantial material into the overall building design. The percentage
requirement shall be calculated on the total exterior surface area exclusive of
glazed surfaces.
         (2)   In R-3 and R-5 Districts, primarily residential construction
materials such as: brick, stone, wood, lap siding, and architectural shingles,
shall be utilized in the design.
            a.   Attached dwelling structures shall incorporate at a minimum,
20 percent brick, stone, or similar substantial material in the overall
building design. The percentage requirement shall be calculated on the total
exterior surface area exclusive of glazed surfaces.
            b.   Multiple family structures shall incorporate at a minimum, 50
percent brick, stone, or similar substantial material into the overall building
design. The percentage requirement shall be calculated on the total exterior
surface area exclusive of glazed surfaces.
         (3)   In C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, and C-6 Districts, the architectural
material selection shall be dominated with permanency and strength of material
in proportion to the aesthetic characteristics of the building’s bulk and
shape. Structures in these districts shall incorporate at a minimum, 60 percent
brick, stone, or “architecturally designed” concrete tilt-up panels. The
remaining surface shall be finished with split-face block, architectural tilt-
up panels, stucco, or architectural aluminum panels. Accent materials not
listed above may be incorporated into the building as an additional secondary
material to compliment and add architectural character and design elements. The
percentage requirement shall be calculated on the total exterior surface area
exclusive of glazed surfaces or door enclosures.
         (4)   In C-7 Districts the architecture shall be of the highest
quality, with detailed design. The architectural design of any building shall
conform to the approved Development Plan and Design Criteria Manual approved by
the Council. The Council, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning
and Zoning Commission, shall determine the appropriateness of an architectural
material when used as a building element as to whether the material enhances
the physical appearance of the development or provides continuity desired to
unite all structures within the development into the project theme. Buildings
shall be architecturally treated on all elevations to produce an aesthetically
pleasing façade which is of a design that complies with the approved
Development Plan. Attention shall be paid to breaking up solid walls by
incorporating window elements, multiple planes, and articulation of surfaces
through the use of wall modulation, offsets, parapets, and of various
materials, textures, and colors.
         (5)   The use of metal panels or sheet metal will not be considered an
acceptable exterior building or accessory building material in any residential
or commercial district. Metal panels may be used on the non-public faces of
buildings in M-1 and M-2 Districts.
      L.   Exterior Color Selection. The building’s exterior color scheme shall
utilize primarily muted, neutral, or earth tone type colors. The primary use of
bright, intense, or extreme colors not consistent with the adjoining
developments shall not be permitted in any zoning district. This regulation is
not intended to prohibit the use of these colors for specifically approved
architectural detailing.
      M.   Waiver of Design Requirements. The Council reserves the right to
waive or modify to a lesser restriction any provision or requirement of
architectural design elements contained in this chapter for structures that
have been constructed, legally permitted, or a Site Plan approved by the
Council prior to February 1, 2004. Said structures are considered
“Grandfathered” as legally non-conforming. The Council’s right to waive or
modify includes subsequent remodeling, building additions, and detached
accessory buildings or structures on the same lot as a “Grandfathered”
principle structure. Furthermore, the Council shall find that said waiver or
modification does not adversely affect the intent of these regulations to
adequately safeguard the general public and surrounding property. Exceptions
will only be considered for those areas where special circumstances warrant a
change and whereby the modification or waiver is determined to be in the best
interest of the general public. This section is not applicable to new
construction, unless specified here above.
      N.   Horizontal and Vertical Survey Control. The City requires all
projects that modify or add to the City’s infrastructure to be tied into the
horizontal and vertical control system as adopted on June 19, 2006.
         (1)   Vertical Control. A project’s vertical datum must tie into the
vertical control points provided in the City’s Horizontal and Vertical Control
Network with a minimum of one of the points being a Primary Control Point,
other points may be Secondary Points.
         (2)   Horizontal Control. A project may use an existing basis of
bearing and assumed coordinates that meet the project’s on the ground needs and
as may be required by practical and accepted survey methods. Although an
assumed horizontal coordinate system can be used, a project’s horizontal
control must also be tied into the City’s Horizontal Control Network by
labeling at least two points. The basis of the tie must be from a minimum of
one of the Primary Control Points listed in the City’s Horizontal and Vertical
Control Network with a listing of the points used to make the relationship.
   3.   Site Plan Requirements. All Site Plans shall be drawn at a scale not
less than 1 inch = 50 feet. Fourteen copies of the Site Plan shall be submitted
to the Clerk. The purpose of the Site Plan is to show all information needed to
enable the engineer, Planning and Zoning Commission, and the Council to
determine if the proposed development meets the requirements of this Zoning
Code.
   4.   Information Required. The Site Plan required shall include the
following information concerning the proposed development:
      A.   Name, address, and phone number of all persons having an interest in
the property, including the engineer, architect, landscape architect, land
surveyor, or person preparing the Site Plan.
      B.   Legal description of property, point of compass, scale, date, and
revision dates.
      C.   Applicant’s name, present and proposed land use and zoning, location
and names of adjoining subdivisions, the numbers of the adjoining lots therein,
and the names and addresses of adjoining landowners.
      D.   If the applicant is other than the legal owner, the applicant’s
interest shall be stated.
      E.   Ties to the City’s Horizontal and Vertical Control Network.
   5.   Required Illustrations. The Site Plan shall clearly set forth the
following information concerning the proposed development:
      A.   Property boundary lines indicated by a heavy line, dimensions, and
total area of the proposed development.
      B.   Existing and proposed contour lines of the proposed development at
intervals of not more than two feet. Soil erosion control practices must be
shown where necessary.
      C.   The availability, location, size, and capacity of existing
utilities, and of proposed utilities.
      D.   Existing and proposed utility lines and easements in accordance with
the Standard Specifications and Subdivision Regulations.
      E.   The proposed location, size, height, shape, use, and architectural
theme of all buildings or structures in the proposed development.
      F.   The total square footage of building floor area, both individually
and collectively in the proposed development.
      G.   Existing buildings, rights-of-way, street improvements, railroads,
easements, drainage courses, streams, and wooded areas.
      H.   All required building setback lines.
      I.   Estimated number of employees for each proposed use, where
applicable, and any other information which may be necessary to determine the
number of off-street parking spaces and loading spaces required by the Zoning
Code.
      J.   Complete traffic circulation and parking plan showing location,
number, dimensions, and design of off-street parking in the proposed
development, including:
         (1)   Driveways, islands, and planters;
         (2)   Striping and safety curbs;
         (3)   Loading facilities;
         (4)   Type and location of lighting;
         (5)   Surface treatment; and
         (6)   Grade and direction of drainage.
      K.   Open spaces, yards, recreational areas, walkways, driveways, outside
lighting, walls, fences, monuments, statues, signs, and other man-made features
to be used in the landscape of the proposed development.
      L.   Facilities for the collection and disposal of garbage, trash,
recycling, and grease dumpsters. Enclosure must be constructed of the same
primary material as the exterior of the principal building, with an opaque
gate.
      M.   Location and type of all plants, grass, and trees to be used in the
landscape of the proposed development. Landscaping to be used for screening
purposes shall be illustrated in the elevation and perspective as well as the
plan, with the approximate size and name of plants, shrubs, or trees to be
planted clearly indicated.
      N.   Location of entrances and exits from the proposed development onto
public roads, and interior drives and proposed sidewalks in the development.
      O.   Proposed drainage facilities and provisions for flood control.
      P.   Location, height, and area of all signs (directional signs,
identification signs, or temporary signs) in the proposed development.
      Q.   Location of existing trees six inches or larger in diameter,
landslide areas, springs and streams and other bodies of water, and any area
subject to flooding by a 100-year storm.
      R.   A “Vicinity Sketch” of legible scale showing the generalized street
patterns, land use, and zoning within 100 feet of the site plan boundary.
      S.   Three copies of architectural elevations of all proposed buildings,
for the purpose of understanding the structures, the location of windows,
doors, overhangs, projection height, etc., and the grade relationship to floor
elevation, and the number of stories of each existing building to be retained
and of each proposed building.
      T.   Soil tests and similar information, if deemed necessary by the City
Engineer, to determine the feasibility of the proposed development.
   6.   Expiration of Approval. All site plan approvals shall expire and
terminate:
      A.   In the case of non-residential improvements described in the Design
Criteria Manual, as amended, for any C-7 zoned development, 365 days after the
date of Council approval, and
      B.   In all other cases where site plan approval is required hereunder,
180 days after the date of the Council approval unless in all cases a building
permit has been issued for the construction provided for in the Site Plan.
   The Council may, upon written request by the developer, extend: (i) the time
for the issuance of a building permit for 60 days; or (ii) the Site Plan
approval expiration date. In the event the Building Permit for the construction
provided for in a site plan expires or is canceled, then such Site Plan
approval shall thereupon terminate.
 
Notes
14 † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 8-19-93.
171.02   SCREENING.
   1.   Intent. The intent of screening regulations is to lessen the
transmission from one lot to another of noise, dust, and glare; to lessen
visual pollution by providing an impression of separation of spaces or entirely
shielding one land use from another; or establishing a sense of privacy from
visual or physical intrusion. The provisions of this chapter are necessary to
safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare.
   2.   General Screening. Every development shall provide sufficient screening
so that neighboring properties are shielded from any adverse external effects
of that development; and the development is shielded from the negative impacts
of adjacent uses, including streets and railroads.
   3.   Compliance With General Standard. The following table illustrates the
type of screen required between zoning classifications. Where such screening is
required, the applicant or burdened use is responsible for installation prior
to receiving an Occupancy Permit for the use in questions. A description of the
screen types (A, B, and C) are described in the following subsection. Where
screening is to be approved at Site Plan review (*), the screening objectives
described in the Site Plan, Section
171.01 are to be adhered. The Council may require additional screening where
deemed appropriate.
Table of Screening Requirements
Benefited Zoning Classification or Use
Zone R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 M-1 M-2
Table of Screening Requirements
Benefited Zoning Classification or Use
Zone R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 M-1 M-2
R-1          A   A   *   B   B   *   B   *   *   C   C
R-2  -   -   A   A   *   B   B   *   B   *   *   C   C
R-3  A   A   -   -   *   A   B   *   B   *   *   C   C
R-4  A   A   -   -   *   A   B   *   B   *   *   C   C
R-5  *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *
C-1  B   B   A   A   *   -   A   *   A   *   *   C   C
C-2  B   B   B   B   *   A   -   *   -   *   *   C   C
C-3  *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *
C-4  B   B   B   B   *   A   -   *   -   *   *   C   C
C-5  *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *
C-6  *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *
M-1  C   C   C   C   *   C   C   *   C   *   *   -   B
M-2  C   C   C   C   *   C   C   *   C   *   *   B   -
*Screening to be approved with Site Plan Review
- No screening required
A, B, C, Described below
 
   4.   Descriptions of Screens. The following three basic types of screens are
established and are used as the basis for the table of screening requirements.
      A.   Broken Screen, Type A. A screen composed of intermittent visual
obstructions from the ground to a height of at least 20 feet. The broken screen
is intended to create the impression of a separation of spaces without
necessarily eliminating visual contact between the spaces. It may be composed
of a wall, fence, landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation, or existing
vegetation. Compliance of planted vegetative screens or natural vegetations
will be judged on the basis of the average mature height and density of foliage
of the subject species, or field observation of existing vegetation. The screen
may contain deciduous plants.
      B.   Semi-Opaque Screen, Type B. A screen that is opaque from the ground
to a height of three feet, with intermittent visual obstruction from above the
opaque portion to a height of at least 20 feet. The semi-opaque screen is
intended to partially block visual contact between uses and to create a strong
impression of the separation of spaces. The semi-opaque screen may be composed
of a wall, fence, landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation, or existing
vegetation. Compliance of planted vegetative screens or natural vegetation will
be judged on the basis of the average mature height and density of foliage of
the subject species, or field observation of existing vegetation. At maturity,
the portion of intermittent visual obstructions should not contain any
completely unobstructed openings more than 10 feet wide. The zone of
intermittent visual obstruction may contain deciduous plants.
      C.   Opaque Screen, Type C. A screen that is opaque from the ground to a
height of at least six feet, with intermittent visual obstructions from the
opaque portion to a height of at least 20 feet. An opaque screen is intended to
exclude all visual contact between uses and to create a strong impression of
spatial separation. The opaque screen may be composed of a wall, fence,
landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation, or existing vegetation. Compliance
of planted vegetative screens or natural vegetation will be judged on the basis
of the average mature height and density of foliage of the subject species, or
field observation of existing vegetation. The opaque portion of the screen must
be opaque in all seasons of the year. At maturity, the portion of intermittent
visual obstructions should not contain any completely unobstructed openings
more than 10 feet wide. The portion of intermittent visual obstructions may
contain deciduous plants.
   5.   Storage Areas. The outdoor storage of materials, equipment, or
supplies, when permitted in any commercial or industrial district, shall be so
located or screened, fenced or landscaped so as to effectively prevent
visibility of such storage from all abutting residential zoning districts or
abutting existing residential uses. Such screening shall be sufficient if it
prevents visibility of such storage area by persons traveling on public rights-
of-way or standing at grade level on the side or rear lot lines of such
property. Such screening shall comply with the standard for an opaque screen
Type C as described in Subsection 4, Paragraph C.
171.03   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   1.   No land shall be occupied or used, and no building here-after erected
or structurally altered shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any
purpose whatsoever, until a certificate is issued by the Administrative
Official stating that the building and use comply with the provisions of this
Zoning Code.
   2.   No change of use shall be made in any building or part thereof, now or
hereafter erected or structurally altered, without a permit being issued
therefore by the Administrative Official. No permit shall be issued to make a
change unless the changes are in conformity with provisions of this Zoning
Code.
   3.   Applications for Certificates of Occupancy shall be applied for
coincidentally with the application for a Building Permit and shall be issued
within 10 days after the lawful erection or alteration of the building is
completed. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of
the Administrative Official and copies shall be furnished on request to any
person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
   4.   No permit for excavation for, or the erection or alteration, of any
building shall be issued before the application has been made for a Certificate
of Occupancy, and no building or premises shall be occupied until that
certificate is issued.
   5.   A Certificate of Non-Conforming Uses shall be required of all non-
conforming uses. Application for a Certificate for Non-Conforming Uses shall be
filed with the Administrative Official within 12 months from the effective date
of the ordinance codified herein, accompanied by affidavits of proof that such
non-conforming use was not established in violation of previous ordinance.
171.04   AMENDMENTS.
   1.   The Council may, from time to time, on its own action or on petition,
amend, supplement, or change the boundaries or regulations herein or
subsequently established. However, no such amendment, supplement, restriction,
change of boundaries, or regulations shall become effective until after a
public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens
shall have an opportunity to be heard. The notice of the time and place of the
hearing shall be published as provided in Section 362.3 of the Code of Iowa,
except that at least seven days’ notice must be given and in no case shall the
public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly scheduled Council
meeting following the published notice. The notice shall be published in a
paper of general circulation in the City. In addition to the notification
requirements above, signs shall also be erected as per Subsection 5. Such
amendment, supplement, or change shall not become effective except by a
favorable vote of a majority of all of the members of the Council. In case,
however, of a written protest against a change or repeal which is filed with
the Clerk and signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the
lots included in the proposed change or repeal, or by the owners of 20 percent
or more of the property which is located within 200 feet of the exterior
boundaries of the property for which the change or repeal is proposed, the
change or repeal shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of at
least three-fourths of all of the members of the Council. The provisions of
Section 414.4 of the Code of Iowa relative to public hearings and official
notice apply equally to all changes or amendments.
   2.   Whenever any person desires that any amendment or change be made in
this Zoning Code, including the text or map, as to any property in the City,
and there shall be presented to the Council a petition requesting such change
or amendment and clearly describing the property and its boundaries as to which
the change or amendment is desired, duly signed by the owners of 50 percent of
the area of all real estate included within the boundaries of said tract as
described in said petition, and in addition, duly signed by the owners of 50
percent of the area of all real estate lying outside of said tract but within
200 feet of the boundaries thereof (intervening streets and alleys not to be
included in computing such 200 feet), it shall be the duty of the Council to
vote upon such petition within 90 days after the filing of such petition with
the Clerk.
   3.   Before any action shall be taken as provided in this section, the party
or parties proposing or recommending a change in the district regulations or
district boundaries shall deposit with the Clerk the sum of $10.00 to cover the
approximate costs of this procedure and under no conditions shall said sum or
any part thereof, be refunded for failure of said amendment to be enacted into
law.
   4.   Whenever any petition for an amendment, supplement, or change of the
zoning regulations herein contained or subsequently established shall have been
denied by the Council until one year shall have elapsed from the date of the
filing of the first petition.
   5.   For any person, firm, or corporation who requests a hearing before the
Planning and Zoning Commission, a notification sign shall be erected at all of
the street frontages of the property. The notification sign will be provided by
the City and the message will be as prescribed by the Community Development
Director, and intended to inform the public of the proposed item and the time
and place of the hearing on said item. Such signs shall be installed by the
City, no less than 10 days before the hearing of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and shall remain in place until the final hearing before the
Council. Any person who removes a sign erected by the City without consent
shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
171.05   COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.
   Whenever a violation of this Zoning Code occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully
the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Administrative Official.
Said Administrative Official shall record properly such complaint, immediately
investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this Zoning Code.
171.06   ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES.
   1.   Enforcement. All departments, officials, and employees of the City who
are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, shall issue
no such permit or license for any use, structure, or purpose if the same would
not conform to the provisions of this Zoning Code.
   2.   Penalties for Violation. The owner or tenant of any building,
structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor,
agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains a
violation of the provisions of this Zoning Code may each be found guilty of a
separate offense and suffer the penalties provided in this Code of Ordinances.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
CHAPTER 175
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
 
175.01 Purpose                       175.08 Final Plat Requirements
175.02 Jurisdiction                  175.09 Subdivision Plat Fees
175.03 Definitions                   175.10 Enforcement
175.04 Procedure - Plats of Survey   175.11 Changes and Amendments
175.05 Procedure - Subdivision Plats 175.12 Construction Drawings and As-Builts
                                     or Record Drawings
175.06 Subdivision Design Standards   
175.07 Preliminary Plat Requirements  
 
175.01   PURPOSE.
   It is deemed essential to establish minimum standards for the design and
development of all new subdivisions so that existing developments will be
protected and so that adequate provisions are made for public utilities and
other public requirements and to improve the health, safety, and general
welfare.
175.02   JURISDICTION.
   This chapter is adopted by the City governing the subdivision of all lands
within the corporate limits of the City, and pursuant to the provisions of
Section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa, the City reserves the right to review each
and every subdivision plat and plat of survey which is proposed to be developed
on any and all land in the unincorporated area outside the corporate boundaries
of the City, but within two miles of those corporate boundaries. These
subdivision plats will be reviewed by the same standards and conditions used
for review and approval of subdivisions within the City limits. In the
alternative, the City reserves the right granted by Section 354.9(2) of the
Code of Iowa and approval pursuant to Chapter 28E Agreements entered into and
recorded between any county or city which has also adopted ordinances
regulating the division of land which lies within the area of review
established by the City. As required in Section 354.9(1) of the Code of Iowa,
the City will record the ordinance codified in this section in the office of
the County Recorder and file it in the office of the County Auditor of each
county wherein land reserved in this section for review of subdivision plats
and plats of survey by the City is located.
175.03   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   Words beginning with “A.”
      A.   “Access street” means a street that is parallel to and adjacent to a
major thoroughfare or highway; and which provides access to abutting properties
and protection from through traffic.
   2.   Words beginning with “B.”
      A.   “Block” means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely
bounded by streets, highways, or ways, except alleys, or by streets, highways,
or ways, except alleys, and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the
subdivision.
      B.   “Building line” shall be shown on all lots intended for residential
use of any character, and on commercial and industrial lots when required by
ordinance. Such building line shall not be less than required by the Zoning
Code. Where the subdivided area is not under zoning control, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall require building lines in accordance with the needs of
each addition.
   3.   Words beginning with “C.”
      A.   “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      B.   “Collector streets” means those which carry traffic from minor
streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for
circulation within such a development.
      C.   “Cul-de-sac” means a short, minor street, having one end open to
motor traffic, the other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular
turnaround.
   4.   Words beginning with “D.”
   5.   Words beginning with “E.”
      A.   “Easement” means a grant by the property owner of the use for a
specific purpose, of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation, or a
certain person or persons, and within the limits of which the owner of the fee
shall not erect any permanent structures, but shall have the right to make any
other use of the land subject to such easement which is not inconsistent with
the rights of the grantee. Public utilities shall have the right to trim or
remove trees which interfere with the use of such easements.
      B.   “Engineer” means a registered engineer authorized to practice civil
engineering, as defined by the registration act of the State.
   6.   Words beginning with “F.”
   7.   Words beginning with “G.”
   8.   Words beginning with “H.”
      A.   “Half-street” means a one-half width street right-of-way on the
boundary of a subdivision dedicated by the subdivider to the City; for future
development when another subdivision is platted along the side of the half-
street. Half streets are not permitted.
   9.   Words beginning with “I.”
   10.   Words beginning with “J.”
   11.   Words beginning with “K.”
   12.   Words beginning with “L.”
      A.   “Lot” means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership
or for building development.
   13.   Words beginning with “M.”
      A.   “Major thoroughfare” means a street used primarily for fast, large
volume traffic.
      B.   “Minor street” means a street used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
   14.   Words beginning with “N.”
   15.   Words beginning with “O.”
   16.   Words beginning with “P.”
      A.   “Performance bond” means a surety bond or cash deposit made out to
the City in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements which are
required by this chapter, said cost being estimated by the City Engineer, and
said surety bond or cash deposit being legally sufficient to secure to the City
that said improvements will be constructed in accordance with this chapter.
      B.   “Plat” means a map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider’s plan
of the subdivision is presented and which the subdivider submits for approval
and intends to be in final form to record.
   17.   Words beginning with “Q.”
   18.   Words beginning with “R.”
      A.   “Roadway” means that portion of the street available for vehicular
traffic, and where the curbs are laid, the portion from back-to-back of curbs.
   19.   Words beginning with “S.”
      A.   “Subdivision” means the division of land into three or more lots for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building
development; or any change in existing street lines or public easement. The
term, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of
subdividing or to the land subdivided, or the resubdivision of land heretofore
divided or platted into lots or other divisions of land, or, if a new street is
involved, any division of land.
      B.   “Surveyor” means a registered surveyor authorized to practice
surveying, as defined by the registration act of the State.
   20.   Words beginning with “T.”
   21.   Words beginning with “U.”
   22.   Words beginning with “V.”
   23.   Words beginning with “W.”
   24.   Words beginning with “X.”
   25.   Words beginning with “Y.”
   26.   Words beginning with “Z.”
175.04   PROCEDURE - PLATS OF SURVEY.
   The following regulations shall apply to any plats of survey which create
new parcels within the jurisdiction of the City:
   1.   Recording. No plats of survey for any land within the jurisdiction of
the City shall be recorded in the County Recorder’s office or have any validity
until the Council has adopted a resolution approving and releasing the plat of
survey for recordation.
   2.   Application and Processing. Any person, firm, or entity, proposing the
division or subdivision by means of a plat of survey of any land into two or
more parts or the creation of a new lot or parcel within the jurisdiction of
the City, including any area outside the City’s boundaries pursuant to Section
354.9 of the Code of Iowa, shall submit an application to the Community
Development Department, on the prescribed forms, for review for compliance with
City Code requirements. The City staff shall review the proposal and formulate
a recommendation to the Council, which shall be presented to the Council in a
written report.
   3.   Approval or Denial. The Council may, at their full discretion, approve,
deny, or modify, wholly or partly, any application for approval of a plat of
survey. The Council may impose such conditions and limitations as it deems
necessary to assure that the general purpose and intent of this Code and all
other ordinances or policies enacted or followed by the Council will be
observed, and that the public interest, health, safety, convenience, and
welfare will be served.
175.05   PROCEDURE - SUBDIVISION PLATS.
   1.   Whenever the owner of any tract or parcel of land within the
jurisdiction of this chapter wishes to subdivide or plat the same, said owner
shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat of said subdivision, and shall
submit 12 copies of said preliminary plat and other information to the Clerk.
The preliminary plat shall contain such information and data as is outlined in
Section
175.07 hereof.
   2.   The Clerk shall immediately refer copies of the preliminary plat to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and to the City Engineer. The City Engineer
shall carefully examine said plat as to its compliance with this Code of
Ordinances, the existing street system, and good engineering practices, and
shall, as soon as possible, submit findings to the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
   3.   After receiving the City Engineer’s report, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall study the preliminary plat and other material for conformity
thereof to those regulations. The Planning and Zoning Commission may confer
with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of such
improvements to be made. Before approving a preliminary plat, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may, at its discretion, hold a public hearing on the proposed
plat, notice of which shall be given by publication in a local newspaper of
general distribution, or by posting notices on the tract, or by sending notices
to affected property owners by mail. Such notice shall be given within seven
days prior to the public hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall file
with the Council recommendations for approval or rejection of such preliminary
plat within 45 days after the date of submission of said plat to the Planning
and Zoning Commission. Upon receiving recommendations of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, the Council shall consider the same and, if the plat is
found to conform to the provisions of this chapter, the Council shall approve
the preliminary plat.
   4.   The approval of the preliminary plat by the Council shall be null and
void unless the final plat is presented to the Council within 180 days after
date of said preliminary plat approval.
   5.   Approval of the final plat and final acceptance of improvements shall
be given by resolution of the Council which shall direct the Mayor and Clerk to
certify the resolution which shall be affixed to the plat. Procedure for
approval of the final plat shall be as outlined in Section
175.06(5).
175.06   SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The standards and details of design herein contained are intended only as
minimum requirements so that the general arrangement and layout of a
subdivision may be adjusted to a wide variety of circumstances. However, in the
design and development of a plat, the subdivider shall use standards consistent
with the site conditions so as to assure an economical, pleasant, and durable
neighborhood.
   1.   Streets.
      A.   Comprehensive Plan. All proposed plats and subdivisions shall
conform to the Comprehensive Plan. All proposed plats and subdivisions shall
also conform to additional proposed street plans as set out by the City.
      B.   Continuation of Existing or Planned Streets. Proposed streets shall
provide for continuation or completion of any existing streets (constructed or
recorded) or any streets which are a part of an approved preliminary
subdivision plan, in adjoining property, at equal or greater width, but not
less than 50 feet in width, and in similar alignment, unless variations are
recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      C.   Circulation. The street pattern shall provide ease of circulation
within the subdivision as well as convenient access to adjoining streets,
thoroughfares, or unsubdivided land as well as may be required by the Planning
and Zoning Commission. Permanent, dead-ended “cul-de-sac” streets may be
utilized as part of a street system layout, but deference is given to street
segments that allow “through” traffic. In a case where a street will eventually
be extended beyond the plat, but is temporarily dead-ended, an interim
turnaround may be required.
      D.   Street Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at
right angles as possible.
      E.   Cul-de-sac. Whenever a cul-de-sac is permitted, such street shall be
no longer than 600 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a
turnaround having a street property line diameter of at least 130 feet in the
case of residential subdivisions. The right-of-way width of the street leading
to the turnaround shall be a minimum of 50 feet. The property lines at the
intersection of the turnaround and the lead-in portion of the street shall be
rounded at a radius of not less than 150 feet; or equal straight approach
lines. A turnaround diameter greater than 130 feet may be required by the
Planning and Zoning Commission in the case of commercial or industrial
subdivisions, if it is deemed necessary.
      F.   Street Names. All newly platted streets shall be named in a manner
conforming to the prevailing street naming system. A proposed street that is
obviously in alignment with other existing streets, or with a street that may
logically be extended although the various portions be at a considerable
distance from each other, shall bear the same name. Names of new streets shall
be subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission in order to
avoid duplication or close similarity of names.
      G.   Physical and Cultural Features. In general, streets shall be platted
with appropriate regard for topography, creeks, wooded areas, and other natural
features which would lend themselves to attractive treatment.
      H.   Half-Streets. Dedication of half-streets will not be permitted.
Where there exists a dedicated or platted half-street or alley adjacent to the
tract of land to be subdivided, the other half shall be platted, if deemed
necessary by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      I.   Alleys. Alleys may be required in business areas and industrial
districts for adequate access to block interiors and for off-street loading and
parking purposes. Except where justified by unusual conditions, alleys will not
be approved in residential districts. Dead-end alleys shall be provided with a
means of turning around at the dead-end thereof.
      J.   Easements. Easements for utilities shall be provided along rear or
side lot lines or along alleys, if needed. Whenever any stream or important
surface water course is located in an area that is being subdivided, the
subdivider shall, at their own expense, make adequate provision for widening
the channel so that it will properly carry the surface water, and shall provide
and dedicate to the City an easement along each side of the stream, which
easement shall be for the purpose of widening, improving, or protecting the
stream and for the purpose of installation of public utilities. The waterway
easements shall be approved by the City Engineer. The total width of the
easement shall be adequate to provide for these purposes, and said easement
shall be a minimum of 50 feet on each side of the centerline of the stream or
water course.
      K.   Neighborhood Plan. If any overall plan has been made by the Planning
and Zoning Commission for the neighborhood in which the proposed subdivision is
located, the street system of the latter shall conform in general thereto.
      L.   Land Not Platted. Where the plat to be submitted includes only part
of the tract owned by the subdivider, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
require topography and a sketch of a tentative future street system of the
unsubdivided portion.
      M.   Major Thoroughfares. Where a new subdivision, except where justified
by limiting conditions, involves frontage on a heavy trafficway, the street
layout shall provide motor access to such frontage by one of the following
means:
         (1)   A parallel street supplying frontage for lots backing onto the
trafficway.
         (2)   A series of cul-de-sacs or short loops entered from and planned
at right angles to such a parallel street, with their terminal lots backing
onto the highway.
         (3)   An access drive separated by a planting strip from the highway
to which a motor access from the drive is provided at points suitably spaced.
         (4)   A service drive or alley at the rear of the lots. Where any one
of the above-mentioned arrangements is used, deed covenants or other means
shall prevent any private residential driveways from having direct access to
the trafficway.
      N.   Dedication. A deed to the City shall be given for all streets before
the same will be accepted for City maintenance.
      O.   Railroads. If a railroad is involved, the subdivision plan should:
         (1)   Be so arranged as to permit, where necessary, future grade
separations at highway crossings of the railroad.
         (2)   Border the railroad with a parallel street at a sufficient
distance from it to permit deep lots to go back onto the railroad, or form a
buffer strip for park, commercial, or industrial use.
         (3)   Provide cul-de-sacs at right angles to the railroad so as to
permit lots to back thereonto.
      P.   Street Widths. Streets shall have a width and cross-section as shown
in the Comprehensive Plan for the type of street involved.
      Q.   Street Grades. Streets and alleys shall be completed to grades which
have been officially determined or approved by the City Engineer. All streets
shall be graded to the full width of the right-of-way and adjacent side slopes
graded to blend with the natural ground level. The maximum grade shall not
exceed six percent for main and secondary thoroughfares, or 10 percent for
minor or local service streets. All changes in grades on major roads or
highways shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length in feet
equivalent to 20 times the algebraic difference between the rates of grades, or
greater, if deemed necessary to the City Engineer; for minor streets, 15 times.
The grade alignment and resultant visibility, especially at intersections,
shall be worked out in detail to meet the approval of the City Engineer.
   2.   Blocks.
      A.   Length. No block shall be longer than 1,320 feet. The distance of
1,320 feet may be reduced by the City if it is considered to be excessive in
its particular application.
      B.   Block Corner Radius. At street intersections, block corners shall be
rounded with a radius of not less than 15 feet, unless at any one intersection
a curve radius has been previously established, then such radius shall be used
as standard.
   3.   Lots.
      A.   Corner Lots - Widths. Corner lots shall have a minimum width of 80
feet in order to permit adequate building setbacks on both front and side
streets.
      B.   Double Frontage Lots - Prohibited. Double frontage lots, other than
corner lots, shall be prohibited except where such lots back onto a major
street or highway or except in the case of large commercial or industrial lots.
In addition, no fence or other structure shall be closer than 15 feet from the
major street or highway right-of-way. The yard between the major street or
highway right-of-way and the 15-foot setback shall include one hardwood
deciduous tree (Ash: “Autumn Purple,” Green [seedless]; Maple: Crimson King,
Norway, Sugar; Oak: Burr, English, Northern Red) and three shrubs for every 25
linear feet, or major fraction thereof, of lot width along the major street or
highway. The trees shall be at least one and one-half inch caliper and the
shrubs shall be at least 18 to 24 inches in height. The developer is required
to install the tree and shrub improvements before the final plat is approved.
Thereafter, the property owner is required to maintain the plantings and
replace them as necessary with approved materials. Whenever practical, existing
trees and shrubs should be preserved and incorporated into the overall design.
This section does not replace the screening requirements for commercial and
industrial properties. (Refer to Chapter 165,
Figure L).
      C.   Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be approximately at right
angles to the street or radial to curved streets.
      D.   Lot Size - Public Sewer Not Available. For the purpose of complying
with minimum health standards, lots which cannot be reasonably served by an
existing public sanitary sewer system shall have a minimum width of 100 feet,
measured at the building line, and an area of not less than 20,000 square feet.
   4.   Improvements.
      A.   General. The subdivider shall install and construct all improvements
required by this chapter. All required improvements shall be installed and
constructed in accordance with the latest published versions of the Urban
Design Standards for Public Improvements and the Urban Standard Specifications
for Public Improvements under the supervision of the Council and to its
satisfaction. Inspection shall be provided by the City, at the subdivider’s
expense, as deemed necessary to assure quality workmanship on all portions of
the construction to be dedicated to the City. Said inspection costs shall be
paid by the subdivider before final approval will be given. These requirements
shall also apply to the unincorporated area up to two miles beyond the limits
of the City.
      B.   Grades. All streets, alleys, and sidewalks within the platted area
which are dedicated for public use shall be brought to the grade approved by
the Council after receiving the report and recommendations of the City
Engineer.
      C.   Paving. All paving of roadways constructed for public use will be
installed in accordance with the latest published versions of the Urban Design
Standards for Public Improvements and the Urban Standard Specifications for
Public Improvements and at grades approved by the City Engineer. Pavement type
may be based on characteristics of the roadway.
      D.   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all
streets being dedicated for public use. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four
feet in width and shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete in
accordance with designs and specifications approved by the Council and at
grades approved by the City Engineer.
      E.   Water and Sewers. Water mains, sanitary sewer lines, and storm
sewers and their appurtenances shall be constructed and installed in accordance
with the latest published versions of the Urban Design Standards for Public
Improvements and the Urban Standard Specifications for Public Improvements and
the plans and specifications adopted by the Council. Water and sewer lines
shall be made accessible to each lot. At a minimum, water mains shall be eight
inches in size, hydrants shall not be farther apart than 350 feet, and storm
sewers shall be designed for five-year storms.
      F.   Underground Utilities. Improvements such as cable TV, telephone and
electric lines, street lights, gas mains, and similar facilities in any
subdivision shall be installed where necessary in any subdivision addition to
the City and all utility lines, except electric lines of nominal voltage in
excess of 15,000 volts, shall be installed underground. The subdivider shall be
responsible for making the necessary arrangements with the utility companies
for installation of such facilities. Said utility lines shall be installed in
accordance with the latest published versions of the Urban Design Standards for
Public Improvements and the Urban Standard Specifications for Public
Improvements and in such a manner so as not to interfere with other underground
utilities. Underground utility lines which cross underneath the right-of-way of
any street, alley, or way shall be installed prior to the improvement of any
such street, alley, or way in the subdivision. Incidental appurtenances, such
as transformers and their enclosures, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, meters,
and meter cabinets may be placed above-ground but shall be located so as not to
be unsightly or hazardous to the public. Such incidental appurtenances shall be
in accordance with the standards and specifications of the City Engineer.
      G.   Horizontal and Vertical Survey Control. The City requires all
projects that modify or add to the City’s infrastructure to be tied into the
Horizontal and Vertical Control System as adopted on June 19, 2006.
         (1)   Vertical Control. A project’s vertical datum must tie into the
vertical control points provided in the City’s Horizontal and Vertical Control
Network with a minimum of one of the points being a Primary Control Point,
other points may be Secondary Points.
         (2)   Horizontal Control. A project may use an existing basis of
bearing and assumed coordinates that meet the project’s on the ground needs and
as may be required by practical and accepted survey methods. Although an
assumed horizontal coordinate system can be used, a project’s horizontal
control must also be tied into the City’s Horizontal Control Network by
labeling at least two points. The basis of the tie must be from a minimum of
one of the Primary Control Points listed in the City’s Horizontal and Vertical
Control Network with a listing of the points used to make the relationship.
   5.   Approval of Final Plat and Final Acceptance of Improvements.
      A.   Construction of Improvement or Posting of Bond. Before the Council
approves the final plat, all of the foregoing improvements shall be constructed
and accepted by formal resolution of the Council. Before passage of said
resolution of acceptance, the City Engineer shall report that said improvements
meet all City specifications and ordinances or other requirements, and all
agreements between the subdivider and the City; and the City Attorney shall
report that the subdivision owner has filed in proper form a maintenance bond
(or bonds) to cover all construction being dedicated to the City. Maintenance
bonds shall be in the name of contractors who have done the work. Maintenance
bonds shall be in effect from passage of resolution of acceptance by the
Council, then for the following number of years:
         (1)   Concrete paving   4 years.
         (2)   Storm sewers and appurtenances   4 years.
         (3)   Sanitary sewers and appurtenances   4 years.
         (4)   Water mains and appurtenances   4 years.
   This requirement for the construction of all improvements may be waived if
the subdivider will post a performance bond or certified check with the Council
guaranteeing that said improvements will be constructed within a period of one
year from final acceptance of the plat. The performance bond shall include the
costs of sediment and erosion control measures for the plat. However, if a
performance bond is posted, final acceptance of the plat will not constitute
final acceptance by the City of any improvements to be constructed.
Improvements will be accepted only after their construction has been completed
all in accordance with the rules above outlined. No maintenance work will be
done by the City and no public funds will be expended in the subdivision until
such improvements have been completed and accepted by the City.
      B.   Resubdivisions. The Council may waive the requirements for the
construction and installation of some or all of the foregoing improvements in
cases of resubdivisions where only the size, shape, and arrangement of lots is
being changed and no new streets are required and, in case of dedications of
land or rights-of-way to public use, where such dedication is in excess of the
needs of the subdivision and is desired by a public agency in lieu of a
purchase or condemnation proceeding.
175.07   PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   The preliminary plat of a subdivision is not intended to serve as a record
plan. Its purpose is to show on a map all facts needed to enable the Planning
and Zoning Commission to determine whether the proposed layout of the land in
question is satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interest. The
subdivider, or any representative of the subdivider, may call at the City
offices in advance of the preliminary plat in order to discuss the proposed
subdivision and in order to obtain information as to the requirements necessary
for approval of the plat.
   1.   Number of Copies and Scale. Twelve copies of the preliminary plat shall
be submitted as prescribed for review. The scale of the map shall be one inch
equals 50 feet on small subdivisions, and one inch equals 100 feet on large
subdivisions, unless otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   2.   Contents of Preliminary Plat.
      A.   Name of subdivision, date, point of compass, scale, and official
description of the property being platted.
      B.   Name and address of recorded owner and of developer.
      C.   Name and address of engineer or land surveyor.
      D.   Existing buildings, railroads, underground utilities, and other
right-of-way.
      E.   Location, names, and widths of all existing and proposed roads,
alleys, streets, and highways in or adjoining the area being subdivided.
      F.   Location and names of adjoining subdivisions, and the names of the
owners of adjoining acreage parcels.
      G.   Proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and the square foot
area of non-rectangular lots.
      H.   Areas dedicated for public use, such as schools, parks, and
playgrounds.
      I.   Contour lines at intervals of not more than five feet.
      J.   Building setback lines.
      K.   Boundaries of the proposed subdivision shall be indicated by a heavy
line.
      L.   Zoning classification of the area.
      M.   Proposed utility service:
         (1)   Source of water supply;
         (2)   Provision for sewage disposal;
         (3)   Provision for stormwater drainage.
      N.   A vicinity sketch at a legible scale showing the relationship of the
plat to its general surroundings.
      O.   Lot numbers.
      P.   Proposed street widths.
      Q.   Location of cluster-style mailboxes.
      R.   Ties to the City’s Horizontal and Vertical Control Network.
   3.   Accompanying Material. An attorney’s opinion in duplicate showing that
the fee title to the subdivision land is in the owner as shown on the plat and
showing any encumbrances that may exist against said land. Any plat that cannot
reasonably be served by public sewer shall show results of soil percolation
tests made by the engineer preparing the plat. Such tests shall be made in
accordance with specifications approved by the City Engineer.
175.08   FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   Number of Copies and Scale. When and if the preliminary plat is
approved, the subdivider shall submit 12 copies of the final plat for review by
the Planning and Zoning Commission. The scale of the map shall be one inch
equals 50 feet on small subdivisions, and one inch equals 100 feet on large
subdivisions, unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
   2.   Contents of Final Plat.
      A.   Name of subdivision.
      B.   Scale.
      C.   Compass point.
      D.   Curve data including delta angle, length of arc, degree of curve,
tangent.
      E.   Boundary lines of subdivided area with accurate distances, bearings,
and boundary angles; and a table showing mathematical closure of the
subdivision boundaries, and also coordinate points of all interior lot corners
with reference to one corner of the subdivision, if the subdivision contains
curve linear lot lines.
      F.   Exact name, location, width, lot designation, and centerline of all
streets within the subdivision.
      G.   Easements for public utilities showing width and use intended.
      H.   Building setback lines with dimensions.
      I.   Official legal description of the property being subdivided.
      J.   Lot numbers and addresses.
      K.   Certification of registered engineer or land surveyor.
      L.   Description and location of all permanent monuments set in the
subdivision, including ties to original government corners and ties to the
City’s Horizontal and Vertical Control Network.
      M.   The final plat shall be an exact duplicate of that plat proposed to
be filed for record in the County Recorder’s office.
      N.   Cluster-style mailboxes shall be installed or bonded for and, in all
cases, shall be in place prior to any occupancy permit being issued within the
plat.
   3.   Accompanying Material.
      A.   Plans and profiles of all streets and alleys at a 50 foot horizontal
scale and five foot vertical scale. Profiles shall show location, size, and
grade of all conduits, sewers, pipelines, etc., to be placed under the streets
and alleys. Profiles of east and west streets shall be drawn so that the west
end of the profile shall be at the left side of the drawing. Profiles of north
and south streets shall be drawn so that the south end of the profile shall be
at the left side of the drawing.
      B.   Any protective covenants or restrictions to be imposed upon the plat
shall be submitted for approval.
      C.   A deed to the City, properly executed, for all streets intended as
public streets, and for any other property intended for public use.
      D.   The following certificates:
         (1)   A certificate by the owner and spouse, if any, that the
subdivision is with their free consent and is in accordance with the desire of
the owner and spouse. This certificate must be signed and acknowledged by the
owner and spouse before some officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of
deeds.
         (2)   A complete abstract of title and an opinion from an attorney at
law showing that the fee title is in the proprietor and that the land platted
is free from encumbrance, or is free from encumbrance other than that secured
by a bond as provided in Section 354.11 of the Code of Iowa.
         (3)   A certificate of the County Treasurer that the land is free from
certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free from
certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are secured by bond
in compliance with Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa.
         (4)   A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council and for
signatures of the Mayor and Clerk.
         (5)   Performance bond, if any.
175.09   SUBDIVISION PLAT FEES.
   1.   Preliminary Plat Fees. Preliminary plat fees - minor plats (no proposed
streets and less than four lots) will be $75.00 plus $10.00 per lot; major
plats (new streets proposed or four or more lots) will be $150.00 plus $10.00
per lot.
   2.   Final Plat Fees. Final plat fees - minor plats (no proposed streets and
less than four lots) will be $75.00; major plats (new streets proposed or four
or more lots) will be $150.00.
   3.   Construction Plan and Inspection Fee. A fee for the submittal and
review of construction plans and inspection of construction projects shall be
paid by the developer to the City in the amount set forth in the Engineering
Schedule of Fees as adopted by the Council. No construction plans shall be
accepted from any person or entity that has fees outstanding as required by
this Code or any other laws or ordinances of the City.
   4.   IDNR Construction Permit Application Fees. If developer elects to do
local permitting of minor water main extensions and wastewater collection
systems through the City, the fee for the submittal of the IDNR Construction
Permit Application forms shall be paid by the developer to the City in the
amount set forth in the Engineering Schedule of Fees as adopted by the Council.
No Construction Permits shall be issued to any person who has fees outstanding
as required by this Code or any other laws or ordinances of the City.
175.10   ENFORCEMENT.
   1.   No plat or subdivision shall be recorded in the County Recorder’s
office or have any validity until it has been approved in the manner prescribed
herein.
   2.   The Council shall not permit any public improvements over which it has
control to be made from City funds, or any City money expended for improvements
or maintenance on any street in any area that has been subdivided after the
date of adoption of these regulations, unless such subdivision and streets have
been approved in accordance with the provisions contained herein, and accepted
by the Council as a public street.
175.11   CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
   Any provisions of these regulations may be changed and amended from time to
time by the Council; provided, however, that such changes and amendments shall
not become effective until after study and report by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and until after a public hearing has been held, public notice of
which shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days
prior to such hearing.
175.12   CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS AND AS-BUILTS OR RECORD DRAWINGS.
   1.   Procedure. Construction drawings and as-builts or record drawings are
required for all plats that have public streets or any of the following public
utilities: water, sanitary sewer, or storm sewer. Construction drawings shall
be submitted and approved by the City before construction begins. As-builts or
record drawings shall be submitted and approved by the City before the public
improvements will be accepted.
   2.   Design Standards.
      A.   All proposed developments for which construction plans are required
shall conform to the preliminary plat for the development and SUDAS.
      B.   Horizontal and Vertical Survey Control. The City requires all
projects that modify or add to the City’s infrastructure to be tied into the
horizontal and vertical control system as adopted on June 19, 2006.
         (1)   Vertical Control. A project’s vertical datum must tie into the
vertical control points provided in the City’s Horizontal and Vertical Control
Network with a minimum of one of the points being a Primary Control Point,
other points may be Secondary Points.
         (2)   Horizontal Control. A project may use an existing basis of
bearing and assumed coordinates that meet the projects on the ground needs and
as may be required by practical and accepted survey methods. Although an
assumed horizontal coordinate system can be used, a project’s horizontal
control must also be tied into the City’s Horizontal Control Network by
labeling at least two points. The basis of the tie must be from a minimum of
one of the Primary Control Points listed in the City’s Horizontal and Vertical
Control Network with a listing of the points used to make the relationship.
   3.   Construction Plan Requirements.
      A.   Construction drawings shall consist of the following, as a minimum:
Title sheet, grading sheet, utility sheets, paving sheets, and detail sheets.
Depending on the size and scope of the project, separate plan sheets may be
required for each of the utilities with the utility of interest in bold and the
other utilities in a lighter shade. All utility sheets should show all of the
utilities on plan and profile sheets.
      B.   The City is to receive seven-copies (24 inches by 36 inches) of the
construction plans for initial review, three-copies (24 inches by 36 inches)
for subsequent reviews, and four-copies (11 inches by 17 inches) and one-
electronic copy (PDF format) of the final approved construction plans.
   4.   As-Built or Record Drawing Requirements.
      A.   Record drawings shall consist of the final approved construction
plans marked up to show all changes.
      B.   Record drawings shall show all utility locations including flow and
rim elevations.
      C.   Record drawings shall show final grading elevations by “spot”
elevation checks shown on the grading sheet. At a minimum, each lot corner and
at least one other point on each lot are to be shown. Additional “spot”
elevation checks should show all drainage ways, stormwater BMPs, and any
features that differ from the original design.
      D.   Record drawings shall be maintained by the contractor and kept up to
date as the work progresses.
      E.   The original record drawings shall be provided to the developer’s
engineer upon completion of construction. The City is to receive record
drawings (full set of construction drawings) as follows: one-electronic copy;
one Mylar copy (24 inches by 36 inches) and seven-copies (24 inches by 36
inches). The drawings shall be submitted prior to final plat acceptance. Add
ties to the City’s Horizontal and Vertical Control Network as set forth in
Section 175.06(4)(G).
   5.   Expiration of Approval. All construction plan approvals shall expire
and terminate within 180 days after date of said approval unless the project
construction has begun and continues in earnest.
CHAPTER 176
CONDITIONAL EXTENSION OF UTILITY SERVICES
 
176.01 Purpose                                   176.04 Discontinuance
176.02 Compliance with Zoning and Building Codes 176.05 Consent to Annexation
176.03 Inspection                                 
 
176.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to assist in the orderly growth and
development of the City by providing conditions and procedures governing the
extension of municipal utility services beyond the corporate limits.
176.02   COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING AND BUILDING CODES.
   The owner or owners of residential property and outbuildings constructed
outside the corporate limits of the City, when requesting the use of water or
sewer facilities of the City, are required to show evidence of compliance with
the ordinance requirements of the City and in particular, the Zoning Code and
Subdivision Regulations.
176.03   INSPECTION.
   Upon request to the City for water or for permission to connect with the
City sewer system, or any one of said services, the owner of said property
shall pay to the City an inspection fee of $25.00, said fee to defray the
expense of inspections of the premises. Inspection is to be made by person
designated by the Council who shall report any findings to the Council.
176.04   DISCONTINUANCE.
   Should the owner of any property as set forth in Section
176.02 hereof, after complying with the requirements of the City for obtaining
service of one or more of said utilities and after acquiring the use of the
same, later cause or permit construction on said owner’s premises which does
not comply with the ordinance requirements of the City then in effect, said
owner shall then be subject to immediate discontinuance of said service or
services, without notice. The City may discontinue the furnishing of any
municipal utility or service to any user without the corporate limits of the
City by serving a 30 day notice showing good cause for said discontinuance upon
the user.
176.05   CONSENT TO ANNEXATION.
   Prior to being furnished municipal utilities of the City, the owner of any
premises requesting such service shall, in accordance with the Code of Iowa,
prepare and execute an application for annexation to the City, describing the
premises to be served together with a plat of said premises attached, the said
plat conforming to and complying with the Zoning Code and Subdivision
Regulations requirements, and deliver the same to the Clerk. The Council is not
required to act on said application, but may accept or reject the same at any
time. In the event of discontinuance of said municipal utility service, said
application will be deemed withdrawn, and shall be returned by the Clerk to the
applicant.
CHAPTER 177
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
 
177.01 Definitions                       177.07 Floodway Fringe (Overlay)
                                         District (FF)
177.02 Statutory Authority, Findings of  177.08 General Floodplain (Overlay)
Fact, and Purpose                        District (GF)
177.03 General Provisions                177.09 Appointment and Duties of Board
                                         of Adjustment
177.04 Administration                    177.10 Nonconforming Uses
177.05 Establishment of Zoning (Overlay) 177.11 Penalties for Violation
Districts
177.06 Floodway (Overlay) District (FW)  177.12 Amendments
 
177.01   DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   1.   “Appurtenant structure” means a structure which is on the same parcel
of the property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which
is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
   2.   “Base flood” means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. (Also commonly referred to as the “100-year
flood.”)
   3.   “Base flood elevation” (BFE) means the elevation floodwaters would
reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
   4.   “Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or
lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see “lowest
floor.”
   5.   “Board of Appeals” means the Council of the City.
   6.   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including (but not limited to) buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage
of equipment or materials. Development does not include minor projects or
routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities, as defined in this
section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling or grading.
   7.   “Enclosed area below lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest
enclosed area in a building when all the following criteria are met:
      A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions
of Section
177.07(2)(D)(1); and
      B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking, or
storage; and
      C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot above the base flood elevation; and
      D.   The enclosed area is not a basement as defined in this section.
   8.   “Existing construction” means any structure for which the start of
construction commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
   9.   “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
   10.   “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means
the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   11.   “Factory-built home” means any structure, designed for residential use
which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled
in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a
building site. For the purpose of this chapter, factory-built homes include
mobile homes, manufactured homes, and modular homes; and also include
recreational vehicles which are placed on a site for greater than 180
consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
   12.   “Factory-built home park or subdivision” means a parcel or contiguous
parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or
lease.
   13.   “Five hundred (500) year flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which
has a two-tenths percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
or which, on average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every 500
years.
   14.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or
rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
   15.   “Flood Insurance Rate Map” (FIRM) means the official map prepared as
part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which
delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
   16.   “Flood Insurance Study” (FIS) means a report published by FEMA for a
community issued along with the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map(s). The
study contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water
surface elevations that were used to prepare the FIRM.
   17.   “Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water as a result of a flood.
   18.   “Floodplain management” means an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including (but not limited to) emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
   19.   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such
structures.
   20.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions
of the floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to
carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood
flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot.
   21.   “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the Special Flood Hazard
Area outside the floodway.
   22.   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   23.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
      A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the National Register.
      B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district.
      C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior.
      D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by
either:
         (1)   An approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
         (2)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   24.   “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building including a basement except when the criteria listed in the definition
of enclosed area below lowest floor are met.
   25.   “Maximum damage potential development” means hospitals and like
institutions; buildings or building complexes containing documents, data, or
instruments of great public value; buildings or building complexes containing
materials dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; power
installations needed in emergency or other buildings or building complexes
similar in nature or use.
   26.   “Minor projects” means small development activities (except for
filling, grading, and excavating) valued at less than $500.00.
   27.   “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home parks, accessory
structures) means those structures or development for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
   28.   “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after
the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by
the community.
   29.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
      A.   Built on a single chassis;
      B.   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
      D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   30.   “Repetitive loss” means a building covered by an NFIP flood insurance
policy that has incurred flood-related damages on two occasions during a 10-
year period ending on the date of the event for which a second claim is made,
in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on average, equaled or
exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the building at the time of each
such flood event.
   31.   “Routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities” means
repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do
not trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general
improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs
include:
      A.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing
roofing tiles, and replacing siding.
      B.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting,
cabinets, counter tops, and similar finish work.
      C.   Basement sealing.
      D.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes.
      E.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating, or air
conditioning systems, and repairing wells or septic systems.
   32.   “Special Flood Hazard Area” (SFHA) means the land within a community
subject to the base flood. This land is identified on the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, or A99.
   33.   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
   34.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including (but not limited to) buildings, factories,
sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities, or
other similar uses.
   35.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be
included in the estimated cost of repair. Substantial damage also means flood-
related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-
year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of such flood event, on
the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be
included in the estimated cost of repair.
   36.   “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
      A.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure
either:
         (1)   Before the start of construction of the improvement; or
         (2)   If the structure has been substantially damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure
to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
The term also does not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided
the alteration will not preclude the structure’s designation as a historic
structure.
      B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building
by 25 percent or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of
the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community shall be
added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in
original floor space would exceed 25 percent.
   37.   “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of
the floodplain management regulations.
   38.   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
177.02   STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT, AND PURPOSE.
   1.   The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Chapter 414 of the Code of
Iowa, as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to
secure safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.
   2.   Findings of Fact.
      A.   The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic
inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community.
      B.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused
by:
         (1)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood
damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately
elevated or otherwise protected from flooding; and
         (2)   The cumulative effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing
increases in flood heights and velocities.
      C.   This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood
hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Department of
Natural Resources.
   3.   Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the City and its residents and
to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and
convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses described in
Section
177.02(2)(A) with provisions designed to:
      A.   Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows
so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
      B.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
      C.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
      D.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
      E.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
177.03   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   1.   Lands to Which Chapter Applies. The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City shown on the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map as being within the boundaries of the Floodway, Floodway
Fringe, General Floodplain, and Shallow Flooding (Overlay) Districts, as
established in Section 177.05.
   2.   Establishment of Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) for Polk County and Incorporated Areas, City of Altoona, Panels
19153C0210F, 19153C0220F, 19153C0230F, 19153C0240F, 19153C0245F, 19153C0380F,
19153C0385F dated February 1st, 2019, which were prepared as part of the Flood
Insurance Study for Polk County, are hereby adopted by reference and declared
to be the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The flood profiles and all
explanatory material contained with the Flood Insurance Study are also declared
to be a part of this ordinance
   3.   Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries. The boundaries of the
zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of a boundary, the City Engineer shall make the necessary
interpretation. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it
is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the City Engineer in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   4.   Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be used, and no
structure shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered,
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
   5.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provision of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   6.   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.
   7.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The standards required by this
chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside the designated Floodplain (Overlay) District areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the City, or any officer or employee thereof, for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or on any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
   8.   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
177.04   ADMINISTRATION.
   1.   Appointment, Duties, and Responsibilities of Administrator.
      A.   The City Engineer is hereby appointed to implement and administer
the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the
Administrator.
      B.   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include (but
not necessarily be limited to) the following:
         (1)   Review all Floodplain Development Permit Applications to assure
that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
         (2)   Review Floodplain Development Applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from federal, State, and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of
Natural Resources for floodplain construction.
         (3)   Record and maintain a record of:
            a.   The elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum
1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures; or
            b.   The elevation to which new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed.
         (4)   Notify adjacent communities, counties, and the Department of
Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
         (5)   Keep a record of all permits, appeals, and such other
transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this
chapter.
         (6)   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administration an annual report
concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administration.
         (7)   Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations
or modifications to the community’s boundaries.
         (8)   Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Board of Adjustment
of potential conflict.
         (9)   Maintain the accuracy of the community’s Flood Insurance Rate
Maps when:
            a.   Development placed within the Floodway (Overlay) District
results in any of the following:
               i.   An increase in the base flood elevations; or
               ii.   Alteration to the floodway boundary.
            b.   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not
include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base elevation; or
            c.   Development relocates or alters the channel.
   Within six months of the completion of the development, the applicant shall
submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for a Letter of Map
Revision.
         (10)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the
standards of this chapter.
         (11)   Forward all requests for variances to the Board of Adjustment
for consideration. Ensure all requests include the information ordinarily
submitted with applications as well as any additional information deemed
necessary to the Board of Adjustment.
   2.   Floodplain Development Permit.
      A.   Permit Required. A Floodplain Development Permit issued by the
Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any manmade
change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, storage of
materials and equipment, excavation, or drilling operations), including the
placement of factory-built homes.
      B.   Application for Permit. Application shall be made on forms furnished
by the Administrator and shall include the following:
         (1)   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
         (2)   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(i.e., lot, block, track, street address, or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done.
         (3)   Location and dimensions of all structures and additions.
         (4)   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work
is intended.
         (5)   Elevation of the base flood.
         (6)   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of structures or of the level to which a
structure is to be floodproofed.
         (7)   For structures being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the structure prior to the improvements.
         (8)   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
      C.   Action on Permit Application. The Administrator shall, within a
reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or
disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed,
in writing, of the specific reasons therefore. The Administrator shall not
issue permits for variances except as directed by the Board of Adjustment.
      D.   Construction and Use to Be as Provided in Application and Plans.
Floodplain Development Permits based on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement, or
construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be
required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor,
as appropriate, registered in the State, that the finished fill, structure
floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the
use or occupancy of any structure.
177.05   ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS.
   The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby
divided into the following districts:
   1.   Floodway (Overlay) District (FW) - those areas identified as Floodway
on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
   2.   Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District (FF) - those areas identified as
Zone AE on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map but excluding those areas
identified as Floodway.
   3.   General Floodplain (Overlay) District (GF) - those areas identified as
Zone A on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
   The boundaries shall be as shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
Within these districts, all uses not allowed as permitted uses are prohibited
unless a variance to the terms of this chapter is granted after due
consideration by the Board of Adjustment.
177.06   FLOODWAY (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FW).
   1.   Permitted Uses. All development within the Floodway District shall be
permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance
standards of the Floodway District.
   2.   Performance Standards. All Floodway District uses allowed as a
permitted use shall meet the following standards.
      A.   No development shall be permitted in the Floodway District that
would result in any increase in the base flood elevation. Consideration of the
effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption
that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated
lands.
      B.   All development within the Floodway District shall:
         (1)   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
         (2)   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
         (3)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage.
      C.   No development shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the
channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or any
other drainage facility or system.
      D.   Structures, buildings, recreational vehicles, and sanitary and
utility systems, if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards
of the Floodway Fringe District, and shall be constructed or aligned to present
the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
      E.   Structures, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential
and shall not be for human habitation.
      F.   Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage
of other material may be allowed if readily removable from the Floodway
District within the time available after flood warning.
      G.   Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and
modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within
the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations
must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
      H.   Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some
beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
      I.   Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed
and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows.
177.07   FLOODWAY FRINGE (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FF).
   1.   Permitted Uses. All development within the Floodway Fringe District
shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other
ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable
performance standards of the Floodway Fringe District.
   2.   Performance Standards. All development must be consistent with the need
to minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable performance
standards. Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no development may
increase the base flood elevation more than one foot. The applicant will be
responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient
technical information to make such determination.
      A.   All development shall:
         (1)   Be designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement.
         (2)   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
         (3)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage.
      B.   Residential Structures. All new or substantially improved
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation. Construction
shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one
foot above the base flood elevation and extend at such elevation at least 18
feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of
elevating (such as piers or extended foundations) may be allowed subject to
favorable consideration by the Board of Adjustment, where existing topography,
street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the
methods used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the
various forces and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential
structures located in areas that would become isolated due to flooding of
surrounding ground shall be provided with a means of access that will be
passable by wheeled vehicles during the base flood. However, this criterion
shall not apply where the Administrator determines there is sufficient flood
warning time for the protection of life and property. When estimating flood
warning time, consideration shall be given to the criteria listed in 567-75.2
(3), Iowa Administrative Code.
      C.   Nonresidential Structures. All new or substantially improved
nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with
attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When
floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State
shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the
flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact, and uplift forces and other
factors associated with the base flood; and that the structure, below the base
flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
      D.   All New and Substantially Improved Structures.
         (1)   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
            a.   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
            b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
            c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
   Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access,
and low damage potential storage. Where the distance between the floor and
ceiling of the fully enclosed area below the lowest floor is five feet or more,
the applicant shall be required to sign and record with the County Recorder a
Non-Conversion Agreement that ensures the lower enclosed area remains compliant
with the criteria outlined in this Section
177.07(2)(D)(1).
         (2)   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
         (3)   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed
with electric meter, electrical service panel box, hot water heater, heating,
air conditioning, ventilation equipment (including ductwork), and other similar
machinery and equipment elevated (or, in the case of nonresidential structures,
optionally floodproofed to) a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation.
         (4)   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed
with plumbing, gas lines, water meters, gas meters, and other similar service
utilities either elevated (or in the case of nonresidential structures,
optionally floodproofed to) a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation or designed to be watertight and withstand inundation to such a
level.
      E.   Factory-Built Homes.
         (1)   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes,
including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions,
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
structure is a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation.
         (2)   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes,
including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions,
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Anchorage
systems may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties
to ground anchors as required by the State Building Code.
      F.   Utility and Sanitary Systems.
         (1)   On-site wastewater disposal and water supply systems shall be
located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the
system during flooding.
         (2)   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system
as well as the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment
facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood
protection equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood elevation.
         (3)   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water
supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with
a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood
elevation.
         (4)   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
      G.   Storage of Equipment and Materials. Storage of materials and
equipment that are flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the base
flood elevation. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated
or:
         (1)   Not be subject to major flood damage and anchored to prevent
movement due to flood waters; or
         (2)   Be readily removable from the area within the time available
after flood warning.
      H.   Flood Control Structures. Flood control structural works such as
levees, flood walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from the base
flood with a minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall provide for
adequate interior drainage. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources
shall approve structural flood control works.
      I.   Watercourse Alterations. Watercourse alterations or relocations must
be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources must
approve such alterations or relocations.
      J.   Subdivisions. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation
of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this
chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all
lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during
the base flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots
(whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those areas
located within the Floodplain Fringe (Overlay) District.
      K.   Accessory Structures to Residential Uses.
         (1)   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are
incidental to a residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation
requirements where the following criteria are satisfied:
            a.   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential. Its size shall not exceed 600 square feet in size. Those portions of
the structure located less than one foot above the base flood elevation must be
constructed of flood-resistant materials.
            b.   The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage
potential purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure
shall not be used for human habitation.
            c.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
            d.   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement which may result in damage to other structures.
            e.   The structure’s service facilities such as electrical and
heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation.
            f.   The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of Section
177.07(2)(D)(1).
         (2)   Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a
structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of
the structure and its contents.
      L.   Recreational Vehicles.
         (1)   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of
Section
177.07(2)(E) regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when the
following criteria are satisfied.
            a.   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less
than 180 consecutive days, and
            b.   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
         (2)   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than
180 consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements
of Section
177.07(2)(E) regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes.
      M.   Pipeline Crossings. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be
buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to
prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
      N.   Maximum Damage Potential Development. All new or substantially
improved maximum damage potential development shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated a minimum of one foot above the elevation of the
500-year flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be
floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional
engineer registered in the State shall certify that the floodproofing methods
used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact,
and uplift forces and other factors associated with the two-tenths percent
annual chance flood; and that the structure, below the two-tenths percent
annual chance flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating
the specific elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to
which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
Where a two-tenths percent chance flood elevation data has not been provided in
the Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be
contacted to compute such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing
the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to
make such determinations.
177.08   GENERAL FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (GF).
   1.   Permitted Uses.
      A.   All development within the General Floodplain District shall be
permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they meet the applicable performance
standards of the General Floodplain District.
      B.   Any development which involves placement of structures, factory-
built homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment,
excavation or alteration of a watercourse shall be reviewed by the Department
of Natural Resources to determine:
         (1)   Whether the land involved is either wholly or partly within the
floodway or floodway fringe; and
         (2)   The base flood elevation.
   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the Department of Natural
Resources with sufficient technical information to make the determination.
      C.   Review by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources is not required
for the proposed construction of new or replacement bridges or culverts where:
         (1)   The bridge or culvert is located on a stream that drains less
than two square miles, and
         (2)   The bridge or culvert is not associated with a channel
modification that constitutes a channel change as specified in 567-71.2(2b)
Iowa Administrative Code.
   2.   Performance Standards.
      A.   All development, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway
as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the applicable
provisions and standards of the Floodway (Overlay) District (Section
177.06).
      B.   All development, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway
fringe as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the
applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District
(Section
177.07).
177.09   APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   1.   Appointment and Duties of Board of Adjustment. A Board of Adjustment is
hereby established which, hereinafter referred to as the Board, shall hear and
decide:
      A.   Appeals; and
      B.   Requests for variances to the provisions of this chapter, and shall
take any other action which is required of the Board.
   2.   Appeals. Where it is alleged that there is any error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved party may appeal such action.
The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board and with the official from
whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason for the
appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board
all the documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
   3.   Variance. The Board may authorize upon request in specific cases such
variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. Variances
granted must meet the following applicable standards.
      A.   Variances shall only be granted upon:
         (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (3)   A determination that the granting of the variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances.
      B.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood would result. Consideration of
the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly
situated lands.
      C.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      D.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for structures than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the
applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator
that:
         (1)   The issuance of a variance will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of
insurance coverage; and
         (2)   Such construction increases risks to life and property.
      E.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
   4.   Hearings and Decisions of the Board.
      A.   Hearings. Upon the filing with the Board of an appeal or a request
for a variance, the Board shall hold a public hearing. The Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as well as due
notice to parties in interest. At the hearing, any party may appear in person
or by agent or attorney and present written or oral evidence. The Board may
require the appellant or applicant to provide such information as is reasonably
deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance or evaluation of a
professional engineer or other expert person or agency, including the
Department of Natural Resources.
      B.   Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal or
variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon an appeal, the Board may, so
long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in
writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decision.
In granting a variance, the Board shall consider such factors as contained in
this section and all other relevant sections of this chapter and may prescribe
such conditions as contained in Section
177.09(4)(B)(2).
         (1)   Factors Upon Which the Decision of the Board Shall Be Based. In
passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall consider all relevant
factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
            a.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments.
            b.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
            c.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary
conditions.
            d.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
            e.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the City.
            f.   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
            g.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use.
            h.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
            i.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for the area.
            j.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
            k.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site.
            l.   The cost of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.
            m.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
         (2)   Conditions Attached to Variances. Upon consideration of the
factors listed above, the Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such
conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
            a.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
            b.   Limitation of periods of use and operation.
            c.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.
            d.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
            e.   Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the
flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated
with the regulatory flood. The Board shall require that the applicant submit a
plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
   5.   Appeals to the Court. Any person or persons, jointly or severally,
aggrieved by any decision of the Board may present to a court of record a
petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole
or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be
presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the
office of the Board.
177.10   NONCONFORMING USES.
   1.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but
which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be
continued subject to the following conditions:
      A.   If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future
use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
      B.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
      C.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless
it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This
limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing
State or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations, or
the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued
designation.
   2.   Except as provided in Section
177.10(1)(B), any use which has been permitted as a variance shall be
considered a conforming use.
177.11   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter will be enforced as a municipal
infraction pursuant to Chapter 3.
177.12   AMENDMENTS.
   The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to
time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
 
