CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF THE
CITY OF AURELIA, IOWA
Adopted December 26, 2018, by Ordinance No. 685
SUPPLEMENT RECORD
SUPPLEMENT                        ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No. Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No. Date     Subject
Feb-19    41.14(3)                684      11-19-18 Fireworks
                                  685      12-26-18 Adopting Ordinance
Sep-19    41.15(3)(A-B)           686      9-16-19  Fireworks
Jan-20    7.05                    687      1-20-20  Operating Budget
                                                    Preparation
          5.07(10-12)             688      1-20-20  Conflict of Interest
Oct-20                            689               Not Adopted
          165.52                  690      7-20-20  Schedule of Fees
          41.15                   691      9-21-20  Fireworks
          46.02; 121.07           692      9-21-20  Tobacco Use
Aug-21    57.01(3)                693      8-16-21  Dangerous and Vicious
                                                    Animals
Oct-21    Ch. 160                 694      10-18-21 Floodplain Management
Nov-21    41.06                   695      11-15-21 Interference With Official
                                                    Acts
          40.03; 40.04            696      11-15-21 Public Disorder
          80.03; 80.04            697      11-15-21 Abandoned Vehicles
          41.16                   698      11-15-21 Failure to Assist
Apr-22    69.09; 69.10            699      4-18-22  Parking Regulations
Oct-22    92.02                   700      9-26-22  Water Rates
          99.07                   701      9-26-22  Sewer User Charge System
Apr-23                            702               In Process
          92.02                   703      4-17-23  Water Rates
                                                    Liquor Licenses and
Sep-23    120.04; 120.05; 121.05  704      8-21-23  Cigarette and Toabacco
                                                    Permits
          7.05; 7.08              705      8-21-23  Fiscal Management
Oct-23    Ch. 147                 706      9-18-23  Property Maintenance
Jul-24    92.02                   707      6-17-24  Water Rates
Aug-24    135.15                  708      7-15-24  Mailboxes in Right-of-Ways
Sep-24    7.05(4)                 709      9-16-24  Operating Budget
                                                    Preparation
          5.02                    710      9-16-24  Bond Requirements
          18.03                   711      9-16-24  Publication of Minutes
          5.06                    712      9-16-24  Electronic Meetings
Jul-25    41.15(3)                713      7-21-25  Fireworks
Aug-25    7.05(4)(D)(1); 7.05(6)  714      8-25-25  Public Hearing Requirements
          55.20                   715      8-25-25  False Representation of
                                                    Service Animal
          Ch. 121                 716      8-25-25  Cigarette and Tobacco
                                                    Permits
Nov-25    92.02                   717      11-17-25 Water Rates
 
 
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
 
1.01 Title                  1.08 Amendments
1.02 Definitions            1.09 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers            1.10 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity              1.11 Severability
1.05 Personal Injuries      1.12 Warrants
1.06 Rules of Construction  1.13 General Standards for Action
1.07 Extension of Authority 1.14 Standard Penalty
 
1.01 TITLE.
   This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Aurelia, Iowa.
1.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined in the
Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council or repugnant to the context of the provision. Other words and phrases
used herein have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise
in another portion of this Code of Ordinances or unless such construction would
be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the
context of the provision:
   1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.
   2.   “City” means the City of Aurelia, Iowa.
   3.   “Clerk” means the city clerk of Aurelia, Iowa.
   4.   “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a
specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the
Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
   5.   “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Aurelia, Iowa.
   6.   “Council” means the city council of Aurelia, Iowa.
   7.   “County” means Cherokee County, Iowa.
   8.   “May” confers a power.
   9.   “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
   10.   “Must” states a requirement.
   11.   “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   12.   “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Aurelia, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance
adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
   13.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust or other
legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar
representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
   14.   “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
   15.   “Shall” imposes a duty.
   16.   “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge
of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
   17.   “State” means the State of Iowa.
   18.   “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
   19.   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa
have their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the
provision.
1.03 CITY POWERS.
   The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if
not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power
and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the
rights, privileges, and property of the City and of its residents, and to
preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and
convenience of its residents, and each and every provision of this Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and
the performance of the foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04 INDEMNITY.
   The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by
making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for any injury to or death
of any person or persons whomsoever, and any loss of or damage to property
whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising
from or related to, directly, indirectly, or remotely, the issuance of the
permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such
applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such applicant, to abide by
or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms
and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such
application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents, and
employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury, or death,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing.
The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or
license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the
City, whether expressly recited therein or not.
1.05 PERSONAL INJURIES.
   When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to
have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person
by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the
pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the
court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from
which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is
liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person
to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any
action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the
defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City
to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage
or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified to
recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by
the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the rules of statutory
construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to
ascertain the intent of the Council, with the understanding that the term
“statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term
“ordinance” when applied to this Code of Ordinances.
1.07 EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY.
   Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a
provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed as
authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate, or a duly
authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1.08 AMENDMENTS.
   All ordinances that amend, repeal, or in any manner affect this Code of
Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection, or
paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09 CATCHLINES AND NOTES.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code of Ordinances, titles,
headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references,
and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself,
contained in this Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law and
are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement, or clarify the contents
of a section.
1.10 ALTERING CODE.
   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of this Code of Ordinances, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code of
Ordinances in any manner that will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented.
1.11 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, provision, or part of this Code of Ordinances is adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of
this Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof
not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
1.12 WARRANTS.
   If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure, or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful
right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or
conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the
County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative
search warrant. No owner, operator or occupant, or any other person having
charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure,
building, or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search
warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.
1.13 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION.
   Whenever this Code of Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the
Council or any commission, board, or officer or employee of the City and does
not specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be
exercised in light of the following standard: The discretionary power to grant,
deny, or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and
circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due
consideration shall be given to the impact upon the public health, safety and
welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under
similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1.14 STANDARD PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code of Ordinances for
violation of any particular provision, section, or chapter, any person failing
to perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise violating
any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted
herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more
than $500.00.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
 
2.01 Title                              2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government                 2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties of City Officers 2.06 Copies on File
 
2.01 TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Aurelia, Iowa. † 1
 
Notes
  †  EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 522 adopting a charter for the City was passed and
1 approved by the Council on August 13, 1975, and published in the Aurelia Sentinel
  on August 20, 1975. The terms of Council members were staggered and extended to
  four years pursuant to an election held November 10, 1975.
2.02 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City.
2.04 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
   The Council consists of five Council Members elected at large for
overlapping terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05 TERM OF MAYOR.
   The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06 COPIES ON FILE.
   The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the
official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies
of the charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)
CHAPTER 3
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
 
3.01 Municipal Infraction    3.04 Civil Citations
3.02 Environmental Violation 3.05 Alternative Relief
3.03 Penalties               3.06 Alternative Penalties
 
3.01 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
   A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein
adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty
required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically
provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious
misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code
of Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided
herein. † 2
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
 
Notes
2 †  EDITOR’S NOTE: For criminal penalty for violations of this Code of
  Ordinances, see Section 1.14.
3.02 ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION.
   A municipal infraction that is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of
Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the
Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental
violation. However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable
until the City has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding
the violation or to the following specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
   1.   A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. § 403.8.
   2.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial
production or manufacturing of grain products.
   3.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production
or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
3.03 PENALTIES.
   A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
   1.   Standard Civil Penalties.
      A.   First offense – not to exceed $750.00
      B.   Each repeat offense – not to exceed $1,000.00
   Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a
repeat offense.
   2.   Special Civil Penalties.
      A.   A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an
industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each
day a violation exists or continues.
      B.   A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is
punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence.
However, an environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of
the following conditions are satisfied:
         (1)   The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup,
cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a
shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to
reduce or eliminate the violation.
         (2)   The City is notified of the violation within 24 hours from the
time that the violation begins.
         (3)   The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight
hours.
3.04 CIVIL CITATIONS.
   Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may
issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. A copy
of the citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil
Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s
last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the
manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the
conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be
retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the
Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a
civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])
   1.   The name and address of the defendant.
   2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer
issuing the citation.
   3.   The location and time of the infraction.
   4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief
sought, or both.
   5.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
   6.   The time and place of court appearance.
   7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
   8.   The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the
condition of the property, including a building code violation, a local housing
regulation violation, a housing code violation, or a public health or safety
violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of the District Court, the
City shall also file the citation in the office of the County Treasurer.
3.05 ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.
   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the
City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such
alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement
or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[8])
3.06 ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES.
   This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal
citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal
penalties are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit
the authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances
by criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11])
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
 
5.01 Oaths                 5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds                 5.08 Resignations
5.03 Powers and Duties     5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04 Books and Records     5.10 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.11 Gifts
5.06 Meetings
 
5.01 OATHS.
   The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for
office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The
oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after such officer is certified as
elected but not later than noon of the first day that is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer
was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
   2.   Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear
that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best
of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in
Aurelia as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
   3.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to
administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the
business of their respective offices:
      A.   Mayor
      B.   City Clerk
      C.   Members of all boards, commissions, or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02 BONDS.
   Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
   1.   Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or
blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk,
Treasurer, and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and
advisable except as allowed in Subsection 5.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
   2.   Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
   3.   Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be
filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23(6))
   4.   Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of
Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City
officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24(1)(a))
   5.   Insurance Policy in Lieu of Bond. In lieu of a bond, a public officer
required to obtain a bond pursuant to Chapter 64 of the Code of Iowa may obtain
an insurance policy in an amount not less than the amounts required of a bond.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.3)
(Section 5.02 – Ord. 710 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
5.04 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open
to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law
expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.
Access to public records that are combined with data processing software shall
be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 and 22.3A)
5.05 TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.
   Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all books,
papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06 MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held
in accordance with the following:
   1.   Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section.
      A.   “Closed session” means a meeting to which all members of the public
do not have access as allowed by Section 21.5 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   “Hybrid meeting” means a meeting involving both remote participation
and in-person participation by members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(a))
      C.   “Open session” means a meeting to which all members of the public
have access.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.2(3))
      D.   “Remote participation” means real-time participation by a remotely
located individual in a meeting which is being held in a different physical
location using integrated audio, video, and other digital tools.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(b))
      E.   “Reasonable notice” means advising the news media who have filed a
request for notice with the governmental body and posting the notice on a
bulletin board or other prominent place which is easily accessible to the
public and clearly designated for that purpose at the principal office of the
body holding the meeting, or if not such office exists, at the building in
which the meeting is to be held.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4(1))
      F.   “Teleconference participation” means participation using audio
conference tools involving multiple participants in at least two separate
locations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(c))
      G.   “Virtual meeting” means a meeting involving real-time interaction
using integrated audio, video, and other digital tools, in which participants
do not share a physical location.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(d))
   2.   Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice of the time, date, and place of
each meeting and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
   3.   Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
   4.   Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time,
and place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The
minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to
indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member present shall
be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to
public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
   5.   Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote
of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting
and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
   6.   Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices
at any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
   7.   Electronic Meetings. A governmental body shall provide for hybrid
meetings, teleconference participation, virtual meetings, remote participation,
and other hybrid options for the members of the governmental body to
participate in official meetings. A governmental body conducting a meeting
pursuant to this subsection shall comply with all of the provisions of Chapter
21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
(Section 5.06 – Ord. 712 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
5.07 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect,
in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services
to be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A
contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of
this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
   1.   Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City
officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding
of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3a])
   2.   Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3b])
   3.   City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as
Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3c])
   4.   Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an
interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind
described in Subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contracts are made
by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened, or if the
remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the
contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement
or preparation of any part of the contract. The competitive bid qualification
of this subsection does not apply to a contract for professional services not
customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3e])
   5.   Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3f])
   6.   Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has
an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee
was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3g])
   7.   Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil defense
volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3h])
   8.   Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five
percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate
family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3i])
   9.   Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3d])
   10.   Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this
section, for the purchase of goods or services that benefit a City officer or
employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a
cumulative total purchase price of $6,000.00 in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3j])
   11.   Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a
utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential
City utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3k])
   12.   Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other
obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from the City
but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may not be the
original underwriter, purchaser, or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3l])
(Subsections 10-12 - Ord. 688 - Jan. 20 Supp.)
5.08 RESIGNATIONS.
   An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a
resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and
considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for
appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was elected
if, during that time, the compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09 REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to
City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the
appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall
give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent
by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk
within 30 days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public
hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The
hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date the request is filed,
unless the person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10 VACANCIES.
   A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled
in accordance with Section 372.13[2] of the Code of Iowa.
5.11 GIFTS.
   Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series
of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted
donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or
more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a
public official, public employee, or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
 
6.01 Nominating Method to Be Used 6.04 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
6.02 Nominations by Petition      6.05 Filing; Presumption; Withdrawals;
                                  Objections
6.03 Adding Name by Petition      6.06 Persons Elected
 
6.01 NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.
   All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the
provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02 NOMINATIONS BY PETITION.
   Nominations for elective municipal offices of the City may be made by
nomination paper or papers signed by not less than 10 eligible electors,
residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
6.03 ADDING NAME BY PETITION.
   The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than by
petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)
6.04 PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT.
   Nomination papers shall include a petition and an affidavit of candidacy.
The petition and affidavit shall be substantially in the form prescribed by the
State Commissioner of Elections, shall include information required by the Code
of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5 & 45.6)
6.05 FILING; PRESUMPTION; WITHDRAWALS; OBJECTIONS.
   The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of
validity thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the
effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency of
such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed by
the appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)
6.06 PERSONS ELECTED.
   The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office on
the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3])
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
 
7.01 Purpose         7.05 Operating Budget Preparation
7.02 Finance Officer 7.06 Budget Amendments
7.03 Cash Control    7.07 Accounting
7.04 Fund Control    7.08 Financial Reports
 
7.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules
and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02 FINANCE OFFICER.
   The Clerk is the finance and accounting officer of the City and is
responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
7.03 CASH CONTROL.
   To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the following
shall apply:
   1.   Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any
City officer shall be deposited through the office of the finance officer. If
any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check
drawn by the finance officer and approved by the Council only upon such
officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law,
ordinance, or Council directive.
   2.   Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be
promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not
exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or
invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law,
including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
   3.   Petty Cash Fund. The finance officer shall be custodian of a petty cash
fund for the payment of small claims for minor purchases, collect-on-delivery
transportation charges, and small fees customarily paid at the time of
rendering a service, for which payments the finance officer shall obtain some
form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor or agent. At such
time as the petty cash fund is approaching depletion, the finance officer shall
draw a check for replenishment in the amount of the accumulated expenditures
and said check and supporting detail shall be submitted to the Council as a
claim in the usual manner for claims and charged to the proper funds and
accounts. It shall not be used for salary payments or other personal services
or personal expenses.
   4.   Change Fund. The finance officer is authorized to establish a change
fund for the purpose of making change without comingling other funds to meet
the requirements of the office.
7.04 FUND CONTROL.
   There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in
accordance with the following:
   1.   Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the
proper fund as required by law, ordinance, or resolution.
   2.   Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such
disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance, or resolution, was properly
budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
   3.   Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency
Fund.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[2])
   4.   Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to
meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by
the original budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3])
   5.   Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited
by State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital
Improvements Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original
budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[4])
   6.   Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund
may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund, by
resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all required
transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in accordance with the
terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the
Utility or Enterprise Fund. A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the
operating account or the unrestricted net position calculated in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, after adding back the net
pension and other postemployment benefits, liabilities, and the related
deferred inflows of resources and deducting the related deferred outflows of
resources, in excess of:
      A.   The amount of the expenses of disbursements for operating and
maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three months; and
      B.   The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted
accounts for the succeeding three months.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[5])
   7.   Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of
each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05 OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION.
   The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with
the following:
   1.   Proposal Prepared. The finance officer is responsible for preparation
of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption
by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
   2.   Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions, and other
administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and
administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the finance officer
for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such form as
required by the Council.
   3.   Submission to Council. The finance officer shall submit the completed
budget proposal to the Council each year at such time as directed by the
Council.
   4.   Annual Statement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 24.2A(2))
      A.   On or before 4:00 p.m. on March 5 of each year, the City shall file,
with the Department of Management, a report containing all necessary
information for the Department of Management to compile and calculate amounts
required to be included in the statement mailed under Paragraph B.
      B.   Not later than March 15, the County Auditor, using information
compiled and calculated by the Department of Management shall send to each
property owner or taxpayer within the County, by regular mail, an individual
statement containing all of the required information as provided under Section
24.2(2)(B)(1-10) of the Code of Iowa.
      C.   The Department of Management shall prescribe the form for the report
required under Paragraph A, the statements to be mailed under Paragraph B, and
the public hearing notice required under Paragraph D.
      D.   The Council shall set a time and place for a public hearing on the
City’s proposed property tax amount for the budget year and the City’s
information included in the statements under Paragraph B. The proposed property
tax hearing shall be set on a date on or after March 20 of the budget year
immediately preceding the budget year for which the tax is being proposed. At
the hearing, the Council shall receive oral or written testimony from any
resident or property owner of the City. This public hearing shall be separate
from any other meeting of the Council, including any other meeting or public
hearing relating to the City’s budget, and other business of the City that is
not related to the proposed property tax amounts and the information in the
statements shall not be conducted at the public hearing. After all testimony
has been received and considered, the governing body may decrease, but not
increase, the proposed property tax amount to be included in the City’s budget.
         (1)   Notice of the public hearing shall be published not less than
four or more than 20 days in a newspaper published at least once weekly and
having general circulation in the City. However, if the City has a population
of 200 or less, publication may be made by posting in three public places in
the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec, 24.2A(4)(b)(2))
(Subparagraph (1) – Ord. 714 – Aug. 25 Supp.)
         (2)   Notice of the hearing shall also be posted and clearly
identified on the City’s internet site for public viewing beginning on the date
of the newspaper publication and shall be maintained on the City’s internet
site with all such prior year notices.
         (3)   Additionally, if the City maintains a social media account on
one or more social media applications, the public hearing notice or an
electronic link to the public hearing notice shall be posted on each such
account on a date no later than the date of publication of the notice.
         (4)   Failure of a newspaper to publish a required notice under this
paragraph shall not be considered a failure of a political subdivision to
provide required notice under this paragraph if all of the following conditions
are met:
            a.   Notice of the public hearing was provided to each property
owner and each taxpayer within the political subdivision in statements required
under Subsection 2, Paragraph B.
            b.   The political subdivision can demonstrate to the County
Auditor that the political subdivision provided sufficient time for the
newspaper to publish the notice.
(Subsection 4 – Ord. 709 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
   5.   Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may
make any adjustments it deems appropriate in the budget before accepting such
proposal for publication, hearing, and final adoption.
6.   Notice of Hearing. Following, and not until completion of requirements, of
Subsection 4 of this section, the Council shall set a time and place for public
hearing on the budget to be held before April 30 and shall publish notice of
the hearing not less than four or more than 20 days before the hearing. A
summary of the proposed budget and a description of the procedure for
protesting the City budget under Section 384.19 of the Code of Iowa, in the
form prescribed by the Director of the Department of Management, shall be
included in the notice. Proof of publication of the notice under this
subsection must be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16(3))
(Subsection 6 – Ord. 714 – Aug. 25 Supp.)
   7.   Copies of Budget on File. Not less than 20 days before the date that
the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than 10 days
before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number
of copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and
organizations, and have them available for distribution at the offices of the
Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
   8.   Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt,
by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall
certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor
and the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than,
but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget submitted at the
final hearing, unless an additional tax levy is approved at a City election.
Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of the tax certificate
must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
(Section 7.05 – Ord. 705 – Aug. 23 Supp.)
7.06 BUDGET AMENDMENTS.
   A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes
effective July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and
purpose specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
   1.   Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program
must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as the
original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.2[384, 388])
   2.   Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to
another must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as
the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.3[384, 388])
   3.   Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to
another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the
Council.
(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])
   4.   Administrative Transfers. The finance officer shall have the authority
to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a
specific activity without prior Council approval.
(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])
7.07 ACCOUNTING.
   The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:
   1.   Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained
books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and
disbursed.
   2.   General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general
ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording
unappropriated surpluses.
   3.   Checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the Clerk (or, in the
Clerk’s absence, the Deputy Clerk) and the Mayor (or, in the Mayor’s absence, a
Council Member) following Council approval, except as provided by subsection 5
hereof.
   4.   Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to
record receipts by source and expenditures by program and activity as will
provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and
approved by the Council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its
proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared
with revenue estimates and expenditures can be related to the authorizing
appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for
the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred.
   5.   Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution authorize
the Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if not
paid promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or
additional interest cost. Any such payments made shall be reported to the
Council for review and approval with and in the same manner as other claims at
the next meeting following such payment. The resolution authorizing immediate
payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized and may include (but is
not limited to) payment of utility bills, contractual obligations, payroll, and
bond principal and interest.
   6.   Utilities. The finance officer shall perform and be responsible for
accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities, including those
utilities under the control and management of the Electric Utility Board of
Trustees.
7.08 FINANCIAL REPORTS.
   The finance officer shall prepare and file the following financial reports:
   1.   Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a
report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program, and
activity for the preceding month.
   2.   Annual Report. Not later than December 1 of each year there shall be
published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year
of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all
expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of
the City for the current fiscal year. The Annual Financial Report shall be
prepared on forms and pursuant to instructions prescribed by the Auditor of
State. Beginning with the Annual Financial Report published by December 1,
2025, each report shall include a list of bonds, notes, or other obligations
issued by the City during the most recently completed fiscal year, and the
applicable lists for other fiscal years beginning on or after July 1, 2024, for
which obligations remain unpaid, payable from any source, including the amount
of the issuance, the project or purpose of the issuance, whether the issuance
was approved at election, eligible to be subject to a petition for an election,
or was exempt from approval at election as the result of statutory exclusions
based on population of the City or amount of the issuance, and identification
of issuances from the fiscal year or prior fiscal years related to the same
project or purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
(Section 7.08 – Ord. 705 – Aug. 23 Supp.)
CHAPTER 8
URBAN REVITALIZATION
8.01 DESIGNATION OF REVITALIZATION AREA.
   In accordance with Chapter 404 of the Code of Iowa, the entire corporate
limits of the City are hereby designated as a Revitalization Area under said
Chapter 404. † 3
 
Notes
3 †  Editor’s Note: Ordinance 683, adopting The Urban Revitalization Area was
  adopted on May 21, 2018.
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
 
15.01 Term of Office    15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties 15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments
 
15.01 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
   1.   Chief Executive Officer. Act as the chief executive officer of the City
and presiding officer of the Council, supervise all departments of the City,
give direction to department heads concerning the functions of the departments,
and have the power to examine all functions of the municipal departments, their
records and to call for special reports from department heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
   2.   Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the police
and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of
emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all
the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
   3.   Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor
deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
   4.   Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto, or take no action on an ordinance, amendment,
or resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an ordinance,
amendment, or resolution within 14 days after passage. The Mayor shall explain
the reasons for the veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the
veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 & 380.6[2])
   5.   Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as
required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the
municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
   6.   Negotiations. Represent the City in all negotiations properly entered
into in accordance with law or ordinance. The Mayor shall not represent the
City where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law,
ordinance, or Council direction.
   7.   Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf
of the City.
   8.   Professional Services. Upon order of the Council, secure for the City
such specialized and professional services not already available to the City.
In executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in accordance with
this Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State.
   9.   Licenses and Permits. Sign all licenses and permits that have been
granted by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be
issued by another municipal officer.
   10.   Nuisances. Issue written order for removal, at public expense, any
nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.
   11.   Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any
absentee officer be carried on during such absence.
15.03 APPOINTMENTS.
   The Mayor shall appoint the Mayor Pro Tem and the Police Chief and the Mayor
also appoints, with Council approval, the following officials:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
   1.   Library Board of Trustees
   2.   Electric Utility Board
   3.   Fire Chief (with Council and Fire Board approval)
   4.   Assistant Fire Chief (with Council and Fire Board approval)
   5.   Firefighters
   6.   Historic Preservation Commission
   7.   Community Center Board of Trustees (with Council approval)
15.04 COMPENSATION.
   The salary of the Mayor is $450.00 per quarter, plus $40.00 for each regular
or special meeting attending.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
15.05 VOTING.
   The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
 
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties         16.04 Compensation
 
16.01 VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.
   The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall
serve as vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem
shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the
Mayor to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the
Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ, or discharge from
employment officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint,
employ, or discharge without the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03 VOTING RIGHTS.
   The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04 COMPENSATION.
   If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s
absence or disability for a continuous period of 15 days or more, the Mayor Pro
Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council,
based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the
compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 17
CITY COUNCIL
 
17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Council Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties          17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power          17.06 Compensation
 
17.01 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
   The Council consists of five Council members elected at large for
overlapping terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 & 376.2)
17.02 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to the
following:
   1.   General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
   2.   Wards. By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into wards based
upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards, or create new
wards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])
   3.   Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all
funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order
payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street
improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement, or repairs that
may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38[1])
   4.   Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the
construction of any improvements, bridges, or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
   5.   Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all
contracts. No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless
approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 26.10)
   6.   Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number,
duties, term of office and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise
provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   7.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council
shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other
elected City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not
become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the
Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any
elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of a
regular City election. A change in the compensation of Council members becomes
effective for all Council members at the beginning of the term of the Council
members elected at the election next following the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.03 EXERCISE OF POWER.
   The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
   1.   Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution
requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a
motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must
be passed to spend public funds in excess of $100,000.00 on a public
improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their
completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure
that fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered
defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
   2.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within 30 days after the Mayor’s veto, the
Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all
of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
   3.   Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become
effective in one of the following ways:
      A.   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective when
the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
      B.   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon
signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
      C.   A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
      D.   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or resolution and the
Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes
effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a
law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
      E.   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment or
resolution, a resolution becomes effective 14 days after the date of passage,
and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of
the ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the date of
passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council
including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not
include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason of a
conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1[a])
17.04 COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions
regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section 5.06 of this
Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council meetings are the
following:
   1.   Regular Meetings. The time and place of the regular meetings of the
Council shall be fixed by resolution of the Council.
   2.   Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor
or upon the request of a majority of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
   3.   Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
   4.   Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and
maintain records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
   5.   Compelling Attendance. Any three members of the Council can compel the
attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or duly called
meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
17.05 APPOINTMENTS.
   The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their
powers, duties, compensation, and term of office:
   1.   City Clerk
   2.   City Attorney
   3.   City Engineer
   4.   Zoning Board of Adjustment
   5.   Zoning Administrator
   6.   Planning and Zoning Commission
17.06 COMPENSATION.
   The salary of each Council member is $40.00 for each meeting of the Council
attended.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
 
18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General   18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Publication of Minutes       18.10 Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures           18.11 Notification of Appointments
18.05 Other Publications           18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication               18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certification
 
18.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
   At its first meeting in January following the regular City election, the
Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Clerk to serve for a term of two
years. The Clerk shall receive such compensation as established by resolution
of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02 POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL.
   The Clerk or, in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk
has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code of Ordinances,
and the law.
18.03 PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.
   Within 15 days following a regular or special meeting of the Council, the
Clerk shall cause the minutes of the proceedings of the Council, including the
total expenditure from each City fund, to be delivered to a newspaper of
general circulation in the City for publication. The publication shall include
a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall show the
gross amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(6))
(Section 18.03 – Ord. 711 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
18.04 RECORDING MEASURES.
   The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council and
record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the
Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure
was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 and 2])
18.05 OTHER PUBLICATIONS.
   The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments,
proceedings and official notices requiring publication as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3)
   1.   Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is
required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at
least once, not less than four or more than 20 days before the date of the
election, hearing, or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
   2.   Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of
Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and
having general circulation in the City.
18.06 AUTHENTICATION.
   The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s
signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
18.07 CERTIFICATION.
   The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district,
building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or
limits to the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08 RECORDS.
   The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:
   1.   Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances
and codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
   2.   Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all
writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise
specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   3.   Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents, or accurate
reproductions, for at least five years except that ordinances, resolutions,
Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating
to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption or replacement of public
bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least 11 years following the final
maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council
proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to real
property transactions shall be maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 and 5])
   4.   Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of
any record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be
necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a
copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council
resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix
the seal of the City to those public documents or instruments that by this Code
of Ordinances are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 and 5] and 380.7[5])
   5.   Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and
petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall
endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such
communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
   The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and, at the
direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees,
boards, and commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record
of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10 LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this
Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which
shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number,
name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit, and purpose for which
issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.11 NOTIFICATION OF APPOINTMENTS.
   The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to
offices in the City government of their positions and the time at which they
shall assume the duties of their offices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12 ELECTIONS.
   The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance with
Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
18.13 CITY SEAL.
   The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the
Clerk to all transcripts, orders, and certificates that it may be necessary or
proper to authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the center of
which are the words “AURELIA, IOWA,” and around the margin of which are the
words “CITY SEAL.”
CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER
 
19.01 Appointment  19.03 Duties of Treasurer
19.02 Compensation
19.01 APPOINTMENT.
   The City Clerk is the Treasurer and performs all functions required of the
position of Treasurer.
19.02 COMPENSATION.
   The Clerk receives no additional compensation for performing the duties of
the Treasurer.
19.03 DUTIES OF TREASURER.
   The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of
the City in the manner provided by law and Council direction.
   2.   Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate.
   3.   Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities
received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the date, from
whom, and for what purpose received.
   4.   Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements,
money, or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.
   5.   Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money received by
the Treasurer from special assessments.
   6.   Deposit Funds. Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the Treasurer’s
custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in depositories selected by
the Council.
   7.   Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the Treasurer’s
books and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash and investments of
each fund and amounts received and disbursed.
   8.   Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all
payments of interest and principal.
   9.   Other Duties. Perform such other duties as specified by the Council by
resolution or ordinance.
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY
 
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.05 Review and Comment
20.02 Attorney for City            20.06 Provide Legal Opinion
20.03 Power of Attorney            20.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
20.04 Ordinance Preparation        20.08 Prepare Documents
20.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
   The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve for a
term of one year. The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.02 ATTORNEY FOR CITY.
   The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters
affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any
court, tribunal, commission, or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or
defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.03 POWER OF ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to
all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution
of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the
same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.04 ORDINANCE PREPARATION.
   The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances that the Council may desire
and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such ordinances
before their final passage by the Council and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.05 REVIEW AND COMMENT.
   The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council giving
an opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to
or coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.06 PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION.
   The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City
contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the
Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.07 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the
Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.08 PREPARE DOCUMENTS.
   The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts,
forms, and other writings that may be required for the use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 21
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 
21.01 Public Library                   21.07 Nonresident Use
21.02 Library Trustees                 21.08 Expenditures
21.03 Qualifications of Trustees       21.09 Annual Report
21.04 Organization of the Board        21.10 Injury to Books or Property
21.05 Powers and Duties                21.11 Theft
21.06 Contracting with Other Libraries 21.12 Notice Posted
 
21.01 PUBLIC LIBRARY.
   The public library for the City is known as the Aurelia Public Library. It
is referred to in this chapter as the Library.
21.02 LIBRARY TRUSTEES.
   The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
consists of seven resident members and one nonresident member. All resident
members are to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. A
nonresident member may be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
County Board of Supervisors. No person shall serve more than two successive
full terms, although a member may also fill out an unexpired term for which an
appointment is made.
21.03 QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.
   All resident members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents
of the City. A nonresident member of the Board shall be a bona fide citizen and
resident of the unincorporated County. Members shall be over the age of 18
years.
21.04 ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.
   The organization of the Board shall be as follows:
   1.   Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for three years,
except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. Appointments
shall be made every year of one-third the total number or as near as possible,
to stagger the terms.
   2.   Vacancies. The position of any resident Trustee shall be vacated if
such member moves permanently from the City. The position of a nonresident
Trustee shall be vacated if such member moves permanently from the County or
into the City. The position of any Trustee shall be deemed vacated if such
member is absent from six consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in
the case of sickness or temporary absence from the City or County. Vacancies in
the Board shall be filled in the same manner as an original appointment except
that the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the
appointment is made.
   3.   Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their
services.
21.05 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary,
and such other officers as it deems necessary. The City Clerk shall serve as
Board Treasurer, but shall not be a member of the Board.
   2.   Physical Plant. To have charge, control and supervision of the Library,
its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.
   3.   Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
   4.   Hiring of Personnel. To employ a Librarian, and authorize the Librarian
to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper
management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, prior
to such employment, the compensation of the Librarian, assistants, and
employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of
the Board voting in favor thereof.
   5.   Removal of Personnel. To remove the Librarian, by a two-thirds vote of
the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or
employees for misdemeanor, incompetence, or inattention to duty, subject
however, to the provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
   6.   Purchases. To select, or authorize the Librarian to select, and make
purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals,
other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery, and supplies for the
Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
   7.   Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by
nonresidents and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service
exists.
   8.   Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify, or repeal
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the
law, for the care, use, government and management of the Library and the
business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
   9.   Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by
gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other
moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals collected under the
rules of the Board.
   10.   Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed
property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to
said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale
for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them
from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.
   11.   Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the
performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by
the City by action against the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 661)
   12.   Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
   13.   County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements
with the local County historical association where such exists, and to set
apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the
possession of the association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase
necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such
articles as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and
pay for the same out of funds allocated for Library purposes.
21.06 CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES.
   The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees
of free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or
semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County,
or with the trustees of any County library district for the use of the Library
by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 & Ch. 28E)
   2.   Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority
vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing
body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent
in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the
contracting party at the last general election. The petition must be presented
to the governing body not less than 40 days before the election. The
proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law which is held in
the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
21.07 NONRESIDENT USE.
   The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents of
the City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
   1.   Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to
nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or
County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
   2.   Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other
materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
   3.   Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that
books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
   4.   Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or
other Library materials to nonresidents.
21.08 EXPENDITURES.
   All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of
the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. Expenditures
shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and
Secretary. The check-writing officer is the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 & 392.5)
21.09 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close of
the fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of
the Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of
fines collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the
Library during the year, together with such further information as may be
required by the Council.
21.10 INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear,
deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper,
periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging to
the Library or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
21.11 THEFT.
   No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with
the intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
21.12 NOTICE POSTED.
   There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library notices
informing the public of the following:
   1.   Failure to Return. Failure to return Library materials for two months
or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library materials, or
failure to return Library equipment for one month or more after the date the
person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence of intent to deprive
the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the mailing by restricted
certified mail of notice that such material or equipment is overdue and
criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the materials or
equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
   2.   Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be
detained and searched pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)
CHAPTER 22
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
 
22.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 22.04 Compensation
22.02 Term of Office                 22.05 Powers and Duties
22.03 Vacancies
22.01 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
Commission, consists of five members appointed by the Council. The Commission
members shall be residents of the City and shall not hold any elective office
in the City government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 & 392.1)
22.02 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five years. The
terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year. No
person shall serve more than two successive full terms, although a member may
also fill out an unexpired term for which an appointment is made.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
22.03 VACANCIES.
   If any vacancy exists on the Commission, caused by resignation or otherwise,
a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner
as the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
22.04 COMPENSATION.
   All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
22.05 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its
first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as
Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during
the Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   2.   Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   3.   Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and
duties and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other
related matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments,
supplements, changes or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
   4.   Recommendations on Improvements. The design and proposed location of
public improvements shall be submitted to the Commission for its
recommendations prior to any actions being taken by the City for the
construction or placement of such improvements. Such requirements and
recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement if
the Commission, after 30 days’ written notice requesting such recommendations,
has failed to file the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   5.   Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of
subdivisions or re-subdivisions of land in the City or adjacent thereto, laid
out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same
intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to
the Commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   6.   Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete, and
exclusive authority to expend, for and on behalf of the City, all sums of money
appropriated to it and to use and expend all gifts, donations, or payments that
are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   7.   Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power to
contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as
approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   8.   Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the
Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts and
disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 23
UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 
23.01 Purpose                 23.06 Powers and Duties of the Board
23.02 Board Established       23.07 Control of Funds
23.03 Appointment of Trustees 23.08 Accounting
23.04 Compensation            23.09 Discriminatory Rates Illegal
23.05 Vacancies               23.10 Discontinuance of Board
23.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the operation of the
municipally owned electric utility by a board of trustees.
23.02 BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to an election held November 2, 1976, the management and control of
the municipally owned Electric Utility were placed in the hands of a Board of
Trustees.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2)
23.03 APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEES.
   The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Council, five
persons to serve as trustees for staggered six-year terms. All members of the
Utility Board shall be a U.S. citizen and a resident of the Aurelia Municipal
Electric service area. Board members shall be a minimum of 21 years old. No
elected public City official of the City of Aurelia or paid employee of the
City of Aurelia or paid employee of the Aurelia Municipal Electric may serve on
the Utility Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
23.04 COMPENSATION.
   The Council shall by resolution set the compensation of Board members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
23.05 VACANCIES.
   An appointment to fill a vacancy on the Board of Trustees shall be made in
the same manner as an original appointment except that such appointment shall
be for the balance of the unexpired term.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
23.06 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
   The Board of Trustees may exercise all powers of the City in relation to the
electric utility, with the following exceptions:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4)
   1.   Taxes, ordinances and bonds. The Board may not certify taxes to be
levied, pass ordinances or amendments, or issue general obligation or special
assessment bonds.
Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[1])
   2.   Property. Title to all property must be in the name of the City but the
Board has full control of such property subject to limitations imposed by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[2])
   3.   Reports to Council. The Board shall make a detailed annual report to
the Council including a complete financial statement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[3])
   4.   Proceedings Published. Immediately following a regular or special
meeting, the Board Secretary shall prepare and cause to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City a condensed statement of
proceedings including a list of all claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[4])
23.07 CONTROL OF FUNDS.
   The Board shall control tax revenues allocated to it as well as all moneys
derived from operations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)
23.08 ACCOUNTING.
   Utility moneys are held in a separate utility fund. The Clerk is the finance
officer of the Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)
23.09 DISCRIMINATORY RATES ILLEGAL.
   The utility may not provide use or service at a discriminatory rate, except
to the City or its agencies, as provided in Section 384.91, Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.6)
23.10 DISCONTINUANCE OF BOARD.
   A proposal, on motion of the Council or upon receipt of a valid petition, to
discontinue the utility board is subject to the approval of the voters of the
City, except that the Board may be discontinued by resolution of the Council
when the utility it administers is disposed of or leased for a period of over
five years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2)
CHAPTER 24
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
 
24.01 Purpose and Intent          24.04 Qualifications of Commission Members
24.02 Definitions                 24.05 Organization of the Commission
24.03 Structure of the Commission 24.06 Powers of the Commission
24.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purposes of this chapter are to:
   1.   Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the
public through the recognition, enhancement and perpetuation of sites and
districts of historical and cultural significance;
   2.   Safeguard the City’s historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage by
preserving sites and districts of historic and cultural significance;
   3.   Stabilize and improve property values;
   4.   Foster pride in the legacy of beauty and achievements of the past;
   5.   Protect and enhance the City’s attractions to tourists and visitors and
the support and stimulus to business thereby provided;
   6.   Strengthen the economy of the City;
   7.   Promote the use of sites and districts of historic and cultural
significance as places for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people
of the City.
24.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Commission” means the Aurelia Historic Preservation Commission, as
established by this chapter.
   2.   “Historic district” means an area which contains a significant portion
of buildings, structures or other improvements which, considered as a whole,
possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling
and association, and which area as a whole:
      A.   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method
of construction, or represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic
values, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components
may lack individual distinction; or
      B.   Is associated with events that have made significant contributions
to the broad patterns of our local, state or national history; or
      C.   Possesses a coherent and distinctive visual character or integrity
based upon similarity of scale, design, color, setting, workmanship, materials
or combinations thereof which is deemed to add significantly to the value and
attractiveness of properties within such area; or
      D.   Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
      E.   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
   3.   “Historic site” means a structure or building which:
      A.   Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution
to the broad patterns of our history; or
      B.   Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
      C.   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method
of construction or represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic
values, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components
may lack individual distinction; or
      D.   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
24.03 STRUCTURE OF COMMISSION.
   The Commission consists of five members who are residents of the City.
Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the Council.
24.04 QUALIFICATIONS OF COMMISSION MEMBERS.
   Members shall demonstrate a positive interest in historic preservation,
possessing interest or expertise in architecture, architectural history,
historic preservation, city planning, building rehabilitation, conservation in
general or real estate.
24.05 ORGANIZATION OF THE COMMISSION
   1.   Term of Office. The Commission members are appointed for staggered
terms of three years, from January 1 following the year of such appointment or
until a successor is appointed to serve for the term of three years. Members
may serve for more than one term. Each member shall serve until the appointment
of a successor.
   2.   Vacancies. The position of any resident commission member shall be
vacant if such member moves permanently from the City. Vacancies occurring in
the Commission, other than expiration of term of office, shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term of the member replaced.
   3.   Compensation. Members shall serve without compensation.
   4.   Meetings. The Commission shall meet at least three times a year. A
simple majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business.
24.06 POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
   The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   Officers. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson who shall preside
over all Commission meetings and shall elect a Secretary who shall be
responsible for maintaining written records of the Commission’s proceedings.
   2.   Studies. The Commission may conduct studies for the identification and
designation of historic districts and sites meeting the definitions established
by this chapter. The Commission may proceed at its own initiative or upon a
petition from any person, group or association. The Commission shall maintain
records of all studies and inventories for public use.
   3.   Recommendations. The Commission may make a recommendation to the State
Bureau of Historic Preservation for the listing of an historic district or site
in the National Register of Historic Places and may conduct a public hearing
thereon. The Commission may investigate and recommend to the Council the
adoption of ordinances designating historic sites and historic districts if
they qualify as defined herein.
   4.   Gifts. The Commission may, with Council approval, accept unconditional
gifts and donations of real and personal property, including money, for the
purpose of historic preservation, and enforce the performance of conditions on
gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by the City.
   5.   Purchase. The Commission may, with Council approval, acquire by
purchase, bequest or donation, fee and lesser interests in historic properties,
including properties adjacent to or associated with historic properties.
   6.   Authority to Transact. The Commission may, with Council approval,
lease, sell and otherwise transfer or dispose of historic properties subject to
rights of public access and other covenants and in a manner that will preserve
the property.
   7.   Other Powers. The Commission shall:
      A.   Contract with State or federal government or other organizations;
      B.   Preserve, restore, maintain and operate historic properties under
the ownership or control of the Commission;
      C.   Cooperate with federal, State and local governments in the pursuance
of the objectives of historic preservation;
      D.   Provide information for the purpose of historic preservation to the
Council; and
      E.   Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on
historic properties within its jurisdiction.
CHAPTER 25
COMMUNITY CENTER BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 
25.01 Community Center               25.06 Power and Duties
25.02 Community Center Trustees      25.07 Board Meetings
25.03 Qualifications of the Trustees 25.08 Expenditures
25.04 Organization of the Board      25.09 Annual Report
25.05 Officers                       25.10 Amendments
25.01 COMMUNITY CENTER.
   The Community Center for the City is known as the Aurelia Community Center.
It is referred to in this chapter as the Community Center.
25.02 COMMUNITY CENTER TRUSTEES.
   The Board of Trustees of the Community Center, hereinafter referred to as
the Board, consists of five members. All members are to be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council. The Board will comply with Code of
Iowa, Chapter 392.
25.03 QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.
   All members of the Board shall be U.S. citizens and residents of Cherokee
County and/or the Aurelia School District. Board Members shall be a minimum of
21 years old.
25.04 ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.
   The organization of the Board shall be as follows:
   1.   Term of Service. All appointments to the Board shall be for staggered
terms of three years, with terms commencing on July 1. Terms for individuals
appointed to fill vacancies will expire when the resigning member’s term would
have expired. Five Board Members shall have full voting powers.
   2.   Vacancies. The position of any Board Member shall be vacated if such
member moves permanently from Cherokee County and/or the Aurelia School
District. The position of any Board Member shall be deemed vacated if such
member is absent from six consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in
the case of sickness or temporary absence. Vacancies in the Board shall be
filled in the same manner as an original appointment except that the new Board
Member shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made.
   3.   Compensation. Board Members shall receive no compensation for their
services.
   4.   Openings on the Board. Openings on the Board may be published in the
local newspaper, the local cable channel, and/or posters in the community.
25.05 OFFICERS.
   Officers shall be the President, Vice President, and Secretary and shall be
elected annually at the meeting in July and begin serving a year’s term after
appointed at the July meeting. The President shall preside at all meetings,
appoint all committees, and generally perform all duties associated with the
office. In the absence of the President, the Vice President shall assume the
President’s duties. The City Clerk shall serve as Board Treasurer, but shall
not be a member of the Board.
25.06 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   Hire, terminate, and evaluate the Community Center Coordinator,
Janitor, Bartenders, Waiter and Waitresses, set-up/tear down personnel.
Coordinate with Public Works Director for outside maintenance.
   2.   Ensure the Community Center Coordinator and staff participates in
training.
   3.   Ensure the Community Center Coordinator and staff stays current with
Iowa Liquor Laws and bar operations.
   4.   Set salaries for the Community Center personnel.
   5.   Review and approve Community Center bills.
   6.   Participate in the budget process and secure adequate financial support
for the Community Center’s operations and services.
   7.   Set policies for the Community Center’s operations and services per
approval of the Aurelia City Council.
   8.   Engage in planning for the future of the Community Center.
   9.   Direct and control all affairs of the Community Center.
   10.   Select, or authorize the Community Center Coordinator to select, and
purchase furniture, fixtures, and supplies for the Community Center within
budgetary limits set by the Board.
   11.   Adopt, amend, modify, or repeal rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with the Code of Ordinances and the law, for the care, use,
government and management of the Community Center and the business of the
Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
25.07 BOARD MEETINGS.
   The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   The Board shall meet on the first Tuesday of every month at the Aurelia
Community Center or City Hall.
   2.   The Board shall consist of five members, with three members
constituting a quorum.
   3.   The Board shall comply with Iowa’s Open Meetings law by printing and
publicly posting a copy of its agenda 24 hours prior to the meeting.
   4.   The Board will conduct its meetings according to parliamentary
procedure as detailed in the latest edition of Robert’s Rules of Order.
   5.   The Board shall record its proceedings as minutes and shall keep copies
of the minutes available for public inspection.
   6.   Committees, when needed, shall act in an advisory capacity and shall
report its recommendations to the full Board.
25.08 EXPENDITURES.
   All money appropriated by Council for the operation and maintenance of the
Community Center shall be set aside in the Community Center Department of the
budget. Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders of the Board. The check-
writing officer is the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 & 392.5)
25.09 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Board shall make a report to the Council at the close of the fiscal year
of June 30. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of the
Community Center, the amount of revenue collected, and the amount of money
expended during the year, together with such further information as may be
required by the Council or as to be considered significant by the Board.
25.10 AMENDMENTS.
   1.   The bylaws may be amended at any meeting per recommendation from the
Board with a majority vote of the Council.
   2.   The bylaws will be reviewed at least once every three years by the
Board.
CHAPTER 30
POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
30.01 Department Established       30.07 Powers and Duties of Police Chief
30.02 Organization                 30.08 Departmental Rules
30.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 30.09 Summoning Aid
30.04 Required Training            30.10 Taking Weapons
30.05 Compensation                 30.11 Contract Law Enforcement
30.06 Peace Officers Appointed
 
30.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   The Police Department of the City is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.
30.02 ORGANIZATION.
   The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement
officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the
Council.
30.03 PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.
   In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement
officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification standards
established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
30.04 REQUIRED TRAINING.
   All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law
at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment.
Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])
(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
30.05 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
30.06 PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED.
   The Mayor shall appoint and dismiss the Police Chief and the Mayor shall
select, subject to the approval of the Council, the other members of the
department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
30.07 POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
   The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval
of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   General. Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by law or
ordinance.
   2.   Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances, and regulations and bring
all persons committing any offense before the proper court.
   3.   Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the
Police Chief.
   4.   Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to
the State Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
   5.   Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including
conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
   6.   Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers,
boards, and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
   7.   Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for
the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
   8.   Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by
showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City
ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the disposition of the
charge.
   9.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report
as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
   10.   Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and
be responsible for the care, maintenance, and use of all vehicles, equipment,
and materials of the department.
30.08 DEPARTMENTAL RULES.
   The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the Code
of Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary
for the operation of the department.
30.09 SUMMONING AID.
   Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as
the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
30.10 TAKING WEAPONS.
   Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items
that are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have
within such person’s control, to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
30.11 CONTRACT LAW ENFORCEMENT.
   In lieu of the appointment of a Police Chief by the Mayor as provided by
Section 30.06, the Council may contract with the County Sheriff or any other
qualified lawful entity to provide law enforcement services within the City and
in such event the Sheriff or such other entity shall have and exercise the
powers and duties of the Police Chief as provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 28E.30)
CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
35.01 Establishment and Purpose          35.09 Obedience to Fire Chief
35.02 Organization                       35.10 Constitution
35.03 Membership Qualifications          35.11 Accidental Injury Insurance
35.04 Approved by Council and Fire Board 35.12 Liability Insurance
35.05 Training                           35.13 Calls Outside Fire District
35.06 Compensation                       35.14 Mutual Aid
35.07 Chiefs Appointed                   35.15 Authority to Cite Violations
35.08 Fire Chief: Duties                 35.16 Emergency Ambulance Service
35.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   A volunteer community fire department is hereby established by agreement
with surrounding townships to prevent and extinguish fires and to protect lives
and property against fires, to promote fire prevention and fire safety, and to
answer all emergency calls for which there is no other established agency. The
Fire Board shall consist of one person designated by each township involved and
one member of the Aurelia City Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
35.02 ORGANIZATION.
   The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers and
personnel as may be authorized by the Council and the Fire Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.03 MEMBERSHIP QUALIFICATIONS.
   In no case shall any person be recruited, selected or appointed as a member
of the department unless such person:
   1.   Is a citizen of the United States and a resident of the City’s Fire
District.
   2.   Is at least 18 years of age.
   3.   Is of good moral character as determined by a thorough investigation.
35.04 APPROVED BY COUNCIL AND FIRE BOARD.
   No person having otherwise qualified shall be appointed to the department
until such appointment is submitted to and approved by a majority of the
Council members and Fire Board.
35.05 TRAINING.
   All members of the department shall attend and actively participate in
regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.06 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Fire Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.07 CHIEFS APPOINTED.
   The Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor
subject to the approval of the Council and the Fire Board. Terms of office
shall be for one year, expiring each year at the first meeting of the Council
in January.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.08 FIRE CHIEF: DUTIES.
   The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or
ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention
and the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
   2.   Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits and
development of fire emergency plans.
   3.   Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation
as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation,
investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other
hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the
reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   4.   Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from
approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel
or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the fire
department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   5.   Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect
ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-
of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to
prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the fire
department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete,
or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
   6.   Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline and control of the fire department. The members of the fire
department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
   7.   Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all
fire apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or belonging to the
fire department.
   8.   Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage
in excess of $200,000.00 has occurred as a result of a fire, or if arson is
suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately. For all fires
causing an estimated damage of $50.00 or more or emergency responses by the
Fire Department, file a report with the Fire Marshal’s Division within 10 days
following the end of the month. The report shall indicate all fire incidents
occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of the property at the
time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated total loss to the
property, origin of the fire as determined by investigation, and other facts,
statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)
   9.   Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any
building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of
making such investigation or inspection which under law or ordinance may be
necessary to be made and is reasonably necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
   10.   Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
   11.   Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal,
and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by
investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.4)
   12.   Records. Cause to be kept records of the fire department personnel,
firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number
of responses to alarms, their cause and location, and an analysis of losses by
value, type and location of buildings.
   13.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report
of the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as
may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
   14.   Fire Board. Serve as an advisory member of the Fire Board.
35.09 OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Chief.
35.10 CONSTITUTION.
   The company and Fire Board shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they
deem calculated to accomplish the object contemplated, and such constitution
and bylaws and any change or amendment to such constitution and bylaws before
being effective, must be approved by the Council and Fire Board.
35.11 ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE.
   The Council shall contract to insure the City and Fire Board against
liability for worker’s compensation and against statutory liability for the
costs of hospitalization, nursing, and medical attention for volunteer fire
fighters injured in the performance of their duties as fire fighters whether
within or outside the corporate limits of the City. All volunteer fire fighters
shall be covered by the contract. All injuries shall be reported to the office
of the Clerk within 72 hours after the time of accident or injury.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)
35.12 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The Council shall contract to insure against liability of the City or
members of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out of
and resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the
corporate limits of the City. Reports of all accidents or injury shall be made
to the office of the Clerk within 72 hours after the time of the accident or
injury.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 & 517A.1)
35.13 CALLS OUTSIDE FIRE DISTRICT.
   The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the
Fire District if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists and that
such action will not endanger persons and property within the Fire District.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
35.14 MUTUAL AID.
   Subject to approval by resolution of the Council and the Fire Board, the
department and Fire Board may enter into mutual aid agreements with other
legally constituted fire departments and townships. Copies of any such
agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
35.15 AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS.
   Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa
may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa, for
violations of state and/or local fire safety regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
35.16 EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE.
   The department is authorized to provide emergency ambulance or rescue
services and the accidental injury and liability insurance provided for herein
shall include such operation.
CHAPTER 36
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
 
36.01 Purpose                     36.05 Notifications
36.02 Definitions                 36.06 Police Authority
36.03 Cleanup Required            36.07 Liability
36.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs
 
36.01 PURPOSE.
   In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety, and welfare from
the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated
to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal and cleanup of hazardous
substance spills within the City limits.
36.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control,
identify, analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove, or dispose of a hazardous
substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])
   2.   “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual,
imminent, or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance
onto the land, into a water of the State, or into the atmosphere which creates
an immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety or to the
environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])
   3.   “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not
limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an
irritant or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat, or other
means. “Hazardous substance” may include any hazardous waste identified or
listed by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under
Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1,
1977, or any hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous
material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])
   4.   “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles,
stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the
release of which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers,
and any other person in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous
condition occurs, whether the person owns the hazardous substance or is
operating under a lease, contract, or other agreement with the legal owner of
the hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])
36.03 CLEANUP REQUIRED.
   Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the
hazardous substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the
environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including
ground waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied
by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to an
acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the
responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to
begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the
incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based
on the character of the hazardous condition, said notice setting a deadline for
accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City will proceed to procure
cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with
the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished within the deadline. In the
event that it is determined that immediate cleanup is necessary as a result of
the present danger to the public health, safety and welfare, then no notice
shall be required and the City may proceed to procure the cleanup and bill the
responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup. If the bill for
those services is not paid within 30 days, the City Attorney shall proceed to
obtain payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the
capacity of the City to finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the
Council and immediately seek any State or federal funds available for said
cleanup.
36.04 LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS.
   The responsible person shall be strictly liable to the City for all of the
following:
   1.   The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents of the
City as a result of the failure of the responsible person to clean up a
hazardous substance involved in a hazardous condition.
   2.   The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City to
evacuate people from the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the
person.
   3.   The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of,
or loss of City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous
condition caused by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury,
destruction or loss.
   4.   The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or the agents
of the City in responding at and to the scene of a hazardous condition caused
by that person.
36.05 NOTIFICATIONS.
   1.   A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing
of a hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources
and the Police Department of the occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon as
possible but not later than six hours after the onset of the hazardous
condition or discovery of the hazardous condition. The Police Department shall
immediately notify the Department of Natural Resources.
   2.   Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the
Police Department, which shall then notify the Department of Natural Resources.
36.06 POLICE AUTHORITY.
   If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer or
an authorized representative may:
   1.   Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a
hazardous condition, and
   2.   Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a
hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.
No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under
this section.
36.07 LIABILITY.
   The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries,
or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the
responsible person as defined in Section
36.02(4).
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
 
40.01 Assault            40.04 Unlawful Assembly
40.02 Harassment         40.05 Failure to Disperse
40.03 Disorderly Conduct
 
40.01 ASSAULT.
   No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
   1.   Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to cause pain or injury to
another or that is intended to result in physical contact that will be
insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute
the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])
   2.   Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to place another in
fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting,
or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])
An act described in Subsections 1 and 2 shall not be an assault under the
following circumstances: (i) if the person doing any of the enumerated acts,
and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other
activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable
incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk of
serious injury or breach of the peace; (ii) if the person doing any of the
enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic
school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a
school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle or
other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or
staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school
grounds, or at an official school function, regardless of the location, whether
the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between
students or other individuals, if the degree and the force of the intervention
is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those
assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02 HARASSMENT.
   No person shall commit harassment.
   1.   A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy, or
alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
      A.   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing, or via
electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to
cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      B.   Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      C.   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      D.   Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law
enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing
that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal
act, knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   2.   A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without
legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent
to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section,
unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in
which two or more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other.
“Personal contact” does not require a physical touching or oral communication,
although it may include these types of contacts.
40.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   No person shall do any of the following:
   1.   Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or
in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in
athletic contests may engage in such conduct that is reasonably related to that
sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1a])
   2.   Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or
public building which intentionally or recklessly causes unreasonable distress
to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1b])
   3.   Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening
gesture that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a
violent reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1c])
   4.   Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of
authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct
intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1d])
   5.   False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate
a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such
report to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1e])
   6.   Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United
States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the
United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will
provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault. As used in this
subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1f])
      A.   “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
      B.   “Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
      C.   “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be
flown from a pole or mast.
      D.   “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make
imperfect.
      E.   “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate, or trample.
      F.   “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a
machine, vehicle, or animal to tread upon.
   7.   Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 1,000 feet of the building or other
location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within
1,000 feet of a funeral procession or burial:
      A.   Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable distress to the
persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the
funeral procession.
      B.   Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction
by another.
      C.   Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral
procession, or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral,
memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.
   This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during, and
within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or
burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
(Section 40.03 - Ord. 696 - Nov. 21 Supp.)
40.04 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 696 - Nov. 21 Supp.)
40.05 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or
persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse.
No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
 
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances                  41.09 Antenna and
                                                         Radio Wires
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public     41.10 Barbed Wire and
Safety Entities                                          Electric Fences
41.03 Providing False Identification Information         41.11 Discharging
                                                         Weapons
                                                         41.12 Pellet Guns and
41.04 Refusing to Assist Officer                         Air Rifles; Throwing
                                                         and Shooting
41.05 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees        41.13 Carrying Pellet
                                                         Guns and Air Rifles
41.06 Interference with Official Acts                    41.14 Urinating and
                                                         Defecating
41.07 Removal of an Officer’s Communication or Control 41.15 Fireworks
Device
41.08 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators              41.16 Failure to
                                                         Assist
 
41.01 DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.
   No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any
corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person
delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes
reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or
animals from the place where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02 FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES.
   No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
   1.   Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department,
a law enforcement authority or other public safety entity, knowing that the
information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act
knowing the act did not occur.
   2.   Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he or
she is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or
assistance.
   3.   Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who
enters the information on a citation.
41.03 PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION.
   No person shall knowingly provide false identification information to anyone
known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider, or
firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is
within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency
medical care provider, or firefighter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)
41.04 REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.
   Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to
render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an
arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render
assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause,
refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
41.05 HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer
or employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.06 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.
   No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to
be a peace officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider under Chapter 147A
of the Code of Iowa, medical examiner, or firefighter, whether paid or
volunteer, or a person performing bailiff duties pursuant to Section 602.1303
[4] of the Code of Iowa, in the performance of any act that is within the scope
of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, jailer, emergency medical care
provider, medical examiner, or firefighter, or person performing bailiff
duties, or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any
authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order of any court. The
terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in this section do not include verbal
harassment unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present ability and
apparent intention to execute a verbal threat physically..
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
(Ord. 695 - Nov. 21 Supp.)
41.07 REMOVAL OF AN OFFICER’S COMMUNICATION OR CONTROL DEVICE.
   No person shall knowingly or intentionally remove or attempt to remove a
communication device or any device used for control from the possession of a
peace officer or correctional officer, when the officer is in the performance
of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that
officer and the person knew or should have known the individual to be an
officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.12)
41.08 ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.
   No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice
box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such
refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on
premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so
accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.09 ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.
   It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio
wires, or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground, or public building without written consent of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.10 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
   It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose
land within the City limits without the written consent of the Council unless
such land consists of 10 acres or more and is used as agricultural land.
41.11 DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
   1.   It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers,
pistols, guns, or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except by
written consent of the Council.
   2.   No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner.
41.12 PELLET GUNS AND AIR RIFLES; THROWING AND SHOOTING.
   It is unlawful for a person to shoot arrows, or to discharge any pellet gun,
air rifle, rubber guns, slingshots, BB guns or other dangerous instruments or
toys which propel any kind of missile at a speed that is potentially dangerous
to others if struck, or to throw stones, bricks or missiles of any kind on or
into any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground or public
building within the City limits except by direct authorization of a person
designated by the Council to give such authorization.
41.13 CARRYING PELLET GUNS AND AIR RIFLES.
   No minor under the age of 18 years shall, within the limits of the City, go
armed with or carry a loaded pellet gun, air rifle, BB gun or other instrument
which propels any kind of missile at a speed that is potentially dangerous to
others if struck; however, this section does not apply to any of the following:
1.   A minor under the age of 18 who goes armed with or carries a loaded device
described above within his or her own dwelling; or
2.   A minor under the age of 18 while he or she is lawfully engaged in target
practice on a range designed for that purpose under the direct supervision of
an adult.
41.14 URINATING AND DEFECATING.
   It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk,
street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building,
including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway,
doorway, or window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
41.15 FIREWORKS.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
   1.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
      A.   “Consumer fireworks” means the following fireworks, as described in
Chapter 3 of the American Pyrotechnics Association (“APA”) Standard 87-1:
         (1)   First-class consumer fireworks:
            a.   Aerial shell kits and reloadable tubes;
            b.   Chasers;
            c.   Helicopters and aerial spinners;
            d.   Firecrackers;
            e.   Mine and shell devices;
            f.   Missile-type rockets;
            g.   Roman candles;
            h.   Sky rockets and bottle rockets;
            i.   Multiple tube devices under this Paragraph B which are
manufactured in accordance with APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.5.
         (2)   Second-class consumer fireworks:
            a.   Cone fountains;
            b.   Cylindrical fountains;
            c.   Flitter sparklers;
            d.   Ground and hand-held sparkling devices, including multiple
tube ground and hand-held sparkling devices that are manufactured in accordance
with APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.5;
            e.   Ground spinners;
            f.   Illuminating torches;
            g.   Toy smoke devices that are not classified as novelties
pursuant to APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.2;
            h.   Wheels;
            i.   Wire or dipped sparklers that are not classified as novelties
pursuant to APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.2.
      B.   “Display fireworks” includes any explosive composition, or
combination of explosive substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration,
or detonation, and includes fireworks containing any explosive or flammable
compound, or other device containing any explosive substance. “Display
fireworks” does not include novelties or consumer fireworks enumerated in
Chapter 3 of the APA Standard 87-1.
      C.   “Novelties” includes all novelties enumerated in Chapter 3 of the
APA Standard 87-1, and that comply with the labeling regulations promulgated by
the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission.
   2.   Display Fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to use or explode any
display fireworks; provided, the City Council may, upon application in writing,
grant a permit for the display of display fireworks by municipalities, fair
associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or groups of individuals
approved by the City when the display fireworks will be handled by a competent
operator,   but no such permit shall be required for the display of display
fireworks at the Iowa State Fairgrounds by the Iowa State Fair Board, at
incorporated county fairs, or at district fairs receiving State aid. No permit
shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or sponsoring organization has
filed with the City evidence of insurance in the following amounts:
      A.   Personal Injury:   $250,000.00 per person
      B.   Property Damage:   $50,000.00
      C.   Total Exposure:   $1,000,000.00
   3.   Consumer Fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to use or explode
consumer fireworks within the City outside of the following dates:
      A.   State Code Dates. Allowed by Section 364.2(6) of the Code of Iowa:
         (1)   July 3 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
            a.   Except when July 3 falls on a Saturday or Sunday preceding
July 4, in which fireworks shall be allowed between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m.
         (2)   July 4 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
         (3)   December 31 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:30 a.m. on the
immediately following day.
      B.   City Allowed Dates.
         (1)   No other dates or times permitted.
(Subsection 3 – Ord. 713 – Jul. 25 Supp.)
(Section 41.15 - Ord. 691 - Oct. 20 Supp.)
41.16 FAILURE TO ASSIST.
   A person who reasonably believes another person is suffering from a risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death shall, if the person is able,
attempt to contact local law enforcement or local emergency response
authorities, if doing so does not place the person or other person at risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death. No person shall without
lawful cause violate the provisions of this section. A person shall not be
required to contact local law enforcement or emergency response authorities if
the person knows or reasonably believes that the other person is not in need of
help or assistance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.12)
(Section 41.16 - Ord. 698 - Nov. 21 Supp.)
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
 
42.01 Trespassing                       42.05 Fraud
42.02 Criminal Mischief                 42.06 Theft
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.07 Other Public Property Offenses
42.04 Unauthorized Entry
 
42.01 TRESPASSING.
   1.   Prohibited. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the
property of another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.8)
   2.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[1])
      A.   “Property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance,
vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly or
privately owned.
      B.   “Public utility” is a public utility as defined in Section 476.1 of
the Code of Iowa or an electric transmission line as provided in Chapter 478 of
the Code of Iowa.
      C.   “Public utility property” means any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure owned, leased,
or operated by a public utility and that is completely enclosed by a physical
barrier of any kind.
      D.   “Railway corporation” means a corporation, company, or person
owning, leasing, or operating any railroad in whole or in part within this
State.
      E.   “Railway property” means all tangible real and personal property
owned, leased, or operated by a railway corporation, with the exception of any
administrative building or offices of the railway corporation.
      F.   “Trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])
         (1)   Entering upon or in property without the express permission of
the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a
public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place
thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
         (2)   Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification
after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or
vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or the
agent or employee of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by
any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise
the use or maintenance of the property.
         (3)   Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect
of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
         (4)   Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing
therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein
anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the
owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession.
         (5)   Entering or remaining upon or in railway property without lawful
authority or without the consent of the railway corporation which owns, leases,
or operates the railway property. This paragraph does not apply to passage over
a railroad right-of-way, other than a track, railroad roadbed, viaduct, bridge,
trestle, or railroad yard, by an unarmed person if the person has not been
notified or requested to abstain from entering onto the right-of-way or to
vacate the right-of-way and the passage over the right-of-way does not
interfere with the operation of the railroad.
         (6)   Entering or remaining upon or in public utility property without
lawful authority or without the consent of the public utility that owns,
leases, or operates the public utility property. This paragraph does not apply
to passage over public utility right-of-way by a person if the person has not
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering onto the right-of-way or to vacate the right-of-way.
   3.   Specific Exceptions. “Trespass” does not mean either of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])
      A.   Entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of
retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been
thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that
the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route
to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is
possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
This paragraph does not apply to public utility property where the person has
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering.
      B.   Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway.
42.02 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally
damage, deface, alter, or destroy property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03 DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES.
   It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down,
or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of
the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement or
notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by
order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04 UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY.
   No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public building,
premises, or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said
building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open
to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an
unauthorized entry.
42.05 FRAUD.
   It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06 THEFT.
   It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
42.07 OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES.
   The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other activities or conditions that are also deemed
to be public property offenses:
   1.   Chapter 21 – Library
      A.   Section 21.10 – Injury to Books or Property
      B.   Section 21.11 – Theft of Library Property
   2.   Chapter 105 – Solid Waste Control and Recycling
      A.   Section 105.07 – Littering Prohibited
   3.   Chapter 135 – Street Use and Maintenance
      A.   Section 135.01 – Removal of Warning Devices
      B.   Section 135.02 – Obstructing or Defacing
      C.   Section 135.03 – Placing Debris On
      D.   Section 135.04 – Playing In
      E.   Section 135.05 – Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
      F.   Section 135.08 – Burning Prohibited
      G.   Section 135.12 – Dumping of Snow
   4.   Chapter 136 – Sidewalk Regulations
      A.   Section 136.11 – Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
      B.   Section 136.15 – Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
      C.   Section 136.16 – Defacing
      D.   Section 136.17 – Debris on Sidewalks
      E.   Section 136.18 – Merchandise Display
      F.   Section 136.19 – Sales Stands
CHAPTER 43
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
 
43.01 Purpose                      43.04 Determining Factors
43.02 Controlled Substance Defined 43.05 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
43.03 Drug Paraphernalia Defined   43.06 Manufacture, Delivery, or Offering For
                                   Sale
 
43.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with intent
to use, manufacture, and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined herein.
43.02 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED.
   The term “controlled substance” as used in this chapter is defined as the
term “controlled substance” is defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
43.03 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED.
   The term “drug paraphernalia” as used in this chapter means all equipment,
products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or
designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing, containing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa. It includes, but is not limited to:
   1.   Growing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can
be derived.
   2.   Processing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances.
   3.   Isomerization Devices. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance.
   4.   Testing Equipment. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or
designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or
purity of controlled substances.
   5.   Scales. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
   6.   Diluents. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose, or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances.
   7.   Separators; Sifters. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for
use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise
cleaning or refining marijuana.
   8.   Mixing Devices. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices
used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances.
   9.   Containers. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
   10.   Storage Containers. Containers and other objects used, intended for
use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
   11.   Injecting Devices. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects
used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting
controlled substances into the human body.
   12.   Ingesting-Inhaling Device. Objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin, marijuana,
cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
      A.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with
or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
      B.   Water pipes;
      C.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
      D.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
      E.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as
a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand;
      F.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
      G.   Chamber pipes;
      H.   Carburetor pipes;
      I.   Electric pipes;
      J.   Air driven pipes;
      K.   Chillums;
      L.   Bongs;
      M.   Ice pipes or chillers.
43.04 DETERMINING FACTORS.
   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose of
enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be considered in addition
to all other logically relevant factors:
   1.   Statements. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use.
   2.   Prior Convictions. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone
in control of the object under any State or federal law relating to any
controlled substance.
   3.   Proximity to Violation. The proximity of the object, in time and space,
to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of
the Code of Iowa.
   4.   Proximity to Substances. The proximity of the object to controlled
substances.
   5.   Residue. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object.
   6.   Evidence of Intent. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of
an owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom
he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of
the Code of Iowa.
   7.   Innocence of an Owner. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not prevent a finding
that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   8.   Instructions. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use.
   9.   Descriptive Materials. Descriptive materials accompanying the object
explaining or depicting its use.
   10.   Advertising. National and local advertising concerning its use.
   11.   Displayed. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
   12.   Licensed Distributor or Dealer. Whether the owner, or anyone in
control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the
community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
   13.   Sales Ratios. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales
of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
   14.   Legitimate Uses. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community.
   15.   Expert Testimony. Expert testimony concerning its use.
43.05 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
43.06 MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY, OR OFFERING FOR SALE.
   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver,
manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia,
intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used, or knowing
that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
 
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.02 Public Consumption or   45.04 Social Host
Intoxication
 
45.01 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
   As used in this section, “legal age” means 21 years of age or more.  
   1.   A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase, consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine or
beer in their possession or control; except in the case of liquor, wine or beer
given or dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with
the knowledge, presence and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or
medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or
dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under
legal age may handle alcoholic beverages, wine, and beer during the regular
course of the person’s employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer
permittee under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])
   2.   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for
the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage,
wine, or beer from any licensee or permittee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
   1.   As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
      A.   “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of
Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code of
Iowa.
      B.   “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine
to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using
devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
      C.   “Peace officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
      D.   “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a
public or private school that provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten
through grade twelve.
   2.   A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon
the public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic
liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor control
license. A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer
on public school property or while attending any public or private school-
related function. A person shall not be intoxicated in a public place.
   3.   A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
   4.   When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public
intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that
the person may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own expense.
If a device approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample
of a person’s breath to determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is
available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a
prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test
performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper
foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or
urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours
after the person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be
the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03 OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES. [See Section
62.01(49) and (50) of this Code of Ordinances.]
45.04 SOCIAL HOST.
   A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has control over,
property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any person,
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under the age of
eighteen, to consume or possess on such property any alcoholic liquor, wine, or
beer. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a landlord or
manager of the property or to a person under legal age who consumes or
possesses any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony, or rite.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47)
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
 
46.01 Curfew                 46.03 Contributing to Delinquency
46.02 Cigarettes and Tobacco
 
46.01 CURFEW.
   The Council has determined that a curfew for minors is necessary to promote
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City and
specifically to reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of adults
responsible for minors; to protect the public from the illegal acts of minors
committed after the curfew hour; and to protect minors from improper influences
and criminal activity that prevail in public places after the curfew hour.
   1.   Definitions. For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
      A.   “Emergency errand” means, but is not limited to, an errand relating
to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any other situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious illness, bodily injury, or loss
of life.
      B.   “Knowingly” means knowledge that a responsible adult should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that
responsible adult’s custody. It is intended to continue to hold the neglectful
or careless adult responsible for a minor to a reasonable standard of adult
responsibility through an objective test. It is therefore no defense that an
adult responsible for a minor was completely indifferent to the activities or
conduct or whereabouts of the minor.
      C.   “Minor” means any unemancipated person under the age of 18 years.
      D.   “Nonsecured custody” means custody in an unlocked multipurpose area,
such as a lobby, office or interrogation room that is not designed, set aside,
or used as a secure detention area, and the person arrested is not physically
secured during the period of custody in the area; the person is physically
accompanied by a law enforcement officer or a person employed by the facility
where the person arrested is being held; and the use of the area is limited to
providing nonsecured custody only while awaiting transfer to an appropriate
juvenile facility or to court, for contacting of and release to the person’s
parents or other responsible adult or for other administrative purposes; but
not for longer than six hours without the oral or written order of a judge or
magistrate authorizing the detention. A judge shall not extend the period of
time in excess of six hours beyond the initial six-hour period.
      E.   “Public place” includes stores, parking lots, parks, playgrounds,
streets, alleys, and sidewalks dedicated to public use and also includes such
parts of buildings and other premises, whether publicly or privately owned,
that are used by the general public or to which the general public is invited
commercially for a fee or otherwise; or in or on which the general public is
permitted without specific invitation; or to which the general public has
access. For purposes of this section, a vehicle or other conveyance is
considered to be a public place when in the areas defined above.
      F.   “Responsible adult” means a parent, guardian or other adult
specifically authorized by law or authorized by a parent or guardian to have
custody or control of a minor.
   2.   Curfew Established. It is unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon
any of the alleys, streets or public places or to be in places of business and
amusement in the City between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the
following day on days commencing on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday and between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Friday and
Saturday.
   3.   Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the curfew:
      A.   The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.
      B.   The minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor resides or
on either side of the place where the minor resides and the adult responsible
for the minor has given permission for the minor to be there.
      C.   The minor is present at or is traveling between home and one of the
following:
         (1)   Minor’s place of employment in a business, trade or occupation
in which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged or, if traveling, within
one hour after the end or before the beginning of work;
         (2)   Minor’s place of religious activity or, if traveling, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of the religious activity;
         (3)   Governmental or political activity or, if traveling, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of the activity;
         (4)   School activity or, if traveling, within one hour after the end
or before the beginning of the activity;
         (5)   Assembly such as a march, protest, demonstration, sit-in or
meeting of an association for the advancement of economic, political, religious
or cultural matters, or for any other activity protected by the First Amendment
of the U.S. Constitution guarantees of free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, freedom of assembly or, if traveling, within one hour after the end or
before the beginning of the activity.
      D.   The minor is on an emergency errand for a responsible adult;
      E.   The minor is engaged in interstate travel through the City
beginning, ending or passing through the City when such travel is by direct
route.
   4.   Responsibility of Adults. It is unlawful for any responsible adult
knowingly to permit or to allow a minor to be in any public place in the City
within the time periods prohibited by this section unless the minor’s presence
falls within one of the above exceptions.
   5.   Enforcement Procedures.
      A.   Determination of Age. In determining the age of the juvenile and in
the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver’s
license, a law enforcement officer on the street shall, in the first instance,
use his or her best judgment in determining age.
      B.   Grounds for Arrest; Conditions of Custody. Grounds for arrest are
that the person refuses to sign the citation without qualification; persists in
violating the ordinance; refuses to provide proper identification or to
identify himself or herself; or constitutes an immediate threat to the person’s
own safety or to the safety of the public. A law enforcement officer who
arrests a minor for a curfew violation may keep the minor in custody either in
a shelter care facility or in any nonsecured setting. The officer shall not
place bodily restraints, such as handcuffs, on the minor unless the minor
physically resists or threatens physical violence when being taken into
custody. A minor shall not be placed in detention following a curfew violation.
      C.   Notification of Responsible Adult. After a minor is taken into
custody, the law enforcement officer shall notify the adult responsible for the
minor as soon as possible. The minor shall be released to the adult responsible
for the minor upon the promise of such person to produce the child in court at
such time as the court may direct.
      D.   Minor Without Adult Supervision. If a law enforcement officer
determines that a minor does not have adult supervision because the law
enforcement officer cannot locate the minor’s parent, guardian or other person
legally responsible for the care of the minor, within a reasonable time, the
law enforcement officer shall attempt to place the minor with an adult relative
of the minor, an adult person who cares for the child or another adult person
who is known to the child.
   6.   Penalties.
      A.   Responsible Adult’s First Violation. In the case of a first
violation by a minor, the law enforcement officer shall, by certified mail,
send to the adult responsible for the minor, written notice of the violation
with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of
the curfew ordinance against both the responsible adult and minor, with
applicable penalties.
      B.   Responsible Adult’s Second Violation. Any responsible adult as
defined in this section who, following receipt of a warning, knowingly allows
the minor to violate any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
municipal infraction.
      C.   Minor’s First Violation. In the case of a first violation by a
minor, the law enforcement officer shall give the minor a written warning,
which states that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of
the curfew ordinance against the responsible adult and the minor, with
applicable penalties, or, at the law enforcement officer’s discretion, may
issue the minor a citation for a first violation.
      D.   Minor’s Second Violation. For the minor’s second and subsequent
violations of any of the provisions of this section, the minor is guilty of a
municipal infraction.
46.02 CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO.
   It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to smoke, use, possess,
purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes. Possession of tobacco,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes
by an individual under 21 years of age shall not constitute a violation of this
section if the individual under 21 years of age possesses the tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as part
of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a
valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers for
sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
(Ord. 692 - Oct. 20 Supp.)
46.03 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY.
   It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under 18 years of age
to commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
CHAPTER 47
INHALING TOXIC VAPORS AND CHEMICALS
 
47.01 Huffing Prohibited               47.04 Use and Possession of Inhalant
                                       Paraphernalia Prohibited
47.02 Possession, Purchase and Use
Prohibited
47.03 Misuse of Prescription Inhalants
Prohibited
47.01 HUFFING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall knowingly smell or inhale the fumes of toxic vapors, whether
synthetic or organic, for the purpose of causing a condition of euphoria,
excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction, or dulled senses of the nervous system.
The actions in the preceding sentence are sometimes referred to as “huffing.”
47.02 POSSESSION, PURCHASE AND USE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall knowingly possess, buy, or use any such substance for the
purposes described in Section
47.01, nor shall any person knowingly aid any other person to use any such
substance for the purposes described in such section. This chapter does not
apply to the inhalation of anesthesia or other substances for prescribed
medical or dental purposes.
47.03 MISUSE OF PRESCRIPTION INHALANTS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall use or possess an aerosol spray product or other inhalant
that is not used pursuant to the instructions or prescription of a licensed
healthcare provider or that is not used pursuant to the manufacturer’s label
instructions, for the purposes described in Section
47.01 of this chapter.
47.04 USE AND POSSESSION OF INHALANT PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED.
   No person shall knowingly use or possess with intent to use inhalant
paraphernalia to inhale, ingest, or otherwise introduce a toxic vapor into the
human body. As used in this section, “inhalant paraphernalia” means any
product, implement, or device used, intended to be used, or designed to be used
to inhale or ingest the fumes of toxic vapors as prohibited in Section
47.01 of this chapter.
CHAPTER 48
PARK REGULATIONS
 
48.01 Purpose                48.04 Littering
48.02 Use of Drives Required 48.05 Parks Closed
48.03 Fires
 
48.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park
facilities by the general public by establishing rules and regulations
governing the use of park facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
48.02 USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED.
   No person shall drive any car, cycle or other vehicle, or ride or lead any
horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or roadways
therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the City.
48.03 FIRES.
   No fire shall be built, except in a place designated for such purpose, and
such fire shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be
immediately used by some other party.
48.04 LITTERING.
   No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter or
foreign substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that
purpose.
48.05 PARKS CLOSED.
   No person shall enter or remain within any park between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except with permission of the proper authorities.
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
 
50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.05 Nuisance Abatement
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated   50.06 Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice
50.03 Other Conditions       50.07 Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited
 
50.01 DEFINITION OF NUISANCE.
   Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to
interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02 NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions that are
deemed to be nuisances in the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
   1.   Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing, or using any building or other
place for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture that, by
occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other
annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property
of individuals or the public.
   2.   Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth, or
noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of
others.
   3.   Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding without
legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor, or collection of
water.
   4.   Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the
water of any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its
natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
   5.   Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by
fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places, or burying grounds.
   6.   Billboards. Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether
erected and constructed on public or private property, that so obstruct and
impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway,
boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render
dangerous the use thereof. (See also Section 62.06) 
   7.   Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk,
such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such
articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof
construction. (See also
Chapter 51) 
   8.   Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
   9.   Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush or noxious
growths of any kind or grass over 12 inches tall or other vegetation upon any
lot or parcel of ground, including upon the parking or in the alley so as to
constitute a health, safety or fire hazard.
   10.   Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch elm disease. (See also
Chapter 151)
   11.   Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within
1,000 feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or
landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take-
off and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or
enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.
   12.   Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of
prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code
of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as
defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or houses
where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are carried on
or permitted to the disturbance of others.
   13.   Septic Tanks or Drain Field. Effluent from septic tank or drain field
running or ponding on the ground in the open.
   14.   Drain Obstructions. Any article or substance placed upon a street,
alley, sidewalk or public ground or in any ditch, waterway or gutter so as to
obstruct the drainage.
   15.   Rubbish and Trash. Accumulation of rubbish or trash tending to harbor
vermin, rodents and the rank growth of weeds or other vegetation and plants
which is conducive to fire hazard.
50.03 OTHER CONDITIONS.
   The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other conditions that are deemed to be nuisances:
   1.   Junk and Junk Vehicles (See
Chapter 51)
   2.   Dangerous Buildings (See Chapter 145)
   3.   Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105)
   4.   Trees (See Chapter 151)
50.04 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance,
public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or
State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   Whenever any authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such
officer has the authority to determine on a case-by-case basis whether to
utilize the nuisance abatement procedure described in Section
50.06 of this chapter or the municipal infraction procedure referred to in
Section 50.07.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY WRITTEN NOTICE.
   Any nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in
this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   1.   Contents of Notice to Property Owner. The notice to abate shall
contain: † 5
      A.   Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the
nuisance.
      B.   Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
      C.   Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to
abate the nuisance.
      D.   Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.
      E.   Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or
condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within
the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against the
property owner.
   2.   Method of Service. The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or
sent by certified mail to the property owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   3.   Request for Hearing. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a
hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a
hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time
stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance
exists and it must be abated as ordered. The hearing will be before the Council
at a time and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the Council shall be
conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated
within a reasonable time under the circumstances.
   4.   Abatement in Emergency. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may
perform any action that may be required under this chapter without prior
notice. The City shall assess the costs as provided in subsection 6 of this
section after notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions of
subsection 1 and 2, and the hearing as provided in subsection 3.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   5.   Abatement by City. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or
condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the
required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred.
The itemized expense account shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall pay such
expenses on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   6.   Collection of Costs. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total
expense incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to
abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not
been paid within one month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County
Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner
as, general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   7.   Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement. If the amount expended to
abate the nuisance or condition exceeds $500.00, the City may permit the
assessment to be paid in up to 10 annual installments, to be paid in the same
manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against
benefited property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
   8.   Failure to Abate. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who
shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time
required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of
Ordinances.
 
Notes
  †  EDITOR’S NOTE: A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is
  included in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of
  this administrative abatement procedure, particularly where cost of abatement is
5 more than minimal or where there is doubt as to whether or not a nuisance does in
  fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings, we
  recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with
  abatement and assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in court
  under Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.
50.07 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   In lieu of the abatement procedures set forth in Section
50.06, the requirements of this chapter may be enforced under the procedures
applicable to municipal infractions as set forth in
Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
 
51.01 Definitions                       51.04 Exceptions
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.05 Notice to Abate
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance
 
51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-
ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery
and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances; iron, steel
or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tinware,
plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly stacked
firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.
   2.   “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage with the
County Treasurer or unlicensed and having any of the following characteristics:
      A.   Broken Glass. Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield,
window, headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken glass.
      B.   Broken, Loose, or Missing Part. Any vehicle with a broken, loose, or
missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel or trunk lid.
      C.   Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects. Any vehicle that has become
the habitat for rats, mice, snakes, or any other vermin or insects.
      D.   Flammable Fuel. Any vehicle that contains gasoline or any other
flammable fuel.
      E.   Inoperable. Any motor vehicle that lacks an engine or two or more
wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle totally
inoperable, or that cannot be moved under its own power or has not been used as
an operating vehicle for a period of 30 days or more.
      F.   Defective or Obsolete Condition. Any other vehicle that, because of
its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to
the public health and safety.
   Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding
that the vehicle is a junk vehicle.
   3.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and
includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle,
tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof.
51.02 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on
any private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or junk
vehicle.
51.03 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE.
   It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon private
property, unless excepted by Section
51.04, constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a
nuisance within the meaning of Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk
or junk vehicle is kept upon private property in violation hereof, the owner of
or person occupying the property upon which it is located shall be prima facie
liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk vehicle
stored within a garage or other enclosed structure.
51.05 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property in
violation of Section
51.03, the City shall within 60 days initiate abatement procedures as outlined
in
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions                  55.11 Owner’s Duty
55.02 Animal Neglect               55.12 Confinement
55.03 Livestock Neglect            55.13 At Large: Impoundment
55.04 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs 55.14 Restrained
55.05 Livestock                    55.15 Destruction in Lieu of Impoundment
55.06 At Large Prohibited          55.16 Dead Animals
55.07 Damage or Interference       55.17 Unsanitary or Offensive Conditions
                                   Prohibited
55.08 Annoyance or Disturbance     55.18 Limitation on Number of Domestic
                                   Animals
55.09 Females in Heat              55.19 Pet Awards Prohibited
55.10 Injuring Squirrels or Birds  55.20 False Representation of Service Animal
 
55.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
   1.   “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any medium
including but not limited to print, radio, television, sign, display, label,
tag or articulation.
   2.   “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
   3.   “At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the
control of a competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, or housed in
a veterinary hospital or kennel.
   4.   “Business” means any enterprise relating to any of the following:
      A.   The sale or offer for sale of goods or services.
      B.   A recruitment for employment or membership in an organization.
      C.   A solicitation to make an investment.
      D.   An amusement or entertainment activity.
   5.   “Cats” includes both male and female felines whether altered or not.
   6.   “Dogs” includes both male and female canines whether altered or not.
   7.   “Fair” means any of the following:
      A.   The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State Fair Board
pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event conducted by a
fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products.
      C.   An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or concession
booths.
   8.   “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill” as defined in
Section 99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.
   9.   “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine,
ovine or porcine species, ostriches, rheas and emus; farm deer as defined in
Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa; or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
   10.   “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an
animal.
   11.   “Pet” means a living dog, cat, or an animal normally maintained in a
small tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not limited to a
rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch, tropical fish,
goldfish, snake, turtle, gecko, or iguana.
   12.   “Restrained” means any licensed or unlicensed dog found on or off the
premises of the owner and under the control of a competent person, restrained
within a motor vehicle, housed in a veterinary hospital or kennel, on a leash,
fenced or tied up beside a competent person and obedient to that person’s
command.
55.02 ANIMAL NEGLECT.
   It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines, in any place, an
animal, excluding livestock, to fail to supply the animal during confinement
with a sufficient quantity of food or water, or to fail to provide a confined
dog or cat with adequate shelter, or to torture, deprive of necessary
sustenance, mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by any means that causes
unjustified pain, distress or suffering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
55.03 LIVESTOCK NEGLECT.
   It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any place
to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary animal
husbandry practices or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance or to
injure or destroy livestock by any means that causes pain or suffering in a
manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.04 ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS.
   A person who has ownership or custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the
cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another person who
will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the cat or dog to
an animal shelter or pound.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
55.05 LIVESTOCK.
   It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except by
written consent of the Council or except in compliance with the following:
   1.   Hogs or Swine. No person shall keep, maintain, or permit to be kept or
maintained any hogs or swine within any residential zoning district and no
person shall keep or maintain hogs or swine in any building, enclosure or
feedlot within 500 feet of any residential zoning district.
   2.   Domestic Animals. A minimum of one-half acre in total area shall be
required to keep, maintain, tether, confine or house any domestic animals,
except dogs and cats, and the total number of such animals kept per each one-
half acre shall not exceed four, such total consisting of any combination of
animals, unless such animals are kept in a confinement area approved by the
Council.
   3.   Proximity to Schools, Hospitals and Churches. In the case where a
shelter, building, cage, confinement area, pasture or area used to keep such
animals is within 300 feet of any school, hospital or church, the property
shall be checked annually by a person designated by the Council to insure that
the animals are confined in a secure manner.
55.06 AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at large within the
corporate limits of the City.
55.07 DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE.
   It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to
pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference
with, the premises.
55.08 ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.
   It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow or permit such dog to cause
serious annoyance or disturbance to any person by frequent and habitual
howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise, or by running after or chasing
persons, bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles.
55.09 FEMALES IN HEAT.
   The owner of any female dog or cat in heat shall confine the female dog or
cat in a building or keep the same in said owner’s presence so that the female
dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned
breeding.
55.10 INJURING SQUIRRELS OR BIRDS.
   Any person who kills or injures any squirrel or damages its nest or kills or
injures any bird protected by the laws of the State or interferes with the nest
or eggs of the same within the City is guilty of a misdemeanor.
55.11 OWNER’S DUTY.
   It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat, or other animal that has bitten
or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack to
report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty
of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health the
existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.12 CONFINEMENT.
   If a local board of health receives information that an animal has bitten a
person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall
order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner
fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be
apprehended and impounded by such board, and after 10 days the board may
humanely destroy the animal. If such animal is returned to its owner, the owner
shall pay the cost of impoundment. This section does not apply if a police
service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in the
performance of its duties has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.13 AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT.
   1.   Dogs and Cats. Any dog or cat found at large in violation of this
chapter shall be seized and impounded upon complaint, or at the discretion of
the peace officer, the owner may be served a summons to appear before a proper
court to answer charges made thereunder, with disposition of the dog or cat as
follows:
      A.   Disposition of Licensed Dog or Cat. Owners of licensed dogs or cats
which have been apprehended and impounded shall be given written notice in not
less than two days after impoundment if the owner’s name and current address
can reasonably be determined by accessing a tag or other device that is on or
part of the animal. The notice shall state that upon payment of an impounding
fee of $25.00, plus costs of boarding, food, and care in a reasonable amount,
the dog or cat will be returned. If impounded licensed dogs or cats are not
recovered by their owners within seven days after notice, the dogs or cats
shall be disposed of in a humane manner, as directed by the Council. Notice
shall be in writing by restricted certified mail, return receipt requested, and
shall be complete upon mailing, regardless of whether the owner accepts the
notice. In the event the second day from impoundment falls on a Saturday,
Sunday, or holiday, the City shall have until the next business day to complete
notice.
      B.   Disposition of Unlicensed Dogs or Cats. Impounded unlicensed dogs or
cats may be recovered by the owner, upon proper identification, by payment of
the impounding fee of $25.00 and boarding, food and care costs, and the
purchase of a license, when applicable. If such dogs or cats are not claimed
within seven days after impoundment, they shall be disposed of in a humane
manner as directed by the Council. Any person willing to give a home to and to
care for the dog or cat may take an unclaimed dog or cat by paying the
impounding fee of $25.00, the fee for spaying if it is a female or the fee for
neutering if it is a male and the fee for rabies vaccination. No unclaimed dog
or cat may be released to a new owner until such fees are paid.
   2.   Other Animals. It is the duty of the Police Chief or any peace officer
of the City to impound any other animal found running at large in the City
contrary to the provisions of this chapter. When any animal has been taken up
and impounded, the Police Chief shall give notice by one publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. The notice shall fully describe
the animal and the time and place where said animal will be sold unless
redeemed by the owner thereof. If said animal or animals are not redeemed, the
Police Chief shall sell the same at auction for cash to the highest bidder and
execute a bill of sale therefor, and the same shall vest title to said animal
in the purchaser. The officer making the sale shall be entitled to receive the
same fees as are allowed constables for making sale under execution by the laws
of the State; provided, if the owner or any other person duly authorized by
said owner, on or before the time fixed for said sale, pays the costs and
charges made, the officer in charge shall release such animal upon satisfactory
proof of the ownership. The money coming from the sale of any animal after the
expenses of taking up, keeping and selling the same are deducted, shall be paid
over to the City Treasurer and accounted for by said officer in the usual
manner.
55.14 RESTRAINED.
   No owner of any dog shall permit such dog to run without being restrained
whether the dog is licensed or unlicensed. A shock collar shall not be
considered a restraining device.
55.15 DESTRUCTION IN LIEU OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this chapter, any peace
officer of the City has the lawful authority to kill any dog or cat when such
dog or cat is caught in the act of maiming or killing any domestic animal or
fowl or when such dog or cat is attacking or attempting to bite a person
without provocation.
55.16 DEAD ANIMALS.
   The owner of any dead animal within the City who fails, neglects or refuses
to properly bury, burn or dispose of the same within 24 hours after having
notice thereof is guilty of a misdemeanor.
55.17 UNSANITARY OR OFFENSIVE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   Any person who uses, keeps or harbors or owns any animals or domestic
animals shall keep the same confined in an enclosed building, fenced enclosure
or yard. Dogs or cats shall be allowed to be kept on a restraint consisting of
a chain, rope or leash strong enough to adequately restrain such dog or cat.
Any pen, yard, pasture or place in which animals are kept or confined must be
kept sanitary by now allowing any filth, manure, excrement or other offensive
matter to accumulate in such quantities as to create an offensive or unsanitary
condition to exist, constituting a nuisance under this Code of Ordinances.
55.18 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   No household within the corporate limits of the City shall maintain more
than three separate or combination of three domestic animals together with
litters therefrom up to the age of six months. This section does not apply to
kennels or veterinary clinics in agricultural, commercial or industrial zoning
districts. No person shall harbor or maintain such a number of animals as to
create unhealthful or unsanitary conditions for the humans or animals occupying
the premises or create any other conditions constituting a nuisance.
55.19 PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717E)
   1.   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or advertise
that a pet may be awarded as any of the following:
      A.   A prize for participating in a game.
      B.   A prize for participating in a fair.
      C.   An inducement or condition for visiting a place of business or
attending an event sponsored by a business.
      D.   An inducement or condition for executing a contract that includes
provisions unrelated to the ownership, care or disposition of the pet.
   2.   Exceptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
      A.   A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code of Iowa if
the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a pet on the
premises of the pet shop.
      B.   Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers of America;
the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated with outdoor
recreation, hunting or fishing, including but not limited to the Iowa
Sportsmen’s Federation.
55.20   FALSE REPRESENTATION OF SERVICE ANIMAL.
A person commits the offense of intentional misrepresentation of an animal as a
service animal or a service-animal-in-training if, for the purpose of obtaining
any of the rights or privileges set forth in State or federal law, the person
intentionally misrepresents an animal in one’s possession as one’s service
animal or service-animal-in-training or a person with a disability’s service
animal or service-animal-in-training whom the person is assisting by
controlling.
(Code of Iowa, Section 216C.11(3)(B))
(Section 55.20 – Ord. 715 – Aug. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 56
DOG AND CAT LICENSES REQUIRED
 
56.01 Annual License Required 56.06 Immunization
56.02 License Fees            56.07 Duplicate Tags
56.03 Delinquency             56.08 Transfers of Licensed Dogs or Cats
56.04 License Tags            56.09 Kennel Dogs
56.05 License Records
 
56.01 ANNUAL LICENSE REQUIRED.
   1.   Every owner of a dog or cat over the age of six months shall procure a
license from the Clerk on or before January 1 of each year.
   2.   Such license may be procured after January 1 and at any time for a dog
or cat that has come into the possession or ownership of the applicant or which
has reached the age of six months after said date.
   3.   The owner of a dog or cat for which a license is required shall apply
to the Clerk on forms provided by the Clerk.
   4.   The form of the application shall state the breed, sex, age, color,
markings, and name, if any, of the dog or cat, and the address of the owner,
and shall be signed by the owner. The application shall also state the date of
the most recent rabies vaccination, the type of vaccine administered and the
date the dog or cat shall be revaccinated.
   5.   All licenses shall expire on January 1 of the year following the date
of issuance.
56.02 LICENSE FEES.
   The annual license fee shall be as established by resolution of the Council.
56.03 DELINQUENCY.
   All license fees shall become delinquent on April 1 of the year in which
they are due and a delinquent penalty of $1.00 shall be added to each unpaid
license on and after said date.
56.04 LICENSE TAGS.
   Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Clerk shall deliver or mail to
the owner a license that shall be in the form of a metal tag stamped with the
serial number of the license as shown on the record book of the Clerk, the year
in which it is issued, and the name of the City. The license tag shall be
securely fastened by the owner to a collar or harness that shall be worn at all
times by the dog or cat for which issued. A license issued for one dog or cat
shall not be transferable to another animal. Upon the expiration of the
license, the owner shall remove said tag from the dog or cat.
56.05 LICENSE RECORDS.
   The Clerk shall keep a book to be known as the record of licenses; such
record shall show:
   1.   The serial number and date of each application for a license.
   2.   The description of the dog or cat as specified in the application,
together with the name of the owner of the dog or cat.
   3.   The date when each license tag is issued and the serial number of each
tag, the date of the most recent rabies vaccination, the type of vaccine
administered, and the date the dog or cat shall be revaccinated.
   4.   The amount of all fees paid.
   5.   Such other data as may be required by law.
56.06 IMMUNIZATION.
   Before a license is issued, the owner shall furnish a veterinarian’s
certificate showing that the dog or cat for which the license is sought has
been vaccinated against rabies, and that the vaccination does not expire within
six months from the effective date of the license. A tag showing evidence of
proper vaccination shall at all times be attached to the collar of the dog or
cat.
56.07 DUPLICATE TAGS.
   Upon the filing of an affidavit that the license tag has been lost or
destroyed, the owner may obtain another tag on the payment of $5.00 and the
Clerk shall enter in the license record the new number assigned.
56.08 TRANSFERS OF LICENSED DOG OR CAT.
   Upon transfer of a licensed dog or cat into the City, the owner shall
surrender the original license tag to the Clerk. The Clerk shall preserve the
surrendered tag and, without a license fee, issue a new license tag.
56.09 KENNEL DOGS.
   Dogs kept in State or federally licensed kennels, which are kept or raised
solely for the bona fide purpose of sale and which are kept under constant
restraint, are not subject to the provisions of this chapter.
CHAPTER 57
DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
 
57.01 Definitions                  57.04 Seizure, Impoundment and Disposition
57.02 Keeping of Dangerous Animals 57.05 Keeping of Licensed Pit Bull Dogs
Prohibited
57.03 Keeping of Vicious Animals
Prohibited
57.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Dangerous animal” means the following animals: † 6
      A.   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunk and mink.
      B.   Raccoons.
      C.   Bats.
      D.   Scorpions.
      E.   Opossums.
      F.   Piranhas.
      G.   Black widow spiders and brown recluse spiders.
      H.   Red and black fire ants and other stinging ants native to Central or
South America.
      I.   Africanized strains of the honey bee.
   2.   “Pit bull dog” means any dog over the age of six months known by the
owner to be a pit bull terrier. “Pit bull terrier” means any bull terrier,
American pit bull terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier, or American
Staffordshire bull terrier breed of dog or any mixed breed of dog which
contains as an element of its breeding the breed of bull terrier, American pit
bull terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier, or American Staffordshire terrier, so
as to be identifiable as partially of the breed bull terrier, American pit bull
terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier, or American Staffordshire terrier.
   3.   “Vicious animal” means any one of the following:
      A.   Vicious animal, except for a dangerous animal as listed above, that
has attacked, bitten, or clawed a person while running at large and the attack
was unprovoked; or,
      B.   Any animal, except for a dangerous animal as listed above, that has
exhibited vicious tendencies in the present or past conduct, including such
that said animal:
         (1)   Has attacked, bitten, or clawed a person causing bodily injury;
or,
         (2)   Has bitten more than one person during the animal’s lifetime;
or,
         (3)   Has bitten one person on two or more occasions during the
animal’s lifetime; or,
         (4)   Has attacked any domestic animal or fowl without provocation,
causing injury or death while off the property of the owner.
 
Notes
  †  EDITOR’S NOTE: Certain other dangerous animals, listed in Chapter 717F.1,
6 paragraph 5a, of the Code of Iowa, are specifically prohibited and regulated by
  the Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship.
(Subsection 3 – Ord. 693 – Aug. 21 Supp.)
57.02 KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor any dangerous animal as a pet, or
act as a temporary custodian for such animal, or keep, shelter or harbor such
animal for any purpose or in any capacity within the City.
57.03 KEEPING OF VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor for any reason within the City a
vicious animal except in the following circumstances:
   1.   Animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency.
   2.   The keeping of guard dogs; however, guard dogs must be kept within a
structure or fixed enclosure at all times, and any guard dog found at large may
be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
Any premises guarded by a guard dog shall be prominently posted with a sign
containing the wording “Guard Dog,” “Vicious Dog” or words of similar import,
and the owner of such premises shall inform the Mayor or peace officer that a
guard dog is on duty at said premises.
57.04 SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION.
   1.   In the event that a dangerous animal or vicious animal is found at
large and unattended upon public property, park property, public right-of-way
or the property of someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to
persons or property, such animal may, in the discretion of the Mayor or peace
officer, be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The City shall be
under no duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous animal or
vicious animal found at large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of
such animal prior to its destruction.
   2.   Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping,
sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal or vicious animal on premises in the
City, the Mayor or peace officer shall cause the matter to be investigated and
if after investigation, the facts indicate that the person named in the
complaint is keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous or vicious animal in
the City, the Mayor or peace officer shall order the person named in the
complaint to safely remove such animal from the City or destroy the animal
within three days of the receipt of such an order. Such order shall be
contained in a notice to remove the dangerous or vicious animal, which notice
shall be given in writing to the person keeping, sheltering, or harboring the
dangerous animal or vicious animal, and shall be served personally or by
certified mail. Such order and notice to remove the dangerous animal or vicious
animal shall not be required where such animal has previously caused serious
physical harm or death to any person, in which case the Mayor or peace officer
shall cause the animal to be immediately seized and impounded or killed if
seizure and impoundment are not possible without risk of serious physical harm
or death to any person.
   3.   The order to remove a dangerous animal or vicious animal issued by the
Mayor or peace officer may be appealed to the Council. In order to appeal such
order, written notice of appeal must be filed with the Clerk within three days
after receipt of the order contained in the notice to remove the dangerous or
vicious animal. Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute
a waiver of the right to appeal the order of the Mayor or peace officer.
   4.   The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall
be delivered personally or by certified mail to the Clerk. The hearing of such
appeal shall be scheduled within seven days of the receipt of the notice of
appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause. After such hearing, the
Council may affirm or reverse the order of the Mayor or peace officer. Such
determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed with
the Clerk within three days after the hearing or any continued session thereof.
   5.   If the Council affirms the action of the Mayor or peace officer, the
Council shall order in its written decision that the person owning, sheltering,
harboring or keeping such dangerous or vicious animal remove such animal from
the City or destroy it. The decision and order shall immediately be served upon
the person against whom rendered in the same manner as the notice of removal.
If the original order of the Mayor or peace officer is not appealed and is not
complied with within three days or the order of the Council after appeal is not
complied with within three days of its issuance, the Mayor or peace officer is
authorized to seize, impound or destroy such dangerous or vicious animal.
Failure to comply with an order of the Mayor or peace officer issued pursuant
to this chapter and not appealed (or of the Council after appeal) constitutes a
simple misdemeanor.
57.05 KEEPING OF LICENSED PIT BULL DOGS.
   Provisions of this chapter are not applicable to any owners, keepers, or
harborers of licensed pit bull dogs within the City. The term “licensed” when
used in the chapter means licensed pursuant to the terms of
Chapter 56 of this Code of Ordinances.
   1.   Standards for Keeping Pit Bull Dogs. The keeping of licensed pit bull
dogs is subject to the following standards:
      A.   Sale or Transfer of Ownership Prohibited. No person shall sell,
barter, or in any other way dispose of a pit bull dog licensed within the City
to a person within the City unless the recipient person resides permanently in
the same household and on the same premises as the licensed owner of such dog;
provided, the owner of a licensed pit bull dog may sell or otherwise dispose of
a licensed dog or the offspring of such dog to persons who do not reside within
the City.
      B.   Animals Born to Licensed Dogs. All offspring born to licensed pit
bull dogs within the City shall be removed from the City within six weeks of
birth of such animal.
      C.   Reporting Requirements. All owners, keepers, or harborers of
licensed pit bull dogs shall, within 10 days of the following occurrences,
report the following information in writing to the City Clerk and Animal
Control Officer:
         (1)   The removal from the City or death of a licensed pit bull dog.
         (2)   The birth of offspring of a licensed pit bull dog.
         (3)   The new address of the owner of a licensed pit bull dog should
the owner move within the City limits.
      D.   Leash and Muzzle. No person shall permit a licensed pit bull dog to
go outside its kennel or pen unless such dog is securely leashed with a leash
no longer than four feet in length and otherwise comply with Section 55.14. No
person shall permit a licensed pit bull dog to be kept on a chain, rope, or
other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person is in physical
control of the chain, rope or leash.
      E.   Confinement. All licensed pit bull dogs shall be securely confined
indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, kennel, or structure and the
owner must fully and completely comply with Section
55.14.
      F.   Confinement Indoors. No licensed pit bull dog shall be kept on a
porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure which would allow such dog
to exit such a building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal shall
be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen
windows or screen doors are the only obstacles preventing the dog from exiting
the structure.
   2.   Failure to Comply. It is unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer of
a pit bull dog licensed with the City to fail to comply with the requirements
and conditions set forth in this section. Each day of violation shall be a
separate offense. Any pit bull dog found to be the subject of a violation of
this chapter shall be subject to immediate confiscation by the Animal Control
Officer. Such animal shall be humanely destroyed within seven days, unless a
Judge of Court of competent jurisdiction orders its release or the owner
provides adequate proof to the Animal Control Officer that such licensed dog
shall no longer reside in the City.
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
 
60.01 Title                          60.05 Reports of Traffic Accidents
60.02 Definitions                    60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic        60.08 Parades Regulated
 
60.01 TITLE.
   Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as
the “Aurelia Traffic Code” (and are referred to herein as the “Traffic Code.”)
60.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law,
such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
   1.   “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including the
following designated streets:
      A.   Pearl Street from First Street (Highway 7) to Third Street.
      B.   Maple Street from First Street (Highway 7) to Third Street.
      C.   Third Street from Maple Street to Myrtle Street.
      D.   South Main Street from Oak Street to First Street (Highway 7).
      E.   Main Street from First Street (Highway 7) to Third Street.
      F.   Myrtle Street from First Street (Highway 7) to Third Street.
      G.   Hill Street from Myrtle Street to the alley between Myrtle Street
and Carlson’s First Addition.
      H.   First Street (Highway 7) from Maple Street to the alley between
Myrtle Street and Carlson’s First Addition.
   2.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
   3.   “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   4.   “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where 40
percent or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of 300 feet or
more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
   5.   “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway for a distance of 200 feet in either direction from a schoolhouse.
   6.   “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.
   7.   “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
   8.   “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control sign or signal.
   9.   “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in
the business, school, or residence districts.
   10.   “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the
purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
   11.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or
alley.
60.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law relating to motor vehicles and
law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
60.04 POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   A peace officer or, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the
Fire Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the
event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])
60.05 REPORTS OF TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the
City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of
Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06 PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.
   A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the
driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic
violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with
reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading or other manifest
of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration
certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such
vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require
exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07 OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
60.08 PARADES REGULATED.
   No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as provided
herein:
   1.   Definition. “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or
vehicles organized for marching or moving on the streets in an organized
fashion or manner or any march or procession of persons or vehicles represented
or advertised to the public as a parade.
   2.   Permit Required. No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining a
written permit from the Mayor or Police Chief. Such permit shall state the time
and date for the parade to be held and the streets or general route therefor.
Such written permit granted to the person organizing or sponsoring the parade
shall be permission for all participants therein to parade when such
participants have been invited by the permittee to participate therein. No fee
shall be required for such permit. † 7
   3.   Parade Not a Street Obstruction. Any parade for which a permit has been
issued as herein required, and the persons lawfully participating therein,
shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets notwithstanding the
provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.
   4.   Control by Police and Firefighters. Persons participating in any parade
shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in the
performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members of the
Fire Department.
   5.   Throwing Items From Vehicles. No person shall throw or permit to be
thrown any candy, balloons, promotional items, or other products from a moving
vehicle proceeding along a parade route as a part of a parade, whether or not
the parade is authorized by permit, or when proceeding to or from such parade
route. As used herein, “moving vehicles” means any vehicle, wagon or other
piece of equipment which moves along the parade route as a part of the parade,
whether or not the vehicle, wagon or equipment is moving at the time the candy,
balloon, promotional material or other product is thrown. Nothing contained
herein shall be construed to make illegal the dispensing of such items by
persons walking next to the curb along the parade route.
 
Notes
7 † Editor’s Note: See Appendix for permit form.
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
 
61.01 Installation  61.04 Standards
61.02 Crosswalks    61.05 Compliance
61.03 Traffic Lanes
 
61.01 INSTALLATION.
   The Police Chief shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control
devices when and as required under this Traffic Code or under State law or
emergency or temporary traffic control devices for the duration of an emergency
or temporary condition as traffic conditions may require to regulate, guide or
warn traffic. The Police Chief shall keep a record of all such traffic control
devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.02 CROSSWALKS.
   The Police Chief is hereby authorized, subject to approval of the Council by
resolution, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate traffic control
devices at intersections where, due to traffic conditions, there is particular
danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and at such other places
as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.03 TRAFFIC LANES.
   The Police Chief is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street
pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent with this
Traffic Code. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.04 STANDARDS.
   Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.05 COMPLIANCE.
   No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to
the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under
Section 321.231 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
 
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.05 Quiet Zones
62.02 Play Streets Designated  62.06 Obstructing View at Intersections
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks    62.07 Prohibition of Jake-Braking
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle
 
62.01 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.
   Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of
a peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire, or who
fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory
laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in
violation of this section. These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by
reference and are as follows:
   1.   Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
   2.   Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited; exception.
   3.   Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
   4.   Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
   5.   Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.
   6.   Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.
   7.   Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.
   8.   Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
   9.   Section 321.91 – Penalty for abandonment.
   10.   Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
   11.   Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
   12.   Section 321.104 – Penal offenses against title law.
   13.   Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates permitted.
   14.   Section 321.174 – Operators licensed.
   15.   Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicles with expired license.
   16.   Section 321.180 – Instruction permits.
   17.   Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged
fourteen through seventeen.
   18.   Section 321.193 – Restricted licenses.
   19.   Section 321.194 – Special minor’s licenses.
   20.   Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service order.
   21.   Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s
identification card.
   22.   Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
   23.   Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain cigarettes or tobacco
products.
   24.   Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license or when
disqualified.
   25.   Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
   26.   Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
   27.   Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
   28.   Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
   29.   Section 321.223 – License inspected.
   30.   Section 321.224 – Record kept.
   31.   Section 321.232 – Speed detection jamming devices; penalty.
   32.   Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles.
   33.   Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
   34.   Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
   35.   Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
   36.   Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
   37.   Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs or signals;
unlawful possession.
   38.   Section 321.262 – Leaving scene of traffic accident prohibited;
vehicle damage only; removal of vehicles.
   39.   Section 321.263 – Information and aid.
   40.   Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
   41.   Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
   42.   Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.
   43.   Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
   44.   Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device while
driving; text-messaging.
   45.   Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.
   46.   Section 321.277A – Careless driving.
   47.   Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
   48.   Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.
   49.   Section 321.284 – Open container; drivers.
   50.   Section 321.284A – Open container; passengers.
   51.   Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
   52.   Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
   53.   Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
   54.   Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
   55.   Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
   56.   Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.
   57.   Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
   58.   Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
   59.   Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
   60.   Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
   61.   Section 321.308 – Motor trucks and towed vehicles; distance
requirements.
   62.   Section 321.309 – Towing; convoys; drawbars.
   63.   Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
   64.   Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
   65.   Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
   66.   Section 321.314 – When signal required.
   67.   Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
   68.   Section 321.316 – Stopping.
   69.   Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
   70.   Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.
   71.   Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
   72.   Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
   73.   Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
   74.   Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
   75.   Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
   76.   Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
   77.   Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
   78.   Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
   79.   Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on
highways.
   80.   Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
   81.   Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
   82.   Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers approaching blind persons.
   83.   Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
   84.   Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad
train or railroad track equipment.
   85.   Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
   86.   Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
   87.   Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
   88.   Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
   89.   Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
   90.   Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
   91.   Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
   92.   Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
   93.   Section 321.364 – Vehicles shipping food; preventing contamination by
hazardous material.
   94.   Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
   95.   Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
   96.   Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
   97.   Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
   98.   Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
   99.   Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
   100.   Section 321.372 – School buses.
   101.   Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
   102.   Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
   103.   Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
   104.   Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
   105.   Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
   106.   Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
   107.   Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
   108.   Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
   109.   Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
   110.   Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
   111.   Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
   112.   Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
   113.   Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
   114.   Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
   115.   Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
   116.   Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
   117.   Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
   118.   Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
   119.   Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
   120.   Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
   121.   Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
   122.   Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
   123.   Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
   124.   Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
   125.   Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
   126.   Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
   127.   Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
   128.   Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
   129.   Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
   130.   Section 321.422 – Red light in front.
   131.   Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
   132.   Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.
   133.   Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
   134.   Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
   135.   Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, and bells prohibited.
   136.   Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
   137.   Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
   138.   Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
   139.   Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
   140.   Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
   141.   Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
   142.   Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
   143.   Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
   144.   Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
   145.   Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
   146.   Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
   147.   Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety regulations.
   148.   Section 321.449A – Rail crew transport drivers.
   149.   Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation.
   150.   Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
   151.   Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
   152.   Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles; permits.
   153.   Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
   154.   Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
   155.   Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
   156.   Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
   157.   Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
   158.   Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight.
   159.   Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
   160.   Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
62.02 PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED.
   The Mayor shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play
street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway
indicating and helping to protect the same. Whenever authorized signs are
erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall
drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of
vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and
then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such
street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area
except at a driveway.
62.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLE.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all
passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
in-line skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05 QUIET ZONES.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.
   It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard, or other object to
obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear
view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such
obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be
abated in the manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.07 PROHIBITION OF JAKE-BRAKING.
   It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or for any
person to cause to be used or operated within the City any mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle which
results in the excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle,
or otherwise known as Jake-braking.
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
 
63.01 General                             63.04 Special Speed Zones
63.02 State Code Speed Limits             63.05 Minimum Speed
63.03 Parks, Cemeteries, and Parking Lots
 
63.01 GENERAL.
   Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a
careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and
proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and
of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on
any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a
stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02 STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.
   The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the Code of
Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically designated
otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.
   1.   Business District – 20 miles per hour.
   2.   Residence or School District – 25 miles per hour.
   3.   Suburban District – 45 miles per hour.
63.03 PARKS, CEMETERIES, AND PARKING LOTS.
   A speed in excess of 15 miles per hour in any public park, cemetery, or
parking lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is
unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
63.04 SPECIAL SPEED ZONES.
   In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of Transportation, or
whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section 63.02 is greater
or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any
intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street system, the
Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower speed limit
as it deems reasonable and safe at such location. The following special speed
zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
   1.   Special 20 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 20 miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   Myrtle Street from First Street (Highway 7) to Second Street
(northbound and southbound).
      B.   Main Street from First Street (Highway 7) to Third Street
(northbound and southbound).
      C.   Pearl Street from First Street (Highway 7) to Fourth Street
(northbound and southbound).
      D.   Maple Street from First Street (Highway 7) to Third Street
(northbound and southbound).
      E.   Fourth Street from First Street (Highway 7) to Pearl Street
(eastbound and westbound).
      F.   Third Street from Maple Street to Myrtle Street (eastbound and
westbound).
   2.   Special 25 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 25 miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   Locust Street from West Sixth Street to Fourth Street (northbound
and southbound).
      B.   Fourth Street from Locust Street to Spruce Street (southeast-bound
and northwest-bound).
      C.   South Main Street from Oak Street to First Street (Highway 7)
(northbound and southbound).
      D.   Main Street from Third Street to the north edge of Benson’s First
Addition (northbound and southbound).
      E.   Third Street from Myrtle Street to Ash Street (eastbound and
westbound).
      F.   Fifth Street from Valor Road (M-21) to Spruce Street (eastbound and
westbound).
      G.   Fourth Street from Valor Road (M-21) to Pearl Street (eastbound and
westbound).
   3.   Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 35 miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   Valor Road on both sides from Ninth Street to Coombs Drive.
      B.   South Main Street, northbound and southbound, from Coombs Drive to
Oak Street.
      C.   Iowa Highway 7 from a point 175 feet + 00 west of Third Street to a
point 1580 feet + 00 east of Myrtle Street.
      D.   Ninth Street in both directions from Valor Road to Iowa Highway 7.
   4.   Special 45 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 45 miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   Iowa Highway 7, from a point 100 feet + 00 west of Locust Street to
a point 275 feet +00 west of Third Street.
      B.   Iowa Highway 7, from a point 1580 feet + 00 east of Myrtle Street to
designated station 530 feet + 00.
   5.   Special 55 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 55 miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   All remaining sections of Iowa Highway 7 within the corporate limits
of the City, not designated as slower speed zones under this section.
63.05 MINIMUM SPEED.
   A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede
or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
 
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.03 Turn Prohibited at Post Office
64.02 U-Turns
 
64.01 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
   1.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   2.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right
half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection
to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
   3.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street
shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way
street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street
being entered upon leaving the intersection.
The Police Chief may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or
adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions
require, that a different course from that specified above be traveled by
vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or signs are so
placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other
than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs.
64.02 U-TURNS.
   It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection;
however, U-turns are prohibited at intersections where there are automatic
traffic signals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
64.03 TURN PROHIBITED AT POST OFFICE.
   No person traveling north on Myrtle Street shall make a left hand turn at
the U. S. Post Office.
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
 
65.01 Stop Required               65.05 School Stops
65.02 Three-Way Stop Intersection 65.06 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk
65.03 Four-Way Stop Intersections 65.07 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
65.04 Yield Required              65.08 Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks
65.01 STOP REQUIRED.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
   1.   Beech Street. Vehicles traveling north on Beech Street shall stop at
Fourth Street.
   2.   Willow Street. Vehicles traveling on Willow Street shall stop at Third
Street.
   3.   Fourth Street. Vehicles traveling east on Fourth Street shall stop at
Valor Road.
   4.   Beech Street. Vehicles traveling on Beech Street shall stop at Third
Street.
   5.   Fifth Street. Vehicles traveling on Fifth Street shall stop at Willow
Street.
   6.   Walnut Street. Vehicles traveling on Walnut Street shall stop at Fourth
Street.
   7.   Fifth Street. Vehicles traveling east on Fifth Street shall stop at
Valor Road.
   8.   Myrtle Street. Vehicles traveling south on Myrtle Street shall stop at
First Street (Highway 7).
   9.   Myrtle Street. Vehicles traveling on Myrtle Street shall stop at Third
Street.
   10.   Myrtle Street. Vehicles traveling on Myrtle Street shall stop at
Fourth Street.
   11.   Main Street. Vehicles traveling south on Main Street shall stop at
First Street (Highway 7).
   12.   Pearl Street. Vehicles traveling on Pearl Street shall stop at Second
Street.
   13.   Pearl Street. Vehicles traveling on Pearl Street shall stop at Fourth
Street.
   14.   Pearl Street. Vehicles traveling on Pearl Street shall stop at Third
Street.
   15.   Hill Street. Vehicles traveling west on Hill Street shall stop at
Myrtle Street.
   16.   Second Street. Vehicles traveling on Second Street shall stop at Main
Street.
   17.   Third Street. Vehicles traveling on Third Street shall stop at Main
Street.
   18.   Fifth Street. Vehicles traveling on Fifth Street shall stop at Myrtle
Street.
   19.   Fourth Street. Vehicles traveling on Fourth Street shall stop at Main
Street.
   20.   Fifth Street. Vehicles traveling on Fifth Street shall stop at Walnut
Street.
   21.   Fifth Street. Vehicles traveling on Fifth Street shall stop at Main
Street.
   22.   Sixth Street. Vehicles traveling on Sixth Street shall stop at Main
Street.
   23.   South Main Street. Vehicles traveling north on South Main Street shall
stop at First Street (Highway 7).
   24.   Pearl Street. Vehicles traveling south on Pearl Street shall stop at
First Street (Highway 7).
   25.   Fifth Street. Vehicles traveling on Fifth Street shall stop at Maple
Street.
   26.   Maple Street. Vehicles traveling south on Maple Street shall stop at
Fourth Street.
   27.   Maple Street. Vehicles traveling south on Maple Street shall stop at
First Street (Highway 7).
   28.   West Third Street. Vehicles traveling east on West Third Street shall
stop at First Street (Highway 7).
   29.   Spruce Street. Vehicles traveling south on Spruce Street shall stop at
Fourth Street.
   30.   Ninth Street. Vehicles traveling east on Ninth Street shall stop at
Valor Road.
   31.   Miller Drive. Vehicles traveling south on Miller Drive shall stop at
Pitcher Drive.
   32.   Valor Road. Vehicles traveling south on Valor Road shall stop at First
Street (Highway 7).
   33.   Second Street. Vehicles traveling west on Second Street shall stop at
First Street (Highway 7).
   34.   Oak Street. Vehicles traveling east on Oak Street shall stop at South
Main Street.
   35.   Locust Street. Vehicles traveling south on Locust Street shall stop at
Highway 7 (First Street).
   36.   Second Street. Vehicles traveling on Second Street shall stop at
Walnut Street.
   37.   Second Street. Vehicles traveling on Second Street shall stop at Beech
Street.
   38.   Main Street. Vehicles traveling north on Main Street shall stop at
Ninth Street.
   39.   Third Street. Vehicles traveling west on Third Street shall stop at
Hickory Street.
   40.   C43. Vehicles traveling north on C43 shall stop at Highway 7.
   41.   C43. Vehicles traveling south on C43 shall stop at Coombs Drive.
   42.   Coombs Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Coombs Drive shall stop at
South Main Street.
   43.   Pitcher Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Pitcher Drive shall stop at
Valor Road.
   44.   Beech Street. Vehicles traveling north on Beech Street shall stop at
Hill Street.
   45.   Walnut Street. Vehicles traveling on Walnut Street shall stop at Hill
Street.
65.02 THREE-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following
designated three-way stop intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
   1.   Fourth Street and Ash Street. Vehicles approaching the intersection of
Fourth Street and Ash Street from the west, south and east shall stop before
entering such intersection.
   2.   Third Street and Ash Street. Vehicles approaching the intersection of
Third Street and Ash Street from the west, south and north shall stop before
entering such intersection.
   3.   Second Street and Myrtle Street. Vehicles approaching the intersection
of Second Street and Myrtle Street from the south, east and north shall stop
before entering such intersection.
65.03 FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following
designated four-way stop intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
   1.   Intersection of Fourth Street and Willow Street.
   2.   Intersection of Third Street and Walnut Street.
   3.   Intersection of Fourth Street and Maple Street.
   4.   Intersection of Sixth Street and Main Street.
65.04 YIELD REQUIRED.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
   1.   Pearl Street. Vehicles traveling on Pearl Street shall yield at Fifth
Street.
   2.   Pearl Street. Vehicles traveling north on Pearl Street shall yield at
Sixth Street.
   3.   Locust Street. Vehicles traveling on Locust Street shall yield at
Fourth Street.
65.05 SCHOOL STOPS.
   At the following school crossing zones every driver of a vehicle approaching
said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point four feet from the
approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and
thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have
passed through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
   1.   Intersection of Main Street and Highway 7.
65.06 STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk
area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do
so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.07 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.
   Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
65.08 YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS.
   Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver
of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need
be, to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk
or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
 
66.01 Temporary Embargo                  66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
 
66.01 TEMPORARY EMBARGO.
   If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of
deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets
will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an
amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so
designated by such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 472)
66.02 PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.
   The Police Chief may, upon application and good cause being shown, issue a
special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a
vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the
maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named
in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the
City is responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E)
66.03 LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS.
   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of four tons at any time upon any of the
following streets or parts of streets:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 475)
   1.   Ash Street from Third Street to Seventh Street.
   2.   Beech Street from Third Street to Seventh Street.
   3.   Willow Street from Third Street to Seventh Street.
   4.   Walnut Street from Third Street to Seventh Street.
   5.   Myrtle Street from Third Street to Seventh Street.
   6.   Main Street from Third Street to Seventh Street.
   7.   Pearl Street from Third Street to Seventh Street.
   8.   Maple Street from Third Street to Seventh Street.
   9.   Spruce Street from Third Street to Seventh Street.
   10.   Locust Street from Third Street to Seventh Street.
   11.   Elm Street from Third Street to Seventh Street.
   12.   Cherry Street from Third Street to Seventh Street.
   13.   Hill Street from Myrtle Street to Beech Street.
   14.   Second Street from Main Street to Ash Street.
The load limit does not apply to any emergency vehicles, sanitation trucks
operating over regular routes in the City, school or church buses or vehicles
being used for the construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of
streets, alleys or other public ways, or of water, sewer, electrical, gas,
telephone, drain and storm sewer pipes, mains, conduits and/or lines, nor does
it apply to any vehicle so as to deny any owner access to his or her property
abutting upon any street, or to any vehicles making deliveries, collections or
service calls to properties abutting upon the streets.
66.04 LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES.
   Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity less than
the maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street serving the
bridge, the Police Chief may cause to be posted and maintained signs on said
bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers
of such maximum load limits. No person shall drive upon said bridge any vehicle
weighing, loaded or unloaded, in excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
 
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking       67.04 Use of Sidewalks
 
67.01 WALKING IN STREET.
   Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a street, walk on
the left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02 HITCHHIKING.
   No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03 PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.
   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
67.04 USE OF SIDEWALKS.
   Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along
and upon an adjacent street.
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
 
68.01 One-way Traffic Required.
 
68.01 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.
   Upon the following streets and alleys, vehicular traffic, other than
permitted cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated direction when
appropriate signs are in place.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[4])
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
 
69.01 Park Adjacent to Curb        69.07 Persons with Disabilities Parking
69.02 Parking on One-Way Streets   69.08 No Parking Zones
69.03 Angle Parking                69.09 All Night Parking Prohibited in
                                   Business District
69.04 Manner of Angle Parking      69.10 All Night Parking Prohibited in
                                   Residential Streets
69.05 Parking for Certain Purposes 69.11 Truck Parking Limited
Illegal
69.06 Parking Prohibited
 
69.01 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement
and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or
edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking
and vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.02 PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way
street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction
of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within
18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in
the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03 ANGLE PARKING.
   Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
   1.   Fifth Street, on the north side, from one-half block east of Spruce
Street to the west end of Fifth Street.
   2.   Second Street, on the north side, from alley between Main Street and
Myrtle Street to Myrtle Street.
   3.   Second Street, on the south side, from alley between Pearl Street and
Main Street to Main Street.
   4.   Second Street, on the south side, from Main Street to Myrtle Street.
   5.   Third Street, on the south side from alley between Pearl Street and
Main Street to Main Street.
   6.   Main Street, from Third Street to First Street.
   7.   Main Street on the west side from middle of block to Third Street.
   8.   Myrtle Street, on the west side, from middle of block to Second Street.
   9.   Walnut Street on the east side middle of block to Third Street.
69.04 MANNER OF ANGLE PARKING.
   Upon those streets or portions of streets that have been signed or marked
for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an
angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as
indicated by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle or the load
thereon, when said vehicle is parked within a diagonal parking district, shall
extend into the roadway more than a distance of 16 feet when measured at right
angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.05 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than 72 hours,
unless otherwise limited under the provisions of this chapter, or for any of
the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   1.   Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
   2.   Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such
vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
   3.   Advertising. Displaying advertising.
   4.   Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a
duly established market place or when so authorized or licensed under this Code
of Ordinances.
69.06 PARKING PROHIBITED.
   No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
   1.   Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[5])
   2.   Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   3.   Mailboxes. Within 20 feet on either side of a mailbox that is so placed
and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   4.   Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[1])
   5.   Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[2])
   6.   Intersection. Within an intersection or within 10 feet of an
intersection of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])
   7.   Fire Hydrant. Within five feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[4])
   8.   Stop Sign or Signal. Within 10 feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[6])
   9.   Railroad Crossing. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red
light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[8])
   10.   Fire Station. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within 75 feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[9])
   11.   Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[10])
   12.   Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[11])
   13.   Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when
standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or
when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be
painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])
   14.   Churches, Nursing Homes and Other Buildings. A space of 50 feet is
hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium,
hotel having more than 25 sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab
stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people
are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor
vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or
discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is
necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
   15.   Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person
shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. The provisions of this
subsection do not apply to a vehicle parked in any alley that is 18 feet wide
or less, provided that said vehicle is parked to deliver goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   16.   Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or
private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
   17.   Area Between Lot Line and Curb Line. That area of the public way not
covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line, where
curbing has been installed.
   18.   In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that any
part of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the
markings designating such space.
69.07 PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.
   The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of
persons with disabilities parking spaces:
   1.   Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be
established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa
and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish
any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining
Council approval.
   2.   Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking
space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of
a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code
of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
      A.   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit.
      B.   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or
being transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa.
      C.   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section
321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.
   3.   Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a
wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
      A.   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must
comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa when
utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
      B.   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone that is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa.
69.08 NO PARKING ZONES.
   No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following
specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace
officer or traffic control signal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   1.   Fourth Street, on the south side, from the alley between Ash Street and
Beech Street to Valor Road.
   2.   Fourth Street, on the north side of intersection of Ash Street and
Fourth Street.
   3.   Ash Street, on the west side, from Fourth Street to Second Street
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on school days.
   4.   Iowa Highway 7 from Sta. 2+19.9 to Sta. 77+07.0.
   5.   Myrtle Street, on the west side from Iowa Highway 7 north for a
distance of 181 feet (across from fire station).
   6.   Third Street, on the north side, from Ash Street west for a distance of
36 feet.
69.09 ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED IN BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   No person, except physicians or other persons on emergency calls, shall park
a vehicle on any streets or City parking lot in the Business District between
the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day between November 15 and April 1
if there is any accumulation of snow on the ground or blowing snow that
requires the City to use snow removal equipment. Attended vehicles in the
street or parking lots must be moved immediately from the roadway or parking
lot upon arrival of snow removal equipment.
(Ord. 699 - Apr. 22 Supp.)
69.10 ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED IN RESIDENTIAL STREETS.
   No person, except physicians or other persons on emergency calls, shall park
a vehicle on any streets or City parking lot in residential areas between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day between November 15 and April 1 if
there is any accumulation of snow on the ground or blowing snow that requires
the City to use snow removal equipment. Attended vehicles in the street or
parking lots must be moved immediately from the roadway or parking lot upon
arrival of snow removal equipment.
(Ord. 699 - Apr. 22 Supp.)
69.11 TRUCK PARKING LIMITED.
   No person shall park a motor truck, semi-trailer, or other motor vehicle
with trailer attached in violation of the following regulations. The provisions
of this section shall apply to any vehicle requiring more than a four-ton
license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   1.   Business District. Excepting only when such vehicles are actually
engaged in the delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo, no person shall
park or leave unattended such vehicle, on any of the streets in the Business
District. When actually receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo such
vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a manner which will not interfere with
other traffic.
   2.   Other Streets. No such vehicle shall be parked or left unattended on
any other streets within the City.
   3.   Semi-Trailer Parking Prohibited. No one shall leave a semi-trailer
parked unhitched from the semi-tractor on any public roadway, parking area or
street in the City. This means that no trailer may be “dollied down” and left
unattended. In addition to the penalty for a violation of this subsection, the
owner or operator of any such trailer shall be responsible for any damages to
the streets or curbs.
   4.   Noise. No such vehicle shall be left standing or parked upon any
street, alley, public or private parking lot, or drive of any service station
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. with the engine, auxiliary engine,
air compressor, refrigerating equipment or other device in operation giving off
audible sounds excepting only the drive of a service station when actually
being serviced, and then in no event for more than 30 minutes.
   5.   Livestock. No such vehicle containing livestock shall be parked on any
street, alley or highway for a period of time of more than 30 minutes.
   6.   Flammable, Explosive, Toxic or Offensively Odorous Cargo. No vehicle
containing a cargo consisting of flammable, explosive, toxic or offensively
odorous material, such as (but not limited to) gasoline, naphtha, liquefied
gases, ammonia, anhydrous or chlorine shall be allowed to stand or park on any
residential or commercial street, alley, public or private parking lot or
driveway or within 100 feet of any public or private structure for more than 60
minutes, except in industrially or agriculturally zoned areas.
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
 
70.01 Arrest or Citation            70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle
                                    Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations          70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal
                                    Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.06 Impounding Vehicles
 
70.01 ARREST OR CITATION.
   Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
   1.   Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person
before a local magistrate; or
   2.   Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate
a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner
of Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-
approved computerized device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 & 321.485)
70.02 SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.
   For violations of the Traffic Code that are designated by Section 805.8A of
the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of
those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 & 805.8A)
70.03 PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE.
   Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of
Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the
office of the City Clerk. The fine for each violation charged under a simple
notice of a fine shall be in the amount of $5.00 for all violations except
improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit. If such fine is not
paid within 30 days, it shall be increased by $5.00. The fine for improper use
of a persons with disabilities parking permit is $100.00.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1b] & 321L.4[2])
70.04 PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED.
   When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code,
and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein
provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
70.05 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
   In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation
occurred shall be raised by proof that:
   1.   Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information
was parked in violation of the Traffic Code; and
   2.   Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question.
70.06 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
   A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a
vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
   1.   Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   2.   Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so
illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   3.   Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on
parking during snow removal operations.
   4.   Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a
continuous period in violation of any limited parking time. If the owner can be
located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   5.   Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or
driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and
storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES, OFF ROAD VEHICLES OR
UTVs, AND SNOWMOBILES
 
75.01 Definitions               75.05 Additional Provisions for Operation
                                of ATVs and UTVs
75.02 General Regulations       75.06 Manner of Operation
75.03 Places of Operation       75.07 Negligence
75.04 Additional Provisions for 75.08 Accident Reports
Operation of Snowmobiles
75.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized vehicle, with not less
than three and not more than six non-highway tires, that is limited in engine
displacement to less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to
less than 1,200 pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled
by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
   2.   “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat
or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering
control and that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain.
“Off-road motorcycle” includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a
certificate of title and registered for highway use under Chapter 321 of the
Code of Iowa, but which contains design features that enable operation over
natural terrain. An operator of an off-road motorcycle is also subject to the
provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
   3.   “Off-road utility vehicle” means a motorized vehicle, with not less
than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized tracks, that
has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled by
the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for control. “Off-road
utility vehicle” includes the following vehicles:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
      A.   “Off-road utility vehicle – type 1” includes vehicles with a total
dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
      B.   “Off-road utility vehicle – type 2” includes vehicles, other than
type 1 vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less and a width of
65 inches or less.
      C.   “Off-road utility vehicle – type 3” includes vehicles with a total
dry weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches, or
both.
An operator of an off-road utility vehicle is also subject to the provisions of
this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
   4.   “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs less than 1,000
pounds, that uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a
width of 48 inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis, or tread, and
is designed for travel on snow or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-
terrain vehicle that has been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type
tracks, or treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
75.02 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle or off-road utility
vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a
snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of
the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource
Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their registration,
equipment and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G & Ch. 321I)
75.03 PLACES OF OPERATION.
   ATVs, UTVs and snowmobiles may be operated upon the streets of the City of
Aurelia, Iowa, except as prohibited in subsection 1 of this section, by persons
possessing a valid Iowa Driver’s License.
   1.   Prohibited Streets. ATVs, UTVs and snowmobiles shall not be operated or
parked upon any City street which is a primary road extension through the City,
to wit: Iowa Highway No. 7. However ATVs, UTVs and snowmobiles may cross such
primary road extension.
   2.   Parks and Other Public Lands. ATVs, UTVs and snowmobiles shall not be
operated off-road in City parks, playgrounds, or upon any publicly owned
property.
   3.   Private Property. ATVs, UTVs and snowmobiles may only be operated upon
private property with express consent of the owner thereof or while engaged in
snow removal, landscaping, or other maintenance activities.
   4.   Sidewalk or Parking. No ATV, UTV or snowmobile shall be operated upon
sidewalks unless engaged in snow removal or maintenance activities, nor shall
they be operated upon that portion of the street located between the curb line
and sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for
purposes of snow removal, maintenance, or landscaping activities.
75.04 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.
   1.   Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only
under the following circumstances:
      A.   Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an
emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the
roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
      B.   Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a
prohibited street provided all of the following occur:
         (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to
the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a
quick and safe crossing;
         (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
street;
         (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic that
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
         (4)   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
   2.   Railroad Right-of-Way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a
railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any
other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])
   3.   Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails
except where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f])
75.05 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR OPERATION OF ATVs AND UTVs.
   1.   Streets. ATVs and off-road utility vehicles may be operated on streets
only in accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa or on such streets
as may be designated by resolution of the Council for the operation of
registered ATVs or registered off-road utility vehicles. In designating such
streets, the Council may authorize ATVs and off-road utility vehicles to stop
at service stations or convenience stores along a designated street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 & 3])
   2.   Trails. ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except where
designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])
   3.   Railroad Right-of-Way. ATVs shall not be operated on an operating
railroad right-of-way. An ATV may be driven directly across a railroad right-
of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions
of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing
after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])
   4.   Direct Crossing. An all-terrain vehicle or off-road utility vehicle may
make a direct crossing of a highway provided all of the following occur:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[5])
      A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees to
the direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a
quick and safe crossing.
      B.   The all-terrain vehicle or off-road utility vehicle is brought to a
complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main traveled way of the highway.
      C.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
      D.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or highway.
      E.   The crossing is made from a street, roadway, or highway designated
as an all-terrain vehicle trail by a state agency, county, or city to a street,
roadway, or highway designated as an all-terrain vehicle trail by a state
agency, county, or city.
75.06 MANNER OF OPERATION.
   No person shall operate an ATV, UTV or snowmobile in the City of Aurelia
except as hereinafter provided:
   1.   License. No person shall operate an ATV, UTV or snowmobile on the
public streets of the City of Aurelia, Iowa, without a valid motor vehicle
operator’s license.
   2.   Equipment. All ATVs, UTVs and snowmobiles shall be equipped with the
original manufacturer’s muffler and exhaust system or their equivalent, not to
exceed the manufacturer’s original emission specification; each vehicle
additionally must be equipped with lights and safety equipment required of
motor vehicles by law or ordinance. If the UTV is equipped with seatbelts by
design, they must be worn by all occupants when the vehicle is in motion.
   3.   Traffic Code. All ATVs, UTVs and snowmobile operators must observe all
State and local traffic control regulations and devices and shall not operate
at a speed in excess of that posted nor at any time operate at a rate of speed
greater than is reasonable and proper under the existing conditions.
   4.   Careless Operation. No person shall operate an ATV, UTV or snowmobile
in a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger the person or
property of another or to cause injury or damage thereto.
   5.   Intoxicated. No person shall operate an ATV, UTV or snowmobile in the
City limits while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics, or
habit forming drugs.
   6.   Lights. No person shall operate an ATV, UTV or snowmobile without a
lighted headlamp and taillight when required for safety.
   7.   Parking. The operators must obey all parking regulations in the City
when parked on a public street or thoroughfare.
   8.   Hours of Operation. ATVs, UTVs and snowmobiles shall not be operated
anywhere within the City limits on Sunday night through Thursday night between
the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 5:30 a.m. nor during the overnight hours of 1:00
a.m. through 5:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday mornings. The only permitted
operation during these hours shall be for routine snow removal.
   9.   Financial Responsibility. The owner or driver of an ATV, UTV or
snowmobile within the City limits must maintain and provide current proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with Section 321.20B of the Code of
Iowa.
   10.   Registration. The owner or driver of an ATV, UTV or snowmobile within
the City limits must maintain a current registration as provided by Iowa law.
   11.   Fines. Any person operating an ATV, UTV or snowmobile in violation of
this chapter may be charged with violation of State Motor Vehicle Laws or
violation of this chapter. In the event that said violator is charged under
this chapter, the first offense shall be a fine of not less than $100.00; the
second offense a fine of not less than $200.00; and the third offense a fine of
not less than $500.00. For each additional offense after a third violation, the
fine shall be not less than $500.00.
   12.   In addition to this chapter, the operator of an ATV, UTV and
snowmobile shall comply with all requirements of Section 321.234A of the Code
of Iowa.
75.07 NEGLIGENCE.
   The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for any injury or
damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or snowmobile. The
owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or damage
only if the owner was the operator of the ATV or snowmobile at the time the
injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the owner’s consent to operate
the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 & 321I.19)
75.08 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury
or death to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500.00 or more, either
the operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law
enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 & 321I.11)
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE AND MOPED REGULATIONS
 
76.01 Scope of Regulations            76.08 Riding on Sidewalks
76.02 Traffic Code Applies            76.09 Towing
76.03 Double Riding Restricted        76.10 Improper Riding
76.04 Two Abreast Limit               76.11 Parking
76.05 Speed                           76.12 Equipment Requirements
76.06 Emerging from Alley or Driveway 76.13 Special Penalty
76.07 Carrying Articles
 
76.01 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle or moped is operated upon
any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.02 TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES.
   Every person riding a bicycle or moped upon a roadway shall be granted all
of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of a vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road
applicable to vehicles or by the Traffic Code of the City applicable to the
driver of a vehicle, except as to those provisions that by their nature can
have no application. Whenever such person dismounts from a bicycle or moped,
the person shall be subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)
76.03 DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED.
   A person propelling a bicycle or moped shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle or moped shall be used
to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234[3 and 4])
76.04 TWO ABREAST LIMIT.
   Persons riding bicycles or mopeds upon a roadway shall not ride more than
two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles and mopeds. All bicycles and mopeds ridden on the roadway shall
be kept to the right and shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-
hand edge of the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.05 SPEED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle or moped at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.06 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   The operator of a bicycle or moped emerging from an alley, driveway or
building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending
across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on
said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.07 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle or moped shall carry any package, bundle or
article that prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.08 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   The following provisions apply to riding bicycles or mopeds on sidewalks:
   1.   Business District. No person shall ride a bicycle or moped upon a
sidewalk within the Business District, as defined in Section 60.02(1) of this
Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
   2.   Other Locations. When signs are erected on any sidewalk or roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles or mopeds thereon by any person, no person
shall disobey the signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
   3.   Yield Right-of-Way. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle or moped
upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and
shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.09 TOWING.
   It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle or moped to be towed or to
tow any other vehicle upon the streets of the City unless the vehicle is
manufactured for such use.
76.10 IMPROPER RIDING.
   No person shall ride a bicycle or moped in an irregular or reckless manner
such as zigzagging, stunting, speeding, or otherwise so as to disregard the
safety of the operator or others.
76.11 PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle or moped upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle
or moped or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford
the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.12 EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Every person riding a bicycle or moped shall be responsible for providing
and using equipment as provided herein:
   1.   Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front emitting a white light visible from a
distance of at least 300 feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear, except
that a red reflector on the rear, of a type that is visible from all distances
from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
   2.   Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake that will
enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean
pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.13 SPECIAL PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the
scheduled fine or standard penalty provided for violations of this Code of
Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle or moped to be impounded by the City for
not less than five days for the first offense, 10 days for a second offense and
30 days for a third offense.
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
 
80.01 Definitions                       80.06 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of   80.07 Disposal of Totally Inoperable
Abandoned Vehicles                      Vehicles
80.03 Notice by Mail                    80.08 Proceeds from Sales
80.04 Reclamation of Abandoned Vehicles 80.09 Duties of Demolisher
80.05 Fees for Impoundment
 
80.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1] & Sec. 321.90)
   1.   “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
      A.   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than 24 hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more wheels or
other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
      B.   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more
than 24 hours.
      C.   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private
property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property
for more than 24 hours.
      D.   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police
authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of 10 days. However, a police
authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the 10-day period by
commencing the notification process.
      E.   Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority
to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
      F.   A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the
Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment
fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out
the impoundment order.
   2.   “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of
Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap or
scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
   3.   “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or establishment,
motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
   4.   “Police authority” means the Iowa State Patrol or any law enforcement
agency of a county or city.
80.02 AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request
of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic,
shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take
into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The police authority
may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a private
entity, equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving,
storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles. A property owner or other person
in control of private property may employ a private entity that is a garage
keeper to dispose of an abandoned vehicle, and the private entity may take into
custody the abandoned vehicle without a police authority’s initiative. If a
police authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the
police authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses
of the registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known
claimant to the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
80.03 NOTICE BY MAIL.
   1.   A police authority or private entity that takes into custody an
abandoned vehicle shall send notice by certified mail that the vehicle has been
taken into custody no more than 20 days after taking custody of the vehicle.
Notice shall be sent to the last known address of record of the last known
registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known
claimant to the vehicle.
   2.   Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. The notice shall include all
of the following:
      A.   A description of the year, make, model, and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle.
      B.   The location of the facility where the vehicle is being held.
      C.   Information for the persons receiving the notice of their right to
reclaim the vehicle and personal property contained therein within 10 days
after the effective date of the notice. Persons may reclaim the vehicle or
personal property upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges
resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of
the notice required pursuant to this section.
      D.   A statement that failure of the owner, lienholders, or claimants to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the
time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders, and claimants
of all right, title, claim, and interest in the vehicle or personal property.
      E.   A statement that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property
is deemed consent for the police authority or private entity to sell the
vehicle at a public auction or dispose of the vehicle to a demolisher and to
dispose of the personal property by sale or destruction.
   3.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity
without a police authority’s initiative, the notice shall state that the
private entity may claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90,
Subsection 1, of the Code of Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the
vehicle.
   4.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a police authority
or by a private entity hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that
any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who
disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or personal property by the
police authority or private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges
provided by this section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police
authority to contest those matters.
   5.   If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise
their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the 10-day
reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders, or claimants shall no longer have
any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal
property.
   6.   A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right,
title, claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders, or claimants after the
expiration of the 10-day reclaiming period.
   7.   If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the
identities and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders,
notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area
where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of
notice under Subsection 2 of this section. The published notice may contain
multiple listings of abandoned vehicles but shall be published within the same
time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed
notice in Subsection 2 of this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3])
(Section 80.03 - Ord. 697 - Nov. 21 Supp.)
80.04 RECLAMATION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES
   Prior to driving an abandoned vehicle away from the premises, a person who
received or who is reclaiming the vehicle on behalf of a person who received
notice under Section 80.03 shall present to the police authority or private
entity, as applicable, the person’s valid driver’s license and proof of
financial liability coverage as provided in Section 321.20B of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
(Ord. 697 - Nov. 21 Supp.)
80.05 FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.
   The owner, lienholder, or claimant shall pay $3.00 if claimed within five
days of impounding, plus $1.00 for each additional day within the reclaiming
period plus towing charges, if stored by the City, or towing and storage fees,
if stored in a public garage, whereupon said vehicle shall be released. The
amount of towing charges, and the rate of storage charges by privately owned
garages, shall be established by such facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.06 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the
police authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether or
not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall
dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.07 DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found
any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle
whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of such motor
vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without notification
procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more wheels or
other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police
authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant
shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate and shall
surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
80.08 PROCEEDS FROM SALES.
   Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the
expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification
required, in accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner
of the motor vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days, and then shall be
deposited in the State Road Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails
to realize the amount necessary to meet costs the police authority shall apply
for reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.09 DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.
   Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor
vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise demolish
such motor vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or
demolish a vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate
issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
CHAPTER 81
RAILROAD REGULATIONS
 
81.01 Definitions         81.03 Crossing Maintenance
81.02 Obstructing Streets
 
81.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation or other
association that owns, operates, drives, or controls a railroad train.
   2.   “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
81.02 OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
   Operators shall not operate any train in such a manner as to prevent
vehicular use of any highway, street or alley for a period of time in excess of
10 minutes except:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)
   1.   Comply with Signals. When necessary to comply with signals affecting
the safety of the movement of trains.
   2.   Avoid Striking. When necessary to avoid striking any object or person
on the track.
   3.   Disabled. When the train is disabled.
   4.   Safety Regulations. When necessary to comply with governmental safety
regulations including, but not limited to, speed ordinances and speed
regulations.
   5.   In Motion. When the train is in motion except while engaged in
switching operations.
   6.   No Traffic. When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the
crossing.
An employee is not guilty of a violation of this section if the employee’s
action was necessary to comply with the direct order or instructions of a
railroad corporation or its supervisors. Guilt is then with the railroad
corporation.
81.03 CROSSING MAINTENANCE.
   Operators shall construct and maintain good, sufficient, and safe crossings
over any street traversed by their rails.
(Bourett vs. Chicago & N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 [1943])
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)
CHAPTER 82
GOLF CART OPERATION ON CITY STREETS
 
82.01 Operation of Golf Carts 82.04 Hours
82.02 Prohibited Streets      82.05 Financial Responsibility
82.03 Equipment
82.01 OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS.
   Golf carts may be operated upon the streets of the City of Aurelia, Iowa,
except as prohibited in Section 82.02 of this chapter, by persons 16 years of
age or over.
82.02 PROHIBITED STREETS.  
   Golf carts shall not be operated upon any City street which is a primary
road extension through the City, to-wit: Iowa Highway No. 7. However, golf
carts may cross such a primary road extension.
82.03 EQUIPMENT.  
   Golf carts operated upon City streets shall be equipped with a slow-moving
vehicle sign and a bicycle safety flag or proper motor vehicle lighting if
conditions warrant and at all times during operation shall have adequate
brakes.
82.04 HOURS.  
   Golf carts may be operated on City streets only between sunrise and sunset.
82.05 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.  
   The owner or operator of any golf cart upon the City streets within the City
limits of the City of Aurelia, Iowa, must maintain and provide current proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with Iowa Code Section 32l.20B of the
Code of Iowa or equivalent coverage.
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 Definitions                        90.16 Inspection and Approval
90.02 Superintendent’s Duties          90.17 Completion by the City
90.03 Mandatory Connections              90.18 Shutting Off Water Supply
90.04 Abandoned Connections              90.19 Operation of Curb Valve and
                                         Hydrants
90.05 Permit                             90.20 Easements
90.06 Connection Charge                  90.21 Complaints
90.07 Compliance with Plumbing Code      90.22 Cross Connections Prohibited
90.08 Plumber Required                   90.23 Construction Use
90.09 Excavations                        90.24 Boilers and Pressure Vessels
90.10 Tapping Mains                      90.25 Line Extensions
90.11 Installation of Water Service Pipe 90.26 Service Interruptions
90.12 Responsibility for Water Service   90.27 City Liability Limited
Pipe
90.13 Failure to Maintain                90.28 Special Terms of Use
90.14 Curb Valve                         90.29 Non-Public Water Wells
90.15 Interior Valve
 
90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this Code of
Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:
   1.   “Combined service account” means a customer service account for the
provision of two or more utility services.
   2.   “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water service
from the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties
the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed
shall be joint and several.
   3.   “Superintendent” means the Superintendent of the City water system or
any duly authorized assistant, agent or representative.
   4.   “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or community
use.
   5.   “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the building
served.
   6.   “Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for
securing, collecting, storing, pumping, treating, and distributing water.
90.02 SUPERINTENDENT’S DUTIES.  
   The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of water service pipes
and their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining
to water services in the City in accordance with this chapter. This chapter
shall apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to
new ones. The Superintendent shall make such rules, not in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation of the
water system, subject to the approval of the Council. In the event of an
emergency the Superintendent may make temporary rules for the protection of the
system until due consideration by the Council may be had.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
90.03 MANDATORY CONNECTIONS.
   All residences and business establishments within the City limits intended
or used for human habitation, occupancy or use shall be connected to the public
water system, if it is reasonably available and if the building is not
furnished with pure and wholesome water from some other source.
90.04 ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.
   When an existing water service is abandoned or a service is renewed with a
new tap in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains shall be turned
off at the corporation stop and made absolutely watertight.
90.05 PERMIT.
   Before any person makes a connection with the public water system, a written
permit must be obtained from the City. The application for the permit shall
include a legal description of the property, the name of the property owner,
the name and address of the person who will do the work, and the general uses
of the water. If the proposed work meets all the requirements of this chapter
and if all fees required under this chapter have been paid, the permit shall be
issued. Work under any permit must be begun within six months after the permit
is issued and the work must be completed within 60 days after the work is
started, except that when such time period is inequitable or unfair due to
conditions beyond the control of person making the application, an extension of
time within which to complete the work may be granted. The permit may be
revoked at any time for any violation of these chapters.
90.06 CONNECTION CHARGE.
   A fee to initiate water service equal to the sum of three months’ minimum
charge shall be paid before issuance of a permit to reimburse the City for
costs borne by the City in making water service available to the property
served. Owners of rental property are exempt.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
90.07 COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE.
   The installation of any water service pipe and any connection with the water
system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether
regulatory, procedural or enforcement provisions, of the State Plumbing Code.
90.08 PLUMBER REQUIRED.
   All installations of water service pipes and connections to the water system
shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
90.09 EXCAVATIONS.
   All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required in making a connection
shall be performed in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and the
provisions of Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
90.10 TAPPING MAINS.
   All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the direct supervision
of the Superintendent and in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Independent Services. No more than one house, building, or premises
shall be supplied from one tap unless special written permission is obtained
from the Superintendent and unless provision is made so that each house,
building, or premises may be shut off independently of the other.
   2.   Sizes and Location of Taps. All mains six inches or less in diameter
shall receive no larger than a three-fourths inch tap. All mains of over six
inches in diameter shall receive no larger than a one-inch tap. Where a larger
connection than a one-inch tap is desired, two or more small taps or saddles
shall be used, as the Superintendent shall order. All taps in the mains shall
be made in the top half of the pipe, at least 18 inches apart. No main shall be
tapped nearer than two feet of the joint in the main.
   3.   Corporation Stop. A brass corporation stop, of the pattern and weight
approved by the Superintendent, shall be inserted in every tap in the main. The
corporation stop in the main shall be of the same size as the service pipe.
   4.   Location Record. An accurate and dimensional sketch showing the exact
location of the tap shall be filed with the Superintendent in such form as the
Superintendent shall require.
90.11 INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE.
   Water service pipes from the main to the meter setting shall be Type K
copper. The use of any other pipe material for the service line shall first be
approved by the Superintendent. Pipe must be laid sufficiently waving, and to
such depth, as to prevent rupture from settlement or freezing.
90.12 RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the water service pipe from the curb valve to the building
served shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any
loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation or maintenance of said water service pipe. The City shall be
responsible for the service line from the main, to and including the curb
valve.
90.13 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
   When any portion of the water service pipe which is the responsibility of
the property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance and the owner fails
to correct such nuisance, the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to
the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.14 CURB VALVE.
   There shall be installed within the public right-of-way a main shut-off
valve on the water service pipe of a pattern approved by the Superintendent.
The shut-off valve shall be constructed to be visible and even with the
pavement or ground.
90.15 INTERIOR VALVE.
   There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service pipe inside the
building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible
and so located that the water can be shut off conveniently. Where one service
pipe supplies more than one customer within the building, there shall be
separate valves for each such customer so that service may be shut off for one
without interfering with service to the others.
90.16 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
   All water service pipes and their connections to the water system must be
inspected and approved in writing by the Superintendent before they are
covered, and the Superintendent shall keep a record of such approvals. If the
Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or property owner must
proceed immediately to correct the work. Every person who uses or intends to
use the municipal water system shall permit the Superintendent to enter the
premises to inspect or make necessary alterations or repairs at all reasonable
hours and on proof of authority.
90.17 COMPLETION BY THE CITY.
   Should any excavation be left open or only partly refilled for 24 hours
after the water service pipe is installed and connected with the water system,
or should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the right to finish
or correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs to the property
owner or the plumber. If the plumber is assessed, the plumber must pay the
costs before receiving another permit. If the property owner is assessed, such
assessment may be collected with and in the same manner as general property
taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.18 SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY.
   The Superintendent may shut off the supply of water to any customer because
of any violation of the regulations contained in these Water Service System
chapters that is not being contested in good faith. The supply shall not be
turned on again until all violations have been corrected and the Superintendent
has ordered the water to be turned on.
90.19 OPERATION OF CURB VALVE AND HYDRANTS.
   It is unlawful for any person except the Superintendent to turn water on at
the curb valve, and no person, unless specifically authorized by the City,
shall open or attempt to draw water from any fire hydrant for any purpose
whatsoever.
90.20 EASEMENTS.
   Each customer shall grant or convey or shall cause to be granted or conveyed
to the City a permanent easement and right-of-way across any property owned or
controlled by the customer wherever said easement or right-of-way is necessary
for the municipal water facilities and lines, so as to be able to furnish water
service to the customer.
90.21 COMPLAINTS.
   Complaints may be made to the Superintendent and may be appealed to the
Council within 10 days.
90.22 CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   Connection, cross connection or permitting the same of any separate water
supply to premises which receive water from the City is prohibited.
90.23 CONSTRUCTION USE.
   Water for building or construction purposes will be furnished by meter
measurement, only after suitable deposit has been made, the minimum deposit
being $10.00, and the amount to be determined by the City depending upon the
size of the construction work contemplated; and all water for building or
construction purposes, as set forth in the permit, must pass through one and
the same meter. Water so supplied shall be discharged through a hose or pipe
directly upon material to be wet, or into a barrel or other container, and in
no case upon the ground or into or through a ditch or trench and all use of
water by other than applicant or use of water for any purpose or upon any
premises not so stated or described in the application must be prevented by the
applicant, or water service may be discontinued without notice.
90.24 BOILERS AND PRESSURE VESSELS.
   Customers having boilers and/or pressure vessels receiving a supply of water
from the City must have a check valve on the water supply line and a vacuum
valve on the steam line to prevent collapse in case the water supply from the
City is discontinued or interrupted for any reason, with or without notice.
90.25 LINE EXTENSIONS.
   The City will construct extensions to its water lines to points within its
service area, but the City is not required to make such installations unless
the customer pays to the City the entire cost of the installation. All line
extensions shall be evidenced by a contract signed by the City and the person
advancing funds for said extension but each contract shall be null and void
unless approved by the Farmers Home Administration and other governing bodies.
If refund of the advance is to be made, the following method shall apply: 20
percent of the total gross revenue of water sales per year for each service
connected to the new extension described in the agreement, for a period not to
exceed five years, provided that the aggregate payments do not exceed the total
amount deposited. No refund shall be made from any revenue received from any
lines leading up to or beyond the particular line extension covered by
contract. All decisions in connection with the manner of installation of any
extension and maintenance thereof shall remain in the exclusive control of the
City and such extension shall be the property of the City and no other person
shall have any right, title or interest therein.
90.26 SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS.
   The City shall make all reasonable efforts to eliminate interruption of
service, and when such interruptions occur will endeavor to reestablish service
with the shortest possible delay. Whenever the service is interrupted for the
purpose of working on the distribution system or the station equipment, all
customers affected by such interruption will be notified in advance whenever it
is possible to do so.
90.27 CITY LIABILITY LIMITED.
   The City shall in no event be held responsible for claims made against it by
reason of the breaking of any main or service pipe or by reason of any other
interruption of the supply of water caused by the breaking of machinery or
stoppage for necessary repairs; and no person shall be entitled to damages or
have any portion of a payment refunded for any interruption or service which,
in the opinion of the City, are necessary.
90.28 SPECIAL TERMS OF USE.
   Special terms and conditions may be made where water is used by the utility
or community for public purposes such as fire extinguishment and public parks.
90.29 NON-PUBLIC WATER WELLS.
   No non-public well or water supply system shall be installed where a public
water supply system is reasonably accessible to the landowner. The
determination of accessibility shall be made by the Council. In the event the
Council determines the property is not accessible to a public water supply
system, or if there is clear and convincing evidence that the accessible public
water supply is inadequate to meet the needs of the landowner, then a variance
from this section may be obtained from the Planning and Zoning Board if a well
permit is obtained pursuant to State law or County ordinance. Exception:
Underground heating systems with or without underground water access will be
allowed.
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS
 
91.01 Purpose                           91.07 Meter Setting
91.02 Water Use Metered                 91.08 Meter Costs
91.03 Fire Sprinkler Systems; Exception 91.09 Meter Repairs
91.04 Residential Meters                91.10 Right of Entry
91.05 Outside Water Use Meters          91.11 Meter Tests
91.06 Location of Meters                91.12 Estimated Readings
 
91.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water and
facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among
customers.
91.02 WATER USE METERED.
   All water furnished customers shall be measured through meters and remote
readers furnished, installed and maintained by the City. Commercial, industrial
or institutional service larger than three-fourths inch shall be measured
through approved meters furnished by the customer; provided, however, a remote
reader will be furnished by the City.
91.03 FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS; EXCEPTION.
   Fire sprinkler systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection
without meters under the direct supervision of the Superintendent. No other
open, unmetered connection shall be incorporated in the system, and there shall
be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which
must be sealed open.
91.04 RESIDENTIAL METERS.
   All residential (not commercial) meters shall be installed, maintained and
renewed by and at the expense of the City, and the City reserves the right to
determine the size and type of meter used. Meters larger than three-fourths
inch shall be furnished, installed and maintained by the property owner, not
the City.
91.05 OUTSIDE WATER USE METERS.
   Any outside water use (defined as water that will not go to sanitary sewer
line and the user requests an exemption from the sewer charge) shall require a
separate water meter. The City will not allow readings from an existing water
meter before or after an outside water use to be recorded for the purposes of
exemption on the sanitary sewer charges. Outside water use meters shall be
installed so no subtraction is necessary from the existing water meter for the
purpose of billing. The property owner shall bear all costs, to include the
cost of the meter, for installation of the meter. The owner shall call City
Hall for an inspection of meter setting when completed. Setting shall conform
with Section
91.07.
91.06 LOCATION OF METERS.
   All meters and remote devices shall be so located that they are easily
accessible to meter readers and repairmen and protected from freezing.
91.07 METER SETTING.
   The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and fittings for
proper setting of the meter including a valve on the discharge side of the
meter. Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the Superintendent and
shall be of a design and construction approved by the Superintendent.
91.08 METER COSTS.
   The full cost of any meter larger than that required for a single-family
residence (three-fourths inch) shall be paid to the City by the property owner
or customer, including installation and maintenance of any such meter, prior to
the installation of any such meter by the City, or, at the sole option of the
City, the property owner or customer may be required to purchase and install
such meter in accordance with requirements established by the City.
91.09 METER REPAIRS.
   Whenever a water meter or remote reader owned by the City is found to be out
of order the Superintendent shall have it repaired. If it is found that damage
to the meter or remote reader has occurred due to the carelessness or
negligence of the customer or property owner, or the meter is not owned by the
City, then the property owner shall be liable for the cost of repairs.
91.10 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Superintendent shall be permitted to enter the premises of any customer
at any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter ore remote reader.
91.11 METER TESTS.
   Upon the written request of any customer, the meter serving said customer
shall be tested by the City. A meter check fee of $10.00 shall be paid when the
customer requests a meter test.
91.12 ESTIMATED READINGS.
   Where a meter has ceased to register, or meter reading could not be
obtained, the quantity of water consumed for billing purposes will be based
upon an average of the prior 12 months’ consumption, and the conditions of
normal water usage expected during the period in which the meter failed to
register.
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES
 
92.01 Service Charges           92.06 Lien for Nonpayment
92.02 Rates For Service         92.07 Lien Exemption
92.03 Rates Outside the City    92.08 Lien Notice
92.04 Billing for Water Service 92.09 Customer Deposits
92.05 Service Discontinued      92.10 Temporary Vacancy
 
92.01 SERVICE CHARGES.
   Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the City based upon
use of water as determined by meters provided for in
Chapter 91. Each location, building, premises or connection shall be considered
a separate and distinct customer whether owned or controlled by the same person
or not.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.02 RATES FOR SERVICE.
   Water service shall be furnished at the following monthly rates within City
limits effective January 1, 2026. †
Minimum monthly bill   $53.00
Single rate for all usage   $0.05 per cubic foot
(Section 92.02 – Ord. 717 – Nov. 25 Supp.)
 
Notes
�EDITOR’S NOTE: Rates for water service before January 1, 2026, were a minimum
  monthly bill of $33.00 plus a usage rate of $0.05 per cubic foot.
92.03 INCENTIVE.
   For the initial three-month period of service time for any new business or
newly constructed residence within the City limits, one-half the water bill
will be discounted up to a maximum of $50.00 per month. At the end of the third
month, rates will resume as stated above for business or residence within the
City limits.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 and 384.84)
92.04 BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE.
   Water service shall be billed as part of a combined service account, payable
in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Meters Read. Water meters shall be read monthly as designated by the
Council.
   2.   Bills Issued. The Clerk shall prepare and issue bills for combined
service accounts on or before the fifth day of the month.
   3.   Bills Payable. Bills for combined service accounts shall be due and
payable at the office of the Clerk by the twenty-sixth of the month.
   4.   Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be considered
delinquent. A one-time late payment penalty of five percent of the amount due
for water service and ten percent of the amount due for sewer service shall be
added to each delinquent bill.
92.05 SERVICE DISCONTINUED.
   Water service to delinquent customers shall be discontinued or disconnected
in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Notice. The Clerk shall notify each delinquent customer that service
will be discontinued or disconnected if payment of the combined service
account, including late payment charges, is not received by the date specified
in the notice of delinquency. Such notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to the
customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred and shall inform
the customer of the nature of the delinquency and afford the customer the
opportunity for a hearing prior to the discontinuance or disconnection.
   2.   Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or
landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the
notice of delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord. If the
customer is a tenant and requests a change of name for service under the
account, such request shall be sent to the owner or landlord of the property if
the owner or landlord has made a written request for notice of any change of
name for service under the account to the rental property.
   3.   Hearing. If a hearing is requested by noon of the day preceding the
shut off, the Utility Committee shall conduct an informal hearing and shall
make a determination as to whether the discontinuance or disconnection is
justified. If the Committee finds that discontinuance or disconnection is
justified, then such discontinuance or disconnection shall be made, unless
total payment for the delinquent amount owing on the account, along with all
associated fees, is received.
   4.   Fees. A fee in an amount equal to the sum of three months’ minimum
charge shall be charged before service is restored to a delinquent customer.
The owners of rental property are not exempt. No fee shall be charged for the
usual or customary trips in the regular changes in occupancies of property.
92.06 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises. Water
service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon
the property or premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.07 LIEN EXEMPTION.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Water Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to
charges for water service to a residential or commercial rental property where
water service is separately metered and the rates or charges for the water
service are paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives
written notice to the City that the property is residential or commercial
rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The
City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of 90 days of such
services to be paid to the City. When the tenant moves from the rental
property, the City shall refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in
full. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs
related to any of the services.
   2.   Other Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall also not apply
to the charges for any of the services of sewer systems, storm water drainage
systems, sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal for
a residential rental property where the charge is paid directly to the City by
the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the property
is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or
charges for such service. The City may require a deposit not exceeding the
usual cost of 90 days of such services to be paid to the City. When the tenant
moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if all
service charges are paid in full. The lien exemption does not apply to
delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.
   3.   Written Notice. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name of
the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the residential or
commercial rental property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the
occupancy begins. Upon receipt, the City shall acknowledge the notice and
deposit. A change in tenant for a residential rental property shall require a
new written notice to be given to the City within 30 business days of the
change in tenant. A change in tenant for a commercial rental property shall
require a new written notice to be given to the City within 10 business days of
the change in tenant. A change in the ownership of the residential rental
property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the City
within 30 business days of the completion of the change of ownership. A change
in the ownership of the commercial rental property shall require written notice
of such change to be given to the City within 10 business days of the
completion of the change of ownership.
   4.   Mobile Homes, Modular Homes, and Manufactured Homes. A lien for
nonpayment of utility services described in Subsections 1 and 2 of this section
shall not be placed upon a premises that is a mobile home, modular home, or
manufactured home if the mobile home, modular home, or manufactured home is
owned by a tenant of and located in a mobile home park or manufactured home
community and the mobile home park or manufactured home community owner or
manager is the account holder, unless the lease agreement specifies that the
tenant is responsible for payment of a portion of the rates or charges billed
to the account holder.
92.08 LIEN NOTICE.  
   A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to the
County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is
given to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. If
the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property or
premises has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given
to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons
by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to certification of the lien to
the County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.09 CUSTOMER DEPOSIT.
   A deposit in an amount to be set by the Council shall be required from all
tenants, with such amount not to exceed the actual cost of 90 days for each
service provided to the tenants. Such deposit shall be applied to any bill for
service delinquent more than 30 days. Upon the termination of the use of the
water service by that tenant for that building, any balance of such deposit
shall be returned to the tenant without interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.10 TEMPORARY VACANCY.
   A property owner may request water service be temporarily discontinued and
shut off at the curb valve when the property is expected to be vacant for an
extended period of time. There shall be a $10.00 service fee for
discontinuation and a $10.00 service fee for restoration of water service.
During a period when service is temporarily discontinued as provided herein
there shall be no minimum service charge. The City will not drain pipes or pull
meters for temporary vacancies.
(Editor’s Note: Forms for Application and Agreement for Owner and Tenant are
contained in the Appendix to this Code of Ordinances.)
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
 
95.01 Purpose                   95.06 Service Outside the City
95.02 Definitions               95.07 Right of Entry
95.03 Superintendent            95.08 Use of Easements
95.04 Prohibited Acts           95.09 Special Penalties
95.05 Sewer Connection Required
 
95.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to
Sanitary Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment
and disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
95.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees C, expressed in milligrams per
liter or parts per million.
   2.   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
   3.   “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the
building wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment
portion of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the
drainage of one building site.
   4.   “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and
sewage.
   5.   “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial, or industrial waste that is directly or indirectly discharged into
the public sewer system.
   6.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage,
and sale of produce.
   7.   “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   8.   “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect
and approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the
public sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
   9.   “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
   10.   “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment
and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment,
and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other
facilities serving the equivalent of 15 persons (1,500 gpd) or less.
   11.   “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
   12.   “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   13.   “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories, or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and
industrial waste.
   14.   “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   15.   “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.
   16.   “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
   17.   “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
   18.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   19.   “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees
levied against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of
said customers by said sewer system.
   20.   “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste that
in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   21.   “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer that carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
   22.   “Superintendent” means the Superintendent of sewage works and/or of
water pollution control of the City or any authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
   23.   “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of,
or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and that are removable
by laboratory filtering.
   24.   “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
95.03 SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Superintendent shall exercise the following powers and duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City sewage system.
   2.   Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure
compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
   3.   Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage
connections and manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof.
95.04 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
   1.   Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment that is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
   2.   Surface Run-Off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout, sump pump,
exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   3.   Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by
authority of the Superintendent.
   4.   Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the City, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste.
   5.   Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage
except as provided in these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
   6.   Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City,
or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes,
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
95.05 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in
the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required
to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a
building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the proper public
sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters, such compliance to be completed within 30 days after
date of official notice from the City to do so provided that said public sewer
is located within 150 feet of the property line of such owner and is of such
design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed to
it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin the date of official notice
to connect to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
95.06 SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.
   Sewer service shall not be made available to property outside the corporate
limits of the City.
95.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
The Superintendent or representatives shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
95.08 USE OF EASEMENTS.
   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
95.09 SPECIAL PENALTIES.
   The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters:
   1.   Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of
these chapters except subsections 1, 3, and 4 of Section 95.04, shall be served
by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations.
   2.   Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the time limit provided for in subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation
of this Code of Ordinances. Each day in which any such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   3.   Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these
chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the City by reason of such violation.
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
 
96.01 Permit                  96.06 Interceptors Required
96.02 Permit Fee              96.07 Sewer Tap
96.03 Plumber Required        96.08 Inspection Required
96.04 Excavations             96.09 Property Owner’s Responsibility
96.05 Connection Requirements 96.10 Abatement of Violations
 
96.01 PERMIT.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the City. The application for the permit
shall set forth the location and description of the property to be connected
with the sewer system and the purpose for which the sewer is to be used, and
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information
considered pertinent. The permit shall require the owner to complete
construction and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer within 60
days after the issuance of the permit, except that when a property owner makes
sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond the owner’s control or
peculiar hardship, such time period is inequitable or unfair, an extension of
time within which to comply with the provisions herein may be granted. Any
sewer connection permit may be revoked at any time for a violation of these
chapters.
96.02 PERMIT FEE.
   There shall be a fee of $50.00 for the permit. The cost of the materials,
the installation and repairs of public property shall be borne by the property
owner.
96.03 PLUMBER REQUIRED.
   All installations of building sewers and connections to the public sewer
shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
96.04 EXCAVATIONS.
   All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required for the installation
of a building sewer shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the
State Plumbing Code and the provisions of Chapter 135 of this Code of
Ordinances.
96.05 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   Any connection with a public sanitary sewer must be made under the direct
supervision of the Superintendent and in accordance with the following:
   1.   Old Building Sewers. Old building sewers shall not be used in
connection with new buildings.
   2.   Separate Building Sewers. A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every occupied building; except where one building stands
at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court,
yard, or driveway. In such cases the building sewer from the front building may
be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
   3.   Installation. The installation and connection of the building sewer to
the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Plumbing Code
and applicable rules and regulations of the City. All such connections shall be
made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
   4.   Water Lines. When possible, building sewers should be laid at least 10
feet horizontally from a water service. The horizontal separation may be less,
provided the water service line is located at one side and at least 12 inches
above the top of the building sewer.
   5.   Size. Building sewers shall be sized for the peak expected sewage flow
from the building with a minimum building sewer size of four inches.
   6.   Alignment and Grade. All building sewers shall be laid to a straight
line to meet the following:
      A.   Recommended grade at one-fourth inch per foot.
      B.   Minimum grade of one-eighth inch per foot.
      C.   Minimum velocity of two feet per second with the sewer half full.
      D.   Any deviation in alignment or grade shall be made only with the
written approval of the Superintendent and shall be made only with approved
fittings.
   7.   Depth. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth of cover above the
sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
   8.   Sewage Lifts. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low
to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the
building sewer.
   9.   Pipe Specifications. Building sewer pipe shall be free from flaws,
splits, or breaks. Materials shall be as specified in the State Plumbing Code
except that the building sewer pipe, from the property line to the public
sewer, shall comply with the current edition of one of the following:
      A.   Clay sewer pipe – A.S.T.M. C-700 (extra strength).
      B.   Extra heavy cast iron soil pipe – A.S.T.M. A-74.
      C.   Ductile iron water pipe – A.W.W.A. C-151.
      D.   P.V.C. – SDR26 – A.S.T.M. D-3034.
   10.   Bearing Walls. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within
three feet of any bearing wall that might thereby be weakened.
   11.   Jointing. Fittings, type of joint and jointing material shall be
compatible with the type of pipe used, subject to the approval of the
Superintendent. Solvent-welded joints are not permitted.
   12.   Unstable Soil. No sewer connection shall be laid so that it is exposed
when crossing any watercourse. Where an old watercourse must of necessity be
crossed or where there is any danger of undermining or settlement, cast iron
soil pipe or vitrified clay sewer pipe thoroughly encased in concrete shall be
required for such crossings. Such encasement shall extend at least six inches
on all sides of the pipe. The cast iron pipe or encased clay pipe shall rest on
firm, solid material at either end.
   13.   Preparation of Basement or Crawl Space. No connection for any
residence, business or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be made
unless the basement floor is poured, or in the case of a building with a slab
or crawl space, unless the ground floor is installed with the area adjacent to
the foundation of such building cleared of debris and backfilled. The backfill
shall be well compacted and graded so that the drainage is away from the
foundation. Prior to the time the basement floor is poured, or the first floor
is installed in buildings without basements, the sewer shall be plugged and the
plug shall be sealed by the Superintendent. Any accumulation of water in any
excavation or basement during construction and prior to connection to the
sanitary sewer shall be removed by means other than draining into the sanitary
sewer.
96.06 INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
   Grease, oil, sludge and sand interceptors shall be provided by gas and
service stations, convenience stores, car washes, garages, and other facilities
when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of such wastes that contain grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable waste, sand or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. When required, such
interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the following:
   1.   Design and Location. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
as specified in the State Plumbing Code, to be approved by the Superintendent,
and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
   2.   Construction Standards. The interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped
with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and watertight.
   3.   Maintenance. All such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at
the owner’s expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient operations at
all times.
96.07 SEWER TAP.
   Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the
“Y” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly
located “Y” branch is available, a saddle “Y” shall be installed at the
location specified by the Superintendent. The public sewer shall be tapped with
a tapping machine and a saddle appropriate to the type of public sewer shall be
glued or attached with a gasket and stainless steel clamps to the sewer. At no
time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a manhole unless
special written permission is received from the Superintendent and in
accordance with the Superintendent’s direction if such connection is approved.
96.08 INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   All connections with the sanitary sewer system before being covered shall be
inspected and approved, in writing, by the Superintendent. As soon as all pipe
work from the public sewer to inside the building has been completed, and
before any backfilling is done, the Superintendent shall be notified and the
Superintendent shall inspect and test the work as to workmanship and material;
no sewer pipe laid underground shall be covered or trenches filled until after
the sewer has been so inspected and approved. If the Superintendent refuses to
approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the
work.
96.09 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
96.10 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines, whether located upon
the private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which
construction or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this
chapter, shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within 30 days after date
of official notice from the Council of such violation. If not made within such
time, the Council shall, in addition to the other penalties herein provided,
have the right to finish and correct the work and assess the cost thereof to
the property owner. Such assessment shall be collected with and in the same
manner as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
 
97.01 Storm Water              97.05 Restricted Discharges; Powers of
                               Superintendent
97.02 Surface Waters Exception 97.06 Special Facilities
97.03 Prohibited Discharges    97.07 Control Manholes
97.04 Restricted Discharges    97.08 Testing of Wastes
 
97.01 STORM WATER.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface
water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Storm
water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers that
are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm
sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
97.02 SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION.
   Special permits for discharging surface waters to a public sanitary sewer
may be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the Superintendent where
such discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing, but
any permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to
the best interests of the sewer system.
97.03 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   1.   Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel
oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
   2.   Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant,
including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two milligrams per liter as
CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
   3.   Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
   4.   Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities
or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   5.   Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow.
      A.   Any waters or wastes: (i) having a five-day biochemical oxygen
demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or (ii) containing more
than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or (iii) having an
average daily flow greater than two percent of the average sewage flow of the
City, shall be subject to the review of the Superintendent.
      B.   Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner
shall provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to: (i) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million
by weight; or (ii) reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by
weight; or (iii) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters
or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating
to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Superintendent and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
97.04 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances restricted are:
   1.   High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150 degrees F (65 degrees C).
   2.   Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or 600
milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble matter.
   3.   Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances that may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees F and 150 degrees
F (0 degrees to 65 degrees C).
   4.   Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to
such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than
one-half inch in any dimension.
   5.   Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
   6.   Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials.
   7.   Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste
or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits that may
be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of State, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
   8.   Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-
life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable State or federal regulations.
   9.   Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
   10.   Unusual Wastes. Materials that exert or cause:
      A.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
      B.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
      C.   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
      D.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
   11.   Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable
of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into
sewers for their maintenance and repair.
   12.   Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials, or substances that
react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases,
develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable
concentration or create any other condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
   13.   Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances that are
not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
97.05 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES; POWERS OF SUPERINTENDENT.
   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to
the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section
97.04 and which in the judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:
   1.   Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public
sewage system;
   2.   Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
   3.   Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or
   4.   Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling
and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of
Chapter 99.
97.06 SPECIAL FACILITIES.
   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary
treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
by the owner at the owner’s expense.
97.07 CONTROL MANHOLES.
   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s
expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
97.08 TESTING OF WASTES.
   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained
from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from
periodic grab samples).
CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
 
98.01 When Prohibited             98.05 Discharge Restrictions
98.02 When Required               98.06 Maintenance of System
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.07 Systems Abandoned
98.04 Permit Required             98.08 Disposal of Septage
 
98.01 WHEN PROHIBITED.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02 WHEN REQUIRED.
   When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
Section 95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are
employed shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.03 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and
requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and
with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the
County Board of Health.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3 & 4])
98.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of
Health.
98.05 DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.
   It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch,
stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the
surface of the ground.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.06 MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
   The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall
operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at no
expense to the City.
98.07 SYSTEMS ABANDONED.
   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an
on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section 95.05,
a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with these
Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.08 DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.
   No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at any
location except an approved disposal site.
CHAPTER 99
SEWER USER CHARGE SYSTEM
 
99.01 Purpose                99.08 Special Rates
99.02 Definitions            99.09 Responsibility for Increased Costs
99.03 Use of Funds           99.10 Application
99.04 Accounts Designated    99.11 Payment of Bills
99.05 Year-end Balances      99.12 Lien for Nonpayment
99.06 Charges Based on Usage 99.13 Review of User Charge System
99.07 Rates for Service      99.14 Notification of Rate Change
99.01 PURPOSE.
   It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the City to
collect charges from all users who contribute wastewater to the City’s
treatment works. The proceeds of such charges so derived will be used for the
purpose of operating, maintaining and retiring the debt for such public
wastewater treatment works.
99.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Normal domestic wastewater” means wastewater that has a BOD
concentration of not more than 204 mg/l, a suspended solids concentration of
not more than 240 mg/l.
   2.   “Operation and maintenance” means all expenditures during the useful
life of the wastewater treatment works for materials, labor, utilities and
other items which are necessary for the management and maintenance of the
treatment works to achieve the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed.
   3.   “Replacement” means expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful
life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which
such works were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance”
includes replacement.
   4.   “Residential contributor” means any contributor to the City’s treatment
works whose lot, parcel of real estate or building is used for domestic
dwelling purposes only.
   5.   “Treatment works” means any devices and systems used for the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or
liquid industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers,
sewage collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power and other
equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvement, remodeling,
additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable
recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and
any works, including site acquisition of the land, that will be an integral
part of the treatment process or used for ultimate disposal of residues
resulting from such treatment (including land for composting sludge, temporary
storage of such compost, and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in
land treatment systems before land application); or any other method or system
for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing
of municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined storm water
and sanitary sewer systems.
   6.   “Useful life” means the period during which a treatment works will be
operated.
   7.   “User charge” means that portion of the total wastewater service charge
which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement of the wastewater treatment works.
   8.   “Water meter” means a water volume measuring and recording device,
furnished and/or installed by the City or furnished and/or installed by a user
and approved by the City.
99.03 USE OF FUNDS.
   The user charge system shall generate adequate annual revenues to pay costs
of annual operation and maintenance and costs associated with debt retirement
of bonded capital associated with financing the treatment works which the City
may by ordinance designate to be paid by the user charge system. That portion
of the total user charge which is designated for operation and maintenance of
the treatment works shall be established by this chapter.
99.04 ACCOUNTS DESIGNATED.
   That portion of the total user charge collected which is designated for
operation and maintenance purposes as established in Section
99.06 shall be deposited in a separate non-lapsing fund known as the Operation,
Maintenance and Replacement Fund and will be kept in two primary accounts as
follows:
   1.   Operation and Maintenance Account. An account designated for the
specific purpose of defraying operation and maintenance costs (excluding
replacement) of the treatment works.
   2.   Replacement Account. An account designated for the specific purpose of
ensuring replacement needs over the useful life of the treatment works.
Deposits in the Replacement Account shall be made annually from the operation
and maintenance revenue in the amount of $1,600.00 annually.
99.05 YEAR-END BALANCES.
   Fiscal year-end balances in the Operation and Maintenance Account and the
Replacement Account shall be carried over to the same accounts in the
subsequent fiscal year, and shall be used for no other purposes than those
designated for these accounts. Moneys which have been transferred from other
sources to meet temporary shortages in the Operation, Maintenance and
Replacement Fund shall be returned to their respective accounts upon
appropriate adjustment of the user charge rates for operation and maintenance.
The user charge rate shall be adjusted such that the transferred moneys will be
returned to their respective accounts within the fiscal year following the
fiscal year in which the moneys were borrowed.
99.06 CHARGES BASED ON USAGE.
   For each customer, user charges shall be based on water used during the
current month. If a customer has a consumptive use of water, or in some other
manner uses water which is not discharged to the wastewater collection system,
the user charge for that customer may be based on a wastewater meter or
separate water meter installed and maintained at the customer’s expense, and in
a manner acceptable to the City.
99.07 RATES FOR SERVICE.
   Water service shall be furnished at the following monthly rates within City
limits effective October 1, 2022.
   Minimum monthly bill   $9.85/mo.
   In addition, each user shall pay a user charge rate for operation,
maintenance, and debt retirement of $0.05 per cubic foot of water usage.
(Section 99.07 – Ord. 701 – Oct. 22 Supp.)
99.08 SPECIAL RATES.
   For those customers who contribute wastewater, the strength of which is
greater than normal domestic sewage, a surcharge in addition to the normal user
charge will be collected. The surcharge for operation, maintenance and debt
service is:
$0.36 per pound BOD
$0.31 per pound SS
99.09 RESPONSIBILITY FOR INCREASED COSTS.
   Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in
the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the City’s treatment works
or any user which discharges any substance which singly or by interaction with
other substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation and
maintenance of the treatment works shall pay for such increased costs. The
charge to each such user shall be as determined by the responsible plant
operating personnel and approved by the Council.
99.10 APPLICATION.
   The user charge rates established in this chapter apply to all users of the
City’s treatment works, regardless of their location.
99.11 PAYMENT OF BILLS.
   All sewer service charges are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section
92.04 of this Code of Ordinances. Sewer service may be discontinued or
disconnected in accordance with the provisions contained in Section
92.05 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section
92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
99.05 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   Except as provided for in Section
92.07 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for sewer
service charges to the premises. Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and
delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the property or premises served and
shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the
same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.13 REVIEW OF USER CHARGE SYSTEM.
   The City shall review the user charge system at least every two years and
revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates
adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance and that the
system continues to provide for the proportional distribution of operation and
maintenance costs among users.
99.14 NOTIFICATION OF RATE CHANGE.
   The City will notify each user at least annually, in conjunction with a
regular bill, of the rate being charged for operation and maintenance of the
treatment works.
(Editor’s Note: See the Appendix to the Code of Ordinances for Appendix “A” to
User Charge Ordinance which presents the methodology to be used in calculating
user charge rates and surcharges, and Appendix “B” to the User Charge
Ordinance, which contains a replacement schedule developed to determine the
amount of revenue needed to fund the Replacement Account.)
CHAPTER 100
SEWER EXTENSIONS
 
100.01 Purpose              100.04 Construction by Owner
100.02 Definition           100.05 Others Required to Connect
100.03 Construction by City 100.06 Building Sewers Installed
 
100.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means and method for the
extension of sewers to serve property not served by an existing sewer line so
as to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and
convenience of the residents of the City.
100.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, “builder” means the owner of land who
causes a sanitary sewer to be installed under the provisions of this chapter.
Such term includes the heirs, successors or assigns of such owner.
100.03 CONSTRUCTION BY CITY.
   An owner of land abutting or adjoining a public street where no sanitary
sewer has been installed may make application to the Council for the
installation of a sanitary sewer in said street for the purpose of serving the
property in accordance with the following:
   1.   Application and Deposit. A written request for such installation, and a
sum equal to the cost as estimated by the City of construction from the point
where the sanitary sewer is presently installed and terminates to the point
where the most distant boundary of the owner’s lot abuts the said public
street, shall be submitted to the Council.
   2.   Construction. Upon receipt of the deposit, the City shall construct the
sanitary sewer for the purpose of serving the property of the applicant
(builder), as soon as such construction can reasonably be accomplished.
   3.   Additional Costs. In the event the actual cost to the City of
installation of the sanitary sewer is in excess of the estimated cost, the
builder agrees to reimburse the City for the actual additional cost within
thirty (30) days after the presentation of a bill for such additional cost.
   4.   Lien Authorized. In the event of the failure of the builder to
reimburse the City, as specified in subsection 3 above, the total of the
additional cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer as a special
assessment lien against the builder’s real estate. In the written request for
installation of the sanitary sewer, the landowner shall waive all objections to
jurisdiction and rights to notice and consent to the entry of such a special
assessment lien against the real estate.
   5.   Connecting Property. The expense of connecting the property of the
builder to the sanitary sewer laid in the public street shall be borne by the
builder, in addition to the cost of constructing said sewer, but such
connection shall be under the supervision of the City.
100.04 CONSTRUCTION BY OWNER.
   In the event an owner of land abutting or adjoining a public street in which
no sewer has been previously installed desires to construct said sewer at the
owner’s own expense, the owner may do so, after making proper application to
the City and receiving a permit to install such a sewer, in accordance with the
following:
   1.   City Supervision. The installation of such a sewer by a landowner at
the owner’s expense shall be under the strict supervision of the City and
shall, in all ways, conform to the requirements and specifications of the City.
   2.   Surety Bond. When making application to the City for a permit to
install such a sewer, the applicant shall post with the City a surety bond, in
an amount to be set by the Council and made a matter of record in the minutes
of the Council, which shall be in an amount equal to but not less than 110
percent of the total estimated cost of the installation for the full distance
from the termination point of the presently existing sewer to the point where
the farthest boundary of the applicant’s land abuts the public street, and the
bond shall guarantee the installation of the sewer in as short a time as
reasonably possible and shall further indemnify the City for the cost of
completing the project in the event the applicant fails to complete the project
within a reasonable time, and shall further indemnify the City for all damages
to the public street incurred in the installation, and shall further hold the
City harmless for any and all other damages arising from the installation of
the sanitary sewer.
   3.   Ownership of Sewer Line. After the sewer has been installed, it shall
become the property of the City.
100.05 OTHERS REQUIRED TO CONNECT.
   Following the installation of a sanitary sewer under the provisions of this
chapter, owners of land abutting or adjoining a public street in which such
sewer has been installed, being persons other than the builder, shall be
obliged to connect any sewage generating facilities into said sanitary sewer,
as required by Chapter 95.
100.06 BUILDING SEWERS INSTALLED.
   Each sanitary sewer constructed in a public street or right-of-way, whether
constructed by the City or by a private party, shall include a stub to each
abutting or adjoining lot line of the street or right-of-way on which the sewer
is installed. Each party responsible for installing such sewer shall provide
the City with an accurate map showing the location of each of such stubs within
30 days of the completion of the installation.
CHAPTER 101
STORM WATER UTILITY
 
101.01 Purpose                              101.04 Rates
101.02 Definitions                          101.05 Payment of Bills
101.03 Storm Water Drainage System District 101.06 Lien for Nonpayment
Established
 
101.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Storm Water Utility and
provide a means of funding the construction, operation and maintenance of storm
water management facilities, including but not limited to detention and
retention basins, storm water sewers, inlets, ditches and drains, and cleaning
of streets. The Council finds that the construction, operation and maintenance
of the City’s storm and surface water drainage system should be funded through
charging users of property which may connect or discharge directly or
indirectly into the storm and surface water drainage system.
101.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Connection” means the physical act or process of tapping a public
storm water, sewer or drainage line, or joining onto an existing side sewer,
for the purpose of connecting private impervious surface or other storm and
surface water sources or systems to the public storm and surface water system.
It also includes creation or maintenance of impervious surface that causes or
is likely to cause an increase in the quantity or decrease in quality, or both,
from the natural state of storm water runoff, and which drains, directly or
indirectly, to the storm and surface water system.
   2.   “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving storm water
service from the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such
parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter
imposed shall be joint and several.
   3.   “Storm and surface water drainage system” means any combination of
publicly owned storm and surface water quantity and quality facilities,
pumping, or lift facilities, storm and secondary drain pipes and culverts, open
channels, creeks and ditches, force mains, laterals, manholes, catch basins and
inlets, including grates and covers thereof, detention and retention
facilities, laboratory facilities and equipment, and any other publicly owned
facilities for the collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal of the storm
and surface water system within the City, to which sanitary sewage flows are
not intentionally admitted.
   4.   “User” means any person who uses property that maintains connection to,
discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the City for storm water
management. The occupant of occupied property is deemed the user. If the
property is not occupied, the person who has the right to occupy it shall be
deemed the user.
101.03 STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM DISTRICT ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to the authority of Section 384.84(5) of the Code of Iowa, the
entire City is hereby declared a Storm Water Drainage System District for the
purpose of establishing, imposing, adjusting and providing for the collection
rates for the operation and maintenance of storm water management facilities.
The entire City, as increased from time to time by annexation, shall constitute
a single Storm Water Drainage System District.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.8[5])
101.04 RATES.
   Each customer shall pay for storm and surface water drainage system service
provided by the City. Imposing a monthly rate on each residential, commercial
and industrial customer within the City of Aurelia shall collect the rates for
the operation and maintenance of the storm water management facilities. The
Council may adopt rules, charges, rates and fees for the use of the City’s
storm and surface water system, and for services provided by the City relating
to that system. Such rules may include delinquency and interest charges and
penalties. Such charges and fees shall be just and equitable based upon the
actual costs of operation, maintenance, acquisition, extension and replacement
of the City’s system, the costs of bond repayment, regulation, administration
and services of the City. A fee of $1.00 shall be charged to each utilities
customer each billing cycle.
101.05 PAYMENT OF BILLS.
   All Storm Water Drainage System District charges shall be due and payable
under the same terms and conditions provided for payment of a combined service
account as contained in Section 92.04 of this Code of Ordinances. All City
services may be discontinued or disconnected in accordance with the provisions
contained in Section 92.05 if the combined service account becomes delinquent,
and the provisions contained in Section 92.08 relating to lien notices shall
also apply in the event of a delinquent account. 
(Code of Iowa Sec. 384.84[3a])
101.06 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   Except as provided for in Section
92.07 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for storm water
service charges to the premises. Storm water service charges remaining unpaid
and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the property or premises served and
shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the
same manner as property taxes.
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
 
105.01 Purpose                           105.07 Littering Prohibited
105.02 Definitions                       105.08 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required        105.09 Waste Storage Containers
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard            105.10 Prohibited Practices
105.05 Open Burning Restricted           105.11 Sanitary Disposal Project
                                         Designated
105.06 Separation of Yard Waste Required
105.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Solid
Waste Control and Collection is to provide for the sanitary storage,
collection, and disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens
of the City from such hazards to their health, safety and welfare as may result
from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.
105.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from
public and private places.
   2.   “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit, or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])
   3.   “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a
structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or
are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
   4.   “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and
vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing,
serving and consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all
offal, excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all such
substances from all public and private establishments and from all residences.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   5.   “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage.
The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds,
leaves, grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
   6.   “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials, or
debris not exceeding 10 pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume. Litter
includes but is not limited to empty beverage containers, cigarette butts, food
waste packaging, other food or candy wrappers, handbills, empty cartons, or
boxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
   7.   “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person
residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting business in
any premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities,
liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
   8.   “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not
limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings,
market and industrial solid waste and sewage treatment waste in dry or
semisolid form.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   9.   “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and any multiple-
family dwelling up to and including four separate dwelling units.
   10.   “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a
result of residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on
the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires,
trade wastes and any locally recyclable goods or plastics.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
   11.   “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible
and non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   12.   “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it
does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   13.   “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances
(including all real and personal property connected with such facilities) that
are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved,
extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid
waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and
which are approved by the Director of the State Department of Natural
Resources.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
   14.   “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar
discarded solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such
materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic
activities. Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of
the Code of Iowa. Solid waste does not include any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
      A.   Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
      B.   Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa,
except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes
have been adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
      C.   Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
      D.   Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable
State or federal standards.
      E.   Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing
process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as a
discarded material.
105.03 SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all
refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a nuisance. Any
such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than 30 days
shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such nuisances in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in
district court.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)
105.04 HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.
   It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises,
improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste that
constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard.
105.05 OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED.
   No person shall burn trash, garbage, refuse, or other materials within the
City unless burned within a closed incinerator capable of trapping burned
particles and equipped with a chimney or similar device, subject, however, to
the following special exceptions:
   1.   Following a Disaster. The Fire Chief may authorize limited periods of
open burning to assist in the cleanup of debris in the aftermath of manmade or
natural disasters such as tornadoes and ice storms.
   2.   Training Fires. The scheduled burning of a structure or a field of
prairie grass for the purpose of training members of the Fire Department, which
burning has been approved by the Fire Chief.
   3.   Recreational Fires. A recreational fire is a fire for religious,
ceremonial, cooking, camping, or social purposes. Permitted recreational fires
include fires in an outdoor fireplace or a barbecue pit. Fires on the open
ground, or in a fire ring, are permitted recreational fires if: (i) they are
authorized by the owner of the property on which they are located; (ii) the
fire has a total fuel area three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less
in height; and (iii) the fire is not located within 25 feet of any structure.
In addition, to qualify as a recreational fire, all of the following
requirements must be met:
      A.   The fuel used must be clean, dry firewood or charcoal only. No yard
waste (other than clean dry tree limbs cut to be the equivalent of firewood),
house waste, rubbish, paneling, treated lumber or construction debris may be
burned, nor may any materials containing glass, paint, solvents or which
contain high moisture or sap content which may produce noxious fumes or dense
smoke.
      B.   Recreational fires are not permitted when the wind speed exceeds 20
mph or under drought conditions when the Fire Chief has proclaimed a ban on
such fires.
      C.   Recreational fires in approved burning appliances equipped with a
spark arrester and/or a lid must be at least 15 feet from any structure and
they may not be placed on a combustible surface if the burning chamber of that
appliance will come in contact with that surface.
      D.   An adult must be in attendance at the recreational fire until it is
out.
      E.   Recreational fires shall not be conducted before 7:00 a.m. and shall
be completely extinguished when the activity ceases, or by 12:00 midnight,
whichever comes first.
      F.   The person responsible for the fire shall have a fire extinguisher
or other means of extinguishing the fire available.
105.06 SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED.
   All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other
solid waste accumulated on the premises and shall be composted on the premises
or placed in acceptable containers and set out for collection. As used in this
section, “yard waste” means any debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden
waste, brush, and trees. Yard waste does not include tree stumps.
105.07 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that
nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection
and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such
purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor
vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to
which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.08 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for
collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall be transported
and disposed of as prescribed by the Director of the State Department of
Natural Resources. As used in this section, “toxic and hazardous waste” means
waste materials, including (but not limited to) poisons, pesticides,
herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological waste, flammable or explosive
materials, and similar harmful waste that requires special handling and that
must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve the environment and protect
the public health and safety.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
(IAC, 567-102.13[2] and 400-27.14[2])
105.09 WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS.
   Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or renting any premises,
dwelling unit or any place where refuse accumulates shall provide and at all
times maintain in good order and repair portable containers for refuse in
accordance with the following:
   1.   Container Specifications. Waste storage containers shall comply with
the following specifications:
      A.   Residential. Residential waste containers, whether they are
reusable, portable containers or heavy-duty disposable garbage bags, shall be
of not less than 20 gallons or more than 32 gallons in nominal capacity, and
shall be leak-proof and waterproof, unless the customer rents an approved 65-
gallon container or a 96-gallon container from the solid waste collector or
purchases a 65-gallon container or a 96-gallon container from the solid waste
collector, with handles suitable for truck pickup. The total weight of any
container and contents shall not exceed 75 pounds. Disposable containers shall
be kept securely fastened and shall be of sufficient strength to maintain
integrity when lifted, and reusable containers shall be in conformity with the
following:
         (1)   Be fitted with a fly-tight lid that shall be kept in place
except when depositing or removing the contents of the container.
         (2)   Have handles, bails, or other suitable lifting devices or
features.
         (3)   Be of a type originally manufactured for the storage of
residential waste with tapered sides for easy emptying.
         (4)   Be of lightweight and sturdy construction.
      Galvanized metal containers, rubber or fiberglass containers, and plastic
containers that do not become brittle in cold weather may be used.
      B.   Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or
renting any commercial premises where an excessive amount of refuse accumulates
and where its storage in portable containers as required above is impractical,
shall maintain metal bulk storage containers approved by the City.
   2.   Storage of Containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be
stored upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall
be stored upon private property, unless the owner has been granted written
permission from the City to use public property for such purposes. The storage
site shall be well drained and fully accessible to collection equipment, public
health personnel, and fire inspection personnel. All owners of residential and
commercial premises shall be responsible for proper storage of all garbage and
yard waste to prevent materials from being blown or scattered around
neighboring yards and streets.
   3.   Location of Containers for Collection. Containers for the storage of
solid waste awaiting collection shall be placed at the curb or alley line by
the owner or occupant of the premises served. Containers or other solid waste
placed at the curb line shall not be so placed more than 12 hours in advance of
the regularly scheduled collection day and shall be promptly removed from the
curb line following collection.
   4.   Nonconforming Containers. Solid waste placed in containers that are not
in compliance with the provisions of this section will not be collected.
105.10 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   1.   Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste
containers not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of
such containers.
   2.   Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste
collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance
of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the
City, or those of any other authorized waste collection service.
   3.   Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed
for high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid, or gaseous
combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid
residues contain little or no combustible material, as acceptable to the
Environmental Protection Commission.
   4.   Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste that has been placed out
for collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste
collector.
105.11 SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED.
   The sanitary landfill facilities operated by Cherokee County are hereby
designated as the official “Public Sanitary Disposal Project” for the disposal
of solid waste produced or originating within the City.
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
 
106.01 Collection Service      106.06 Right of Entry
106.02 Collection Vehicles     106.07 Contract Requirements
106.03 Loading                 106.08 Collection Fees
106.04 Frequency of Collection 106.09 Lien for Nonpayment
106.05 Bulky Rubbish           106.10 Unit-Based Pricing
 
106.01 COLLECTION SERVICE.
   The City shall provide for the collection of all solid waste except bulky
rubbish as provided in Section
106.05 within the City.
106.02 COLLECTION VEHICLES.
   Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage
and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall be
leak-proof, durable and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned
to prevent nuisances, pollution, or insect breeding and shall be maintained in
good repair.
(IAC, 567-104.9[455B])
106.03 LOADING.
   Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any
solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will
not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or
loss of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up
immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or
container and the area properly cleaned.
106.04 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
   All solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at least once
each week and from commercial, industrial and institutional premises twice each
week or as frequently as may be determined by the contractor and Council.
106.05 BULKY RUBBISH.
   Bulky rubbish that is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal
manner of other solid waste may be collected on special cleanup days by the
collector upon request in accordance with procedures established by the
Council.
106.06 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private property
for the purpose of collecting solid waste, as required by this chapter;
however, solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other
residential buildings.
106.07 CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting,
processing or disposing of solid waste for the City without first entering into
a contract with the City. This section does not prohibit an owner from
transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises owned, occupied or used by
such owner, provided such refuse is disposed of properly in an approved
sanitary disposal project. Furthermore, a contract is not required for the
removal, hauling, or disposal of earth and rock material from grading or
excavation activities, provided that all such materials are conveyed in tight
vehicles, trucks or receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the
material being transported is spilled upon any public right-of-way.
106.08 COLLECTION FEES.
   The collection and disposal of solid waste as provided by this chapter are
declared to be beneficial to the property served or eligible to be served and
there shall be levied and collected fees for the same, in accordance with the
following:
(Goreham vs. Des Moines, 1970, 179 NW 2nd, 449)
   1.   Schedule of Fees. The fees for solid waste collection and disposal
service, used or available (no vacation rates), are:
      A.   For each unoccupied residence or dwelling unit, for landfill
assessment only (no garbage service or special cleanup day participation) -
$12.66 per month.
      B.   For each occupied single-family residence and each occupied dwelling
unit of a multiple-family dwelling - $22.16 per month.
      C.   Commercial premises shall be billed directly by the contractor.
   2.   Payment of Bills. All fees are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section
92.04 of this Code of Ordinances. Solid waste collection service may be
discontinued in accordance with the provisions contained in Section
92.05 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section
92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
106.09 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   Except as provided for in Section 92.07 of this Code of Ordinances, the
owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof are jointly and
severally liable for fees for solid waste collection and disposal. Fees
remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the property or
premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for
collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
106.10 UNIT-BASED PRICING.
   Pursuant to Section 455D.3 of the Code of Iowa, the City must regulate the
amount of trash each residential household may place at the curbside in the
City limits of Aurelia. Each household will be allowed four 32-gallon trash
cans of solid waste per week, not to exceed 128 gallons in total per week. Each
bag or container must not exceed 75 pounds in weight. Any additional waste over
the 128-gallon limit will require a City-approved tag/sticker securely affixed
to each bag or container. The tag/sticker must be obtained from the City Clerk
prior to trash collection days and will cost $1.00 per tag/sticker. The
contracting hauler will not pick up any bags or cans exceeding the 128 gallons
per household limit without the proper tag/sticker. Unique items that do not
meet the container requirements shall be picked up at the City-wide cleanup in
May, July or October.
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
110.01 Franchise Granted            110.09 Information
110.02 Rights and Privileges        110.10 Indemnification
110.03 Pipes and Mains              110.11 Applicable Regulations
110.04 Construction and Maintenance 110.12 Quality and Quantity
110.05 Excavations                  110.13 Franchise Fee
110.06 Utility Easements            110.14 Management Fees
110.07 Relocation not Required      110.15 Termination
110.08 Relocation Reimbursement
 
110.01 FRANCHISE GRANTED.
   There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa corporation,
hereinafter called the “Company,” and to its successors and assigns, the right
and franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain, and operate in the City a
gas distribution system, to furnish natural gas along, under and upon the
right-of-way, streets, avenues, alleys and public places to serve customers
within and without the City, and to furnish and sell natural gas to the City
and its inhabitants. The Company is granted the right to exercise powers of
eminent domain, subject to City Council approval upon application by the
Company. This franchise shall be effective for a 25-year period from and after
the effective date of the ordinance codified by this chapter. † 8
 
Notes
8 †  EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 676, adopting a natural gas franchise for the
  City, was passed and adopted on April 18, 2016.
110.02 RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES.
   The rights and privileges hereby granted are subject to the restrictions and
limitations of Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa, or as subsequently amended or
changed.
110.03 PIPES AND MAINS.
   The Company shall have the right to excavate in any public street for the
purpose of laying, re-laying, repairing, or extending gas pipes, mains,
conduits and other facilities provided that the same shall be so placed as not
to unreasonably interfere with any above or below-ground utility services or
facilities which have been or may hereafter be located by or under authority of
the City.
110.04 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The Company shall, excluding facilities located in private easements
(whether titled in Company exclusively or in Company and other entities), in
accordance with Iowa law including Company’s tariff on file with and made
effective by the Iowa Utilities Board as may subsequently be amended
(“Tariff”), at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its existing
facilities or equipment in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the
City in such a manner as the City may reasonably require for the purposes of
facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of the
street or alley. Relocation expenses for other hard surfaces, including
pedestrian and non-motorized vehicle pathways, will be paid by the City. If the
City has a reasonable alternative route for the street, alley, or public
improvements or an alternative construction method, which would not cause the
relocation of the Company installations, the City shall select said alternative
route or construction method. The City shall be responsible for surveying and
staking the right-of-way for City projects that require the Company to relocate
Company facilities. If requested, the City shall provide, at no cost to the
Company, copies of its relocation plan and profile and cross-section drawings.
If vegetation removal must be completed by the City as part of the City’s
project and are necessary whether or not utility facilities must be relocated,
the City at its own cost shall be responsible for said removals. If the timing
of the tree removals does not coincide with the Company facilities relocation
schedule and the Company must remove vegetation or trees that are included in
the City’s portion of the project, the City shall either remove the vegetation
trees at its cost or reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred to remove
said trees or vegetation. If project funds from a source other than the City
are available to pay for the relocation of utility facilities, the City shall
attempt to secure said funds and provide them to the Company to compensate the
Company for the costs of relocation.
110.05 EXCAVATIONS.
   In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys, and public places for
the installation of gas pipes, conduits, or apparatus, the Company shall not
unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets and shall replace the surface,
restoring it to the condition as existed immediately prior to excavation. The
Company agrees any replacement of road surface shall conform to current City
code regarding its depth and composition. The Company shall not be required to
restore or modify public right-of-way, sidewalks, or other areas in or adjacent
to the Company project to a condition superior to its immediate previously
existing condition or to a condition exceeding its previously existing
condition to the extent any alterations are required for the City to comply
with City, State or federal rules, regulations or laws.
110.06 UTILITY EASEMENTS.  
   Vacating a street, avenue, alley, public ground, or public right-of-way
shall not deprive the Company of its right to operate and maintain existing
facilities on, below, above, or beneath the vacated property. Prior to the City
abandoning or vacating any street, avenue, alley or public ground where the
Company has gas lines, mains or facilities, the City shall provide the Company
with not less than 60 days’ advance notice of the City’s proposed action and,
upon request grant the Company a utility easement covering existing and future
facilities and activities. If the City fails to grant the Company a utility
easement for said facilities prior to abandoning or vacating a street, avenue,
alley, or public ground, the City shall, at its cost and expense, obtain
easements for existing Company facilities.
110.07 RELOCATION NOT REQUIRED.  
   The Company shall not be required to relocate, at its cost and expense,
Company facilities in the public right-of-way that have been relocated at
Company expense at the direction of the City at any time during the previous 10
years.
110.08 RELOCATION REIMBURSEMENT.  
   Pursuant to relocation of Company facilities as may be required by this
chapter, if the City orders or requests the Company to relocate its existing
facilities or equipment in order to directly or indirectly facilitate the
project of a commercial or private developer or other non-public entity, the
City shall reimburse or the City shall require the developer or non-public
entity to reimburse the Company for the cost of such relocation as a
precondition to relocation. The Company shall not be required to relocate in
order to facilitate such private project at its expense.
110.09 INFORMATION.  
   Upon reasonable request the Company shall provide the City, on a project
specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location, relative to
boundaries of the right-of-way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it
has control that is located in City right-of-way, including documents, maps,
and other information in paper or electronic or other forms (“Information”).
The Company and City recognize the Information may in whole or part be
considered a confidential record under State or federal law or both. Upon
receipt of a request from a third party for information concerning information
about the Company’s facilities within the City, the City will promptly submit
same to Company. If the Company believes any of the information requested
constitutes a trade secret which may otherwise be protected from public
disclosure by State or federal law, or otherwise exempt from disclosure under
the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission Critical Energy Infrastructure requirements pursuant to 18 CFR
388.112 and 388.113, or Chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa, as such statutes and
regulations may be amended from time to time, then the Company shall provide
the City with a written explanation of the basis for such assertion of
confidentiality or exemption from disclosure within 10 days.
110.10 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The Company shall indemnify and save harmless the City from any and all
claims, suits, losses, damages, costs, or expenses, on account of injury or
damage to any person or property, to the extent caused or occasioned by the
Company’s negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation or
maintenance of the natural gas facilities authorized by the franchise;
provided, however, that the Company shall not be obligated to defend,
indemnify, and save harmless the City for any costs or damages to the extent
arising from the negligence of the City, its officers, employees, or agents.
110.11 APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   The Company shall extend its mains and pipes and operate and maintain the
system in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities
Board or its successors and Iowa law.
110.12 QUALITY AND QUANTITY.  
   During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish natural gas in
the quantity and quality consistent and in accordance with the applicable
regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board the Company’s tariff made effective by
the Iowa Utilities Board or its successors and Iowa law.
110.13 FRANCHISE FEE.  
   A franchise fee of ______ percent is imposed upon, and shall be collected
from, the natural gas customers of the Company receiving service and located
within the corporate limits of the City. The franchise fee shall be imposed
upon the gross receipts, minus uncollectable amounts, derived from the sale of
natural gas and distribution service.
   1.   The City agrees to modify the level of franchise fees imposed only once
in any 24-month period.
   2.   The Company will commence collecting franchise fees on or before the
first Company billing cycle of the first calendar month following 90 days of
receipt of information required of the City to implement the franchise fee,
including the City’s documentation of customer classes subject to or exempted
from City-imposed franchise fee.
   3.   The City shall be solely responsible for identifying customer classes
subject to or exempt from paying the City imposed franchise fee. The Company
shall have no obligation to collect franchise fees from customers in annexed
areas until and unless such ordinances have been provided to the Company by
certified mail. The Company shall commence collecting franchise fees in the
annexed areas no sooner than 60 days after receiving annexation ordinances from
the City.
   4.   The Company shall not, under any circumstances be required to return or
refund any franchise fees that have been collected from customers and remitted
to the City. In the event the Company is required to provide data or
information in defense of the City’s imposition of franchise fees or the
Company is required to assist the City in identifying customers or calculating
any franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual customers the City shall
reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by the Company to provide such
data or information.
110.14 MANAGEMENT FEES.  
   Upon implementation of a franchise fee the City shall not, pursuant to
Chapter 480A.6 of the Code of Iowa, impose or charge Company right-of-way
management fees for permits for Company construction, maintenance, repairs,
excavation, pavement cutting, or inspections of Company work sites and projects
or related matters.
110.15 TERMINATION.  
   Either City or Company (“party”) may terminate this franchise if the other
party shall be materially in breach of its provisions. Upon the occurrence of a
material breach, the non-breaching party shall provide the breaching party with
notification by certified mail specifying the alleged breach. The breaching
party shall have 60 days to cure the breach, unless it notifies the non-
breaching party, and the parties agree upon a shorter or longer period for
cure. If the breach is not cured within the cure period, the non-breaching
party may terminate this franchise. A party shall not be considered to be in
breach of this franchise if it has operated in compliance with State or federal
law. A party shall not be considered to have breached this franchise if the
alleged breach is the result of the actions of a third party or the other
party.
CHAPTER 111
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
 
111.01 Definitions                         111.07 Indemnification of City
111.02 Grant of Authority and General      111.08 Insurance
Provisions
111.03 Conditions on Street Use            111.09 Revocation
111.04 Operation and Maintenance of System 111.10 Sale or Transfer of Franchise
111.05 Drops to Public Buildings           111.11 Miscellaneous Provisions
111.06 Public, Educational and Government
(PEG) Access
 
111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
   1.   “Basic cable service” means any service tier which includes the lawful
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational, and governmental access programming required by the franchise to
be carried on the basic tier. Basic cable service as defined herein shall not
be inconsistent with 47 U.S.C. §543(b)(7).
   2.   “Cable programming service” means any video programming provided over a
cable system, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of
equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than:
      A.   Video programming carried on the basic service tier;
      B.   Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program
basis; or
      C.   A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-
program video programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted basis so
long as the combined service: (i) consists of commonly identified video
programming; and (ii) is not bundled with any regulated tier of service.
   Cable programming service as defined herein shall not be inconsistent with
the definition as set forth in 47 U.S.C. §543(1)(2) and 47 C.F.R. 76.901(b).
   3.   “Cable service” means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming, or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any,
which is required for the selection of such video programming or other
programming service.
   4.   “Cable system” or “System” shall have the meaning ascribed to it in
federal law.
   5.   “Franchise” means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof issued
by a franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a
franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or
otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system or
other MVPD facility.
   6.   “Franchise area” means the area within the legal boundaries of the
City.
   7.   “Grantee” is NEW ULM TELECOM, INC., its agents and employees, lawful
successors, transferees or assignees.
   8.   “Gross revenue” means any revenue, as determined in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles received by the Grantee from the
operation of the cable system to provide cable services in the City, provided,
however, that such phrase shall not include: (i) any taxes, fees or assessments
of general applicability collected by the Grantee from subscribers for pass-
through to a government agency, including franchise fees and the FCC user fee;
(ii) unrecovered bad debt; (iii) credits, refunds and deposits paid to
subscribers; and (iv) any exclusions available under applicable State law.
   9.   “Multichannel Video Program Distributor” or “MVPD” means a person such
as, but not limited to, a cable operator, a multichannel multipoint
distribution service, a direct broadcast satellite service, an OVS provider, or
a television receive-only satellite program distributor, who makes available
for purchase, by subscribers or customers, multiple channels of video
programming.
   10.   “Open Video Services” or “OVS” means any video programming services
provided to any person by a franchisee certified by the FCC to operate an open
video system pursuant to Section 47 U.S.C. 573, as may be amended, regardless
of the facilities used.
   11.   “Pay television" means the delivery over the system of pay-per-channel
or pay-per-program audio-visual signals to subscribers for a fee or charge, in
addition to the charge for basic cable service or cable programming services.
   12.   “Person” is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or other legal entity.
   13.   “Standard installation” means any residential installation which can
be completed using a drop of 150 feet or less.
   14.   “Street” means the surface of, and the space above and below, any
public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, path, court, sidewalk,
parkway, or drive, or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by the
City.
   15.   “Subscriber” means any person who lawfully receives cable service.
   16.   “Video programming” means programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast
station.
111.02 GRANT OF AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   1.   Franchise Required. It is unlawful for any person to construct, operate
or maintain a cable system or MVPD facility or to provide cable service, video
programming or other MVPD services, including OVS, in the City without a
franchise authorizing the same, unless applicable federal or State law
prohibits the City’s enforcement of such a requirement.
   2.   Grant of Franchise. The franchise is granted pursuant to the terms and
conditions contained herein.
   3.   Grant of Nonexclusive Authority.
      A.   The Grantee shall have the right and privilege to construct, erect,
operate, and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the
streets, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and all
extensions thereof, and additions thereto in franchise area, poles, wires,
cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and
fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in franchise area of a
cable system.
      B.   The franchise shall be nonexclusive, and the City reserves the right
to grant a similar use of said streets to any MVPD at any time during the
period of the franchise, provided, however, that any additional franchise shall
contain the same terms and conditions as this chapter in order that one MVPD is
not granted a competitive advantage over another. In the event a MVPD commences
operation without a franchise or is granted a franchise to operate by the City,
the terms and conditions of which do not comply with this chapter, the Grantee
shall have the right to either: (i) opt in to the competitor’s franchise by
providing 10 days’ prior written notice to the City; or (ii) petition the City
for modifications to its franchise, in which case the City shall work in good
faith with a Grantee to review and adopt modifications which the Grantee deems
necessary, review and approval by the City shall not be unreasonably denied.
      C.   Before granting an additional franchise, the City shall give written
notice to Grantee of any new application, identifying the applicant for such
additional franchise and providing at least 30 days prior notice of the date,
time, and place at which the City shall consider and/or determine whether such
additional franchise should be granted.
      D.   Every franchise shall apply to the entire service area of the City,
as it exists now or may later be configured.
      E.   In the event City grants one or more additional franchises or one or
more non-franchised MVPDs commence providing cable service in the City, Grantee
shall have the right to terminate or reduce the term of the franchise in its
sole discretion.
      F.   Neither City nor Grantee may unilaterally alter the material rights
and obligations set forth in this chapter. In the event of a conflict between
any other ordinance and this chapter, this chapter shall control.
   4.   Franchise Term. The franchise shall be in effect for a period of 10
years from the date of acceptance by Grantee, unless renewed, revoked, or
terminated sooner as herein provided. † 9
   5.   Territorial Area Involved. The franchise is granted for the corporate
boundaries of City, as it exists from time to time. In the event of annexation
by City, or as development occurs, any new territory shall become part of the
area covered, provided, however, that Grantee shall not be required to extend
service beyond its present system boundaries unless there is a minimum of 25
homes per cable mile as measured from the last fiber node or terminating
amplifier.
   6.   Written Notice. All notices, reports, or demands required to be given
in writing under this chapter shall be deemed to be given when delivered
personally to any officer of Grantee or City’s Administrator of the franchise.
 
Notes
  †  EDITOR’S NOTE: An Ordinance granting a franchise to operate a cable
9 communications system in the City was passed and adopted on June 20, 2011.
   
111.03 CONDITIONS ON STREET USE.
   1.   Grantee shall obtain all required permits from City before commencing
any construction upgrade or extension of the system.
   2.   The City shall impose no permit fees upon Grantee.
   3.   If at any time during the period of the franchise the City shall elect
to alter, or change the grade or location of any street, alley or other public
way, the Grantee shall, at its own expense, upon reasonable notice by City,
remove and relocate its poles, wires, cables, conduits, manholes and other
fixtures of the system. If City reimburses other occupants of the street,
Grantee shall be likewise reimbursed.
   4.   The Grantee shall, on request of any person holding a moving permit
issued by City, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of
buildings with the expense of such temporary removal to be paid by the person
requesting the same, and the Grantee shall be given not less than 10 days’
advance notice to arrange for such temporary changes.
   5.   The Grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees upon and
overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public easements of City so as
to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and
cables of the Grantee.
   6.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall relieve any person from
liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid
injuring Grantee's facilities.
   7.   In areas where all other utility lines are placed underground, Grantee
shall construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities underground.
In any area where one or more public utilities are aerial, Grantee may
construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities from the same pole
with the consent of the owner of the pole.
111.04 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
   The Grantee shall render effective service, make repairs promptly, and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.
111.05 DROPS TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
   Grantee shall provide standard installation of one cable drop, one cable
outlet, and monthly basic cable service without charge to City Hall, Community
Center, public library, fire hall and all public and private elementary and
secondary schools, excluding home schools, located in the City within 150 feet
of the system, upon request of the school system. No redistribution of the free
basic cable service provided pursuant to this section shall be allowed.
Additional drops and/or outlets in any of the above locations will be provided
by Grantee at the cost of Grantee’s time and material. Alternatively, at the
institution’s request, said institution may add outlets at its own expense, as
long as such installation meets Grantee’s standards and provided that any fees
for cable communications services are paid. Nothing herein shall be construed
as requiring Grantee to extend the system to serve additional institutions as
may be designated by City. Grantee shall have one year from the date of City
Council designation of additional institutions to complete construction of the
drop and outlet.
111.06 PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENT (PEG) ACCESS.
   Grantee shall offer to each of its subscribers who receive all or any part
of the cable services offered on the system, reception of one PEG access
channel.
111.07 INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY.
   1.   Grantee shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless City, its officers,
boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and agents, from
and against all liability, damages, and penalties which they may legally be
required to pay as a result of the exercise of the franchise, except claims
covered by worker’s compensation insurance or any claims arising from or
related to City’s negligence. Nothing in this franchise relieves a person from
liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid
injuring the Grantee's facilities while performing work connected with grading,
regrading, or changing the line of a street or public place or with the
construction or reconstruction of a sewer or water system.
   2.   In order for City to assert its rights to be indemnified, defended, and
held harmless, City must with respect to each claim:
      A.   Promptly notify Grantee in writing of any claim or legal proceeding
which gives rise to such right.
      B.   Afford Grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully control
any compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of any claim or
proceeding.
      C.   Fully cooperate with reasonable requests of Grantee, at Grantee’s
expense, in its participation in, and control, compromise, settlement or
resolution or other disposition of such claim or proceeding subject to
paragraph B above.
111.08 INSURANCE.
   Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect at its sole expense, a
comprehensive general liability insurance policy, including contractual
liability coverage, in protection of City in its capacity as such. The policies
of insurance shall be in the sum of not less than $300,000.00 for personal
injury or death of any one person, and $1,000,000.00 for personal injury or
death of two or more persons in any one occurrence, $300,000.00 for property
damage to any one person and $1,000,000.00 for property damage resulting from
any one act or occurrence.
111.09 REVOCATION.
   1.   City’s Right to Revoke. City reserves the right to revoke, terminate or
cancel the franchise, if after strictly following the procedures required by
subsection 2 of this section, it is determined that Grantee has violated any
material provision of this chapter and has failed to substantially cure said
violation.
   2.   Procedures for Revocation.
      A.   City shall provide Grantee with written notice of a cause for
revocation and the intent to revoke and shall allow Grantee 60 days subsequent
to receipt of the notice in which to substantially cure the violation or to
provide adequate assurance of performance. Together with the notice required
herein, City shall provide Grantee with written findings of fact which are the
basis of the revocation.
      B.   Grantee shall be provided the right to a public hearing affording
due process before the City Council prior to revocation, which public hearing
shall follow the 60-day notice provided in paragraph A above. City shall
provide Grantee with written notice of its decision together with written
findings of fact supplementing said decision.
      C.   After the public hearing and upon written determination by City to
revoke the franchise, Grantee may appeal said decision with an appropriate
State or federal court or agency.
      D.   During the appeal period, the franchise shall remain in full force
and effect unless the term thereof sooner expires.
      E.   Upon satisfactory correction by Grantee of the violation upon which
said notice was given, the initial notice shall become void.
111.10 SALE OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
   No sale or transfer of the franchise shall take place without the written
approval of the City, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. All of
the rights, privileges, obligations, duties, and liabilities created by this
chapter shall pass to and be binding upon the successor or assign of Grantee.
Said approval shall not be required where Grantee grants a security interest in
its Franchise and assets to secure indebtedness.
111.11 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   1.   Franchise Renewal. Any renewal of the franchise shall be done in
accordance with applicable federal law.
   2.   Amendment of Franchise Ordinance. Grantee and City may agree, from time
to time, to amend this chapter. Such written amendments may be made at any
time.
   3.   Marketing. Grantee shall have the right to conduct direct selling in
the franchise area, including door to door sales, notwithstanding any peddler
or solicitor laws or regulations to the contrary.
CHAPTER 112
REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION RATES
 
112.01 Authority                   112.04 Notice of Rate Change
112.02 Rate Regulation Proceedings 112.05 Delegation of Power
112.03 Certification
 
112.01 AUTHORITY.
   The City has the legal authority to administer and shall enforce against any
non-municipally owned cable television system operator, as permitted therein,
the provisions of Part 76, Subpart N of the Rules and Regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), concerning Cable Rate Regulation, 47
C.F.R. §§76.900 et. seq., as they currently read and hereafter may be amended,
which are herewith incorporated by reference.
112.02 RATE REGULATION PROCEEDINGS.
   Any rate regulation proceedings conducted hereunder shall provide a
reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of any interested party,
including but not limited to, the City or its designee, the Cable Operator,
subscribers, and residents of the franchise area. In addition to all other
provisions required by the laws of the State of Iowa and by the City, and in
order to provide for such opportunity for consideration of the views of any
interested party, the City shall take the following actions:
   1.   The City shall publish notice as provided in Section 362.3 of the Code
of Iowa and shall mail, by certified mail, to the Cable Operator a notice of
the intent to conduct a public proceeding on basic service tier rates and/or
charges for equipment to receive such basic service tier, as defined by the
FCC.
   2.   The public notice shall state, among other things, that cable
television rates are subject to municipal review and explain the nature of the
rate review in question; that any interested party has a right to participate
in the proceeding; that public views may be submitted in the proceeding,
explaining how they are to be submitted and the deadline for submitting any
such views; that a decision concerning the reasonableness of the cable
television rates in question will be governed by the Rules and Regulations of
the FCC; and that the decision of the City is subject to review by the FCC.
   3.   The City shall conduct a public proceeding to determine whether or not
the rates or proposed rate increases are reasonable. The City may delegate the
responsibility to conduct the proceeding to any duly qualified and eligible
individuals or entity. If the City or its designee cannot determine the
reasonableness of a proposed rate increase within the time period permitted by
the FCC Rules and Regulations, it may announce the effective date of the
proposed rates for an additional period of time as permitted by the FCC Rules
and Regulations, and issue any other necessary or appropriate order and give
public notice accordingly.
   4.   In the course of the rate regulation proceeding, the City may require
additional information from the Cable Operator that is reasonably necessary to
determine the reasonableness of the basic service tier rates and equipment
charges. Any such additional information submitted to the City shall be
verified by an appropriate official of the cable television system supervising
the preparation of the response on behalf of the entity, and submitted by way
of affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating that the response is true and
accurate to the best of that person’s knowledge, information and belief formed
after reasonable inquiry.
   5.   The City may request proprietary information, provided that the City
shall consider a timely request from the Cable Operator that said proprietary
information shall not be made available for public information, consistent with
the procedures set forth in Section 0.459 of the FCC Rules and Regulations.
Furthermore, said proprietary information may be used only for the purpose of
determining the reasonableness of the rates and charges or the appropriate rate
level based on a cost-of-service showing submitted by the Cable Operator.
   6.   The City may exercise all powers under the laws of evidence applicable
to administrative proceedings under the laws of the State of Iowa and of the
City to discover any information relevant to the rate regulation proceeding,
including, but not limited to, subpoena, interrogatories, production of
documents, and deposition.
   7.   Upon termination of the rate regulation proceeding, the City shall
adopt and release a written decision as to whether or not the rate or proposed
rate increase is reasonable or unreasonable, and, if unreasonable, its remedy,
including prospective rate reduction, rate prescription, and refunds.
   8.   The City may not impose any fines, penalties, forfeitures or other
sanctions, other than permitted by the FCC Rules and Regulations, for charging
an unreasonable rate or proposing an unreasonable rate increase.
   9.   Consistent with FCC Rules and Regulations, the City’s decision may be
reviewed only by the FCC.
   10.   The City shall be authorized, at any time, whether or not in the
course of a rate regulation proceeding, to gather information as necessary to
exercise its jurisdiction as authorized by the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended, and the FCC Rules and Regulations. Any information submitted to the
City shall be verified by an appropriate official of the cable television
system supervising the preparation of the response on behalf of the entity, and
submitted by way of affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating that the
response is true and accurate to the best of that person’s knowledge,
information and belief formed after reasonable inquiry.
112.03 CERTIFICATION.
   The City shall file with the FCC the required certification form (FCC Form
328) on September 1, 1993, or as soon thereafter as appropriate. Thirty days
later, or as soon thereafter as appropriate, the City shall notify the Cable
Operator that the City has been certified by the FCC and that it has adopted
all necessary regulations so as to begin regulating basic service tier cable
television rates and equipment charges.
112.04 NOTICE OF RATE CHANGE.
   With regard to the cable programming service tier, as defined by the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and the FCC Rules and Regulations, and
over which the City is not empowered to exercise rate regulation, the Cable
Operator shall give notice to the City of any change in rates for the cable
programming service tier or tiers, any change in the charge for equipment
required to receive the tier or tiers, and any changes in the nature of the
services provided, including the program services included in the tier or
tiers. Said notice shall be provided within five (5) business days after the
change becomes effective.
112.05 DELEGATION OF POWER.
   The City may delegate its powers to enforce this chapter to municipal
employees or officers (the “cable official”). The cable official will have the
authority to:
   1.   Administer oaths and affirmations;
   2.   Issue subpoenas;
   3.   Examine witnesses;
   4.   Rule upon questions of evidence;
   5.   Take or cause depositions to be taken;
   6.   Conduct proceedings in accordance with this chapter;
   7.   Exclude from the proceeding any person engaging in contemptuous conduct
or otherwise disrupting the proceedings;
   8.   Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues by
consent of the parties; and
   9.   Take actions and make decisions or recommend decisions in conformity
with this chapter.
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
 
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.04 Action by Council
120.02 General Prohibition        120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03 Investigation              120.06 Amusement Devices
120.01 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for
sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor control
license, wine permit, or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122, and 123.171)
120.02 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale,
possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms,
conditions, limitations, and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code
of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty
may be imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39, and 123.50)
120.03 INVESTIGATION.
   Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or beer permit,
the Clerk may forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an
investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred
in the application. The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine
if they conform to the requirements of the City. The Council shall not approve
an application for a license or permit for any premises that does not conform
to the applicable law and ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04 ACTION BY COUNCIL.
   The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of a retail
alcohol license, shall endorse its approval or disapproval on the application,
and shall forward the application with the necessary fee and bond, if required,
to the Iowa Department of Revenue.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])
(Ord. 704 – Aug. 23 Supp.)
120.05 PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.
   A person holding a retail alcohol license and the person’s agents or
employees shall not do any of the following:
   1.   Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])
   2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage on the premises covered by the
license or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:
00 a.m. on any day of the week.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b])
   3.   Sell alcoholic beverages to any person on credit, except with a bona
fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its
members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests, or to
retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center, or
events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])
   4.   Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold, except as
follows:
      A.   Definitions. For use in this subsection the following terms are
defined as follows:
         (1)   “Bar” means an establishment where one may purchase alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises and in which the serving of food is
only incidental to the consumption of those beverages.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2[1])
         (2)   “Restaurant” means eating establishments, including private and
public school cafeterias, which offer food to the public, guests, or employees,
including the kitchen and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere, and including a bar area within a restaurant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2[17])
      B.   This subsection shall not apply if the employer has, on file,
written permission from the parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a person 16
or 17 years of age for the person to sell or serve alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises where sold. However, a person 16 or 17 years of age
shall not work in a bar as defined in Paragraph A.
         (1)   The employer shall keep a copy of the written permission on file
until the person is either 18 years of age or no longer engaged in the sale of
or serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.
         (2)   If written permission is on file in accordance with Paragraph B,
a person 16 or 17 years of age may sell or serve alcoholic beverages in a
restaurant as defined above in Paragraph A during the hours in which the
restaurant serves food.
      C.   A person 16 or 17 years of age shall not sell or serve alcoholic
beverages under this subsection unless at least two employees 18 years of age
or older are physically present in the area where alcoholic beverages are sold
or served.
      D.   If a person employed under this subsection reports an incident of
workplace harassment to the employer or if the employer otherwise becomes aware
of such an incident, the employer shall report the incident to the employee’s
parent, guardian, or legal custodian and to the Iowa Civil Rights Commission,
which shall determine if any action is necessary or appropriate under Chapter
216 of the Code of Iowa.
      E.   An employer that employs a person under this subsection shall
require the person to attend training on prevention and response to sexual
harassment upon commencing employment.
      F.   Prior to a person commencing employment under this subsection, the
employer shall notify the employer’s dramshop liability insurer, in a form and
time period prescribed by the Director, that the employer is employing a person
under this subsection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])
   5.   In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow the
mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine, beer, or any
other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])
   6.   Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])
   7.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises
covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])
   8.   Keep on premises covered by a retail alcohol license any alcoholic
liquor in any container except the original package purchased from the Iowa
Department of Revenue and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the
premises for immediate consumption. However, mixed drinks or cocktails that are
mixed on the premises and are not for immediate consumption may be consumed on
the licensed premises, subject to rules adopted by the Iowa Department of
Revenue.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])
   9.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or
receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or
adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents or remaining
contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly
possess any original package that has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])
   10.   Allow any person other than the licensee or employees of the licensee
to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or
other container that is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except
as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])
   11.   Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine that is used to
vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized
form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2k])
(Section 120.05 – Ord. 704 – Aug. 23 Supp.)
120.06 AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   The following provisions pertain to electrical or mechanical amusement
devices possessed and used in accordance with Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa.
(Said devices are allowed only in premises with a liquor control license or
beer permit, as specifically authorized in said Chapter 99B.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.57)
   1.   As used in this section, "registered electrical or mechanical amusement
device" means an electrical or mechanical device required to be registered with
the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals, as provided in Section 99B.53 of
the Code of Iowa.
   2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to participate in the
operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.
   3.   It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing a registered electrical
or mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing a
registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a
person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation of a registered
electrical or mechanical amusement device.
   4.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation
of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under
the age of 21.
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
 
121.01 Definitions     121.07 Expiration
121.02 Permit Required 121.08 Refunds
121.03 Application     121.09 Persons Under Legal Age
121.04 City Approval   121.10 Self-Service Sales Prohibited
121.05 Fees            121.11 Permit Revocation
121.06 Issuance
 
121.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
   1.   “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or
containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or
by any other means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not include cigarettes,
tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug
or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   2.   “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of
tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and
irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored,
adulterated, or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper
or cover made of paper or any other material. However, cigarettes shall not be
construed to include cigars.
   3.   “Department” means the State Department of Revenue.
   4.   “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products are sold, stored, or kept for
the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
   5.   “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes, or offers for
sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption,
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, irrespective of
the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages in the business
of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products to ultimate consumers.
   6.   “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement,
or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of
the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or
employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access
location.
   7.   “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars;
cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and
other smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and
other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and
sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such
manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for
both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
   8.   “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not
contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic
circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of
shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a solution or other
substance. “Vapor product” includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any
cartridge or other container of a solution or other substance, which may or may
not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device. “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a
drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter
V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
121.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   1.   Retail Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a
holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products,
or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit
the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products
within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit
shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be
easily seen by the public and the persons authorized to inspect the place of
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(1))
   2.   Retail Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products at any place of business without first having
received a permit as a retailer for each place of business owned or operated by
the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A(1))
A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a
retail tobacco permit. However, if a retailer only holds a retail cigarette
permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the retailer shall
not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products, during such time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A(4))
121.03   APPLICATION.
A retailer shall submit to the department an application on forms furnished by
the department, accompanied by the required fees and adequate bond as provided
in Section 453A.14, of the Code of Iowa. Applications, any supporting
documentation, and the associated fees shall be submitted electronically to the
department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(5))
121.04   CITY APPROVAL.
The City may approve retail permit applications for applicants with a place of
business within the City limits. The City shall use the electronic portal of
the department to process retail permit applications. Upon approval of a retail
permit application by the City the department shall issue the permit to the
applicant on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(2))
121.05 FEES.
   The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(3)(b) and 453A.47A(7))
 
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING:   FEE:
July, August or September     $ 75.00
October, November or December $ 56.25
January, February or March    $ 37.50
April, May or June            $ 18.75
 
121.06   ISSUANCE.
Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for which it is
issued and shall be nonassignable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(9))
121.07   EXPIRATION.
All permits shall expire on June 30 of each year. A permit shall not be granted
or issued until the applicant has paid the fees to the department for the next
period ending on June 30.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(3)(a))
121.08   REFUNDS.
A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the
City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13(4) and 453A.47A(8))
121.09   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
A person shall not sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any
person under 21 years of age. The provision of this section includes
prohibiting a person under 21 years of age from purchasing tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a
vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the
provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and
hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation,
assess the following:
   1.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty
in the amount of $300.00. Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under
this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period
of 14 days.
   2.   For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall
be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 or the retailer’s permit
shall be suspended for a period of 30 days. The retailer may select its
preference in the penalty to be applied under this subsection.
   3.   For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.
   4.   For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 60 days.
   5.   For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s
permit shall be revoked.
The Clerk shall give 10 days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy
of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a
permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the
time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22, and 453A.36(6))
121.10   SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.
Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as
provided in Section 453A.36(6) of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell
or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
vapor products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.11   PERMIT REVOCATION.
Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by the
Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or
any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be
issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person
for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has
expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown
to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail
permit to the department within 30 days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
(Chapter 121 – Ord. 716 – Aug. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose                  122.10 Time Restriction
122.02 Definitions              122.11 Revocation of License
122.03 License Required         122.12 Hearing
122.04 Application for License  122.13 Record and Determination
122.05 License Fees             122.14 Appeal
122.06 Bond Required            122.15 Effect of Revocation
122.07 License Issued           122.16 Rebates
122.08 Display of License       122.17 License Exemptions
122.09 License Not Transferable 122.18 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
 
122.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against
fraud, unfair competition, and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by
licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants.
122.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   "Peddler" means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or
offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to
house or upon the public street.
   2.   "Solicitor" means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from
house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any
order for goods, services, subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a
future date.
   3.   "Transient merchant" means any person who engages in a temporary or
itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires,
leases or occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or who operates out of
a vehicle that is parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary association
with a local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of such
transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any
local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer does not exempt any person from
being considered a transient merchant.
122.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting or in the business of a
transient merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein
provided is in violation of this chapter.
122.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   An application in writing shall be filed with the Clerk for a license under
this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant's name, permanent
and local address, and business address if any. The application shall also set
forth the applicant's employer, if any, and the employer's address, the nature
of the applicant's business, the last three places of such business and the
length of time sought to be covered by the license. An application fee of $2.00
shall be paid at the time of filing such application to cover the cost of
investigating the facts stated therein.
122.05 LICENSE FEES.
   The following license fees shall be paid to the Clerk prior to the issuance
of any license.
   1.   Solicitors. In addition to the application fee for each person actually
soliciting (principal or agent), a fee for the principal of $10.00 per year.
   2.   Peddlers or Transient Merchants.
      A.   For one day            $   5.00
      B.   For one week            $   10.00
      C.   For up to six (6) months      $   20.00
      D.   For one year or major part thereof   $   25.00
122.06 BOND REQUIRED.
   Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant, an
applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed a
bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of
Iowa.
122.07 LICENSE ISSUED.
   If the Clerk finds the application is completed in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be correct,
and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued immediately.
122.08 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all times
while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective
customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements
of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant's
license in the merchant's place of business.
122.09 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in
any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the
application.
122.10 TIME RESTRICTION.
   All peddler's and solicitor's licenses shall provide that said licenses are
in force and effect only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
122.11 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the Clerk may
revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for the following reasons:
   1.   Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in
the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
   2.   Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has
otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
   3.   Endangered Public Welfare, Health, or Safety. The licensee has
conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare,
safety, order, or morals.
   The Clerk shall send the written notice to the licensee at the licensee's
local address. The notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against
the licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated,
and the date, time, and place for hearing on the matter.
122.12 HEARING.
   The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any
complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in
the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative,
fail to appear without good cause, the Clerk may proceed to a determination of
the complaint.
122.13 RECORD AND DETERMINATION.
   The Clerk shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and
shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the Clerk
finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or
State law.
122.14 APPEAL.
   If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall make a
part of the record the reasons for such revocation or refusal. The licensee, or
the applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next
regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify, or affirm the decision of the
Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall
carry out the decision of the Council.
122.15 EFFECT OF REVOCATION.
   Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any
license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the
revocation.
122.16 REBATES.
   Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled to
a rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it
expires. The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing the total
license fee by the number of days for which the license was issued and then
multiplying the result by the number of full days not expired. In all cases, at
least $5.00 of the original fee shall be retained by the City to cover
administrative costs.
122.17 LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.
   1.   Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for, or selling
subscriptions to newspapers.
   2.   Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl
Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America, and similar organizations.
   3.   Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for
sale their own products.
   4.   Students. Students representing the Alta-Aurelia Community School
District conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the
school.
   5.   Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit
additional business or make special sales.
   6.   Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses
or institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or
institutional use.
122.18 CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations
operating under the provisions of Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa desiring to
solicit money or to distribute literature are exempt from the operation of
Sections
122.04 and
122.05. All such organizations are required to submit in writing to the Clerk
the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought, names
and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period
during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions,
fees or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof. If the
Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or nonprofit
organization, the Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license containing the
above information to the applicant. In the event the Clerk denies the
exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the
decision to the Council, as provided in Section
122.14 of this chapter.
CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS
 
123.01 House Mover Defined 123.07 Public Safety
123.02 Permit Required     123.08 Time Limit
123.03 Application         123.09 Removal by City
123.04 Bond Required       123.10 Protect Pavement
123.05 Insurance Required  123.11 Overhead Wires
123.06 Permit Issued
 
123.01 HOUSE MOVER DEFINED.
   A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a building or
similar structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the
building or structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks,
dollies, or any other specialized moving equipment.
123.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover as
herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building or
similar structure to be moved. Buildings of less than 200 square feet are
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
123.03 APPLICATION.
   Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the
Clerk. The application shall include:
   1.   Name and Address. The applicant’s full name and address and, if a
corporation, the names and addresses of its principal officers.
   2.   Building Location. An accurate description of the present location and
future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
   3.   Routing Plan. A routing plan approved by the Police Chief, street
superintendent, and public utility officials. The route approved shall be the
shortest route compatible with the greatest public convenience and safety.
123.04 BOND REQUIRED.
   The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the minimum sum of
$5,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the
State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to
the City or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City
in the course of moving the building or structure.
123.05 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that
the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration
of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the
following minimum amounts:
   1.   Bodily Injury – $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
   2.   Property Damage – $50,000.00 per accident.
123.06 PERMIT ISSUED.
   Upon approval of the application and filing of bond and insurance
certificate, the Clerk shall issue a permit. A separate permit shall be
required for each house, building, or similar structure to be moved.
123.07 PUBLIC SAFETY.
   At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any
street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain flag
persons at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to
the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure. At all times when the
building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public
property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights at the
intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the
building or structure.
123.08 TIME LIMIT.
   No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to
remain upon any street or other public way for a period of more than 12 hours
without having first secured the written approval of the City.
123.09 REMOVAL BY CITY.
   In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation
of Section 123.08, the City is authorized to remove such building or structure
and assess the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the
permit holder’s bond.
123.10   PROTECT PAVEMENT.
   It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement,
unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are at
least one inch in width for each 1,000 pounds of weight of such building. If
there is any question as to the weight of a house or building, the estimate of
the City as to such weight shall be final.
123.11 OVERHEAD WIRES.
   The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone,
cable television and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and
replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same.
CHAPTER 124
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
 
124.01 Definitions 124.02 Regulations
 
124.01 DEFINITIONS.
   1.   “Adult bookstore” means a retail store for the sale, rental, or
exchange of books, magazines, or video cassettes, distinguished or
characterized by primary emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this
section. Adult bookstores do not include businesses which sell, rent, or
exchange video cassettes as a sidelight or adjunct to sales or rental of video
cassettes not relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   2.   “Adult entertainment facility” means a building in which:
      A.   Entertainers routinely remove all or portions of their clothing as a
part of their performance, regardless of whether the business has a license to
sell alcohol; or
      B.   Entertainers allow patrons to observe specific sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas involving such entertainers.
   For the purpose of this subsection, an “entertainer” is a person who either
works as an employee of the business, is an agent of the business, or an
independent contractor who has been hired or is allowed by the business to
perform for the apparent pleasure or gratification of the patron. Examples of
adult entertainment facilities would include but not be limited to gentlemen’s
clubs, strip-bars, full-nudity juice bars, and nude modeling clubs.
   3.   “Adult movie theater” means an enclosed building used for presenting
motion picture films, video cassettes, cable television, or any other visual
media, distinguished or characterized by emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined in this section, for observation by persons therein. For
purposes of this section, the size and description of the viewing room shall
not affect characterization of the buildings as a theater; however, nothing in
this section shall be deemed to regulate the viewing habits of persons in the
privacy of their homes.
   4.   “Specified anatomical areas” includes the following:
      A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, and female breast below the point immediately above the top
of the areola; and
      B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   5.   “Specific sexual activities” includes displays of the following:
      A.   Any act of sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, including
genital-genital, anal-genital, or oral-genital, whether between human beings,
or a human being and an animal.
      B.   Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing costume or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restricted on the
part of one so clothed.
      C.   Masturbation or lewd exhibitions of the genitals including any
explicit, close-up representation of a human genital organ.
      D.   Physical contact as stimulated physical contact with the unclothed
pubic area or buttocks of a human male or female, or the breasts of the female,
whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans
and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
      E.   An act of sexual assault where physical violence or drugs are
employed to overcome the will or to achieve the consent of a person to an act
of sexual conduct and the effects or results of the violence or drugs are
shown.
   6.   “Used” describes a continuing course of conduct exhibiting “specific
sexual activities” and “specified anatomical areas” in a manner that appeals to
the prurient interest.
124.02 REGULATIONS.
   1.   Adult movie theaters, adult bookstores and adult entertainment
facilities are prohibited within 2,500 feet from the following specified uses
or zones:
      A.   Any residential zone.
      B.   Any public or private school.
      C.   Any church or religious facility or institution.
      D.   Any public park.
   2.   The distance provided in this section shall be measured by following a
straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point
of the property parcel upon which the proposed use is to be located, to the
nearest point of the parcel of property or the land use district boundary line
from which the proposed land use is to be separated.
   3.   Nothing in this section is intended to authorize, legalize, or permit
the establishment, operation, or maintenance or any business, building or use
which violates any other provisions of law.
   4.   No adult movie theater, adult bookstore, or adult entertainment
facility shall be located closer than 300 feet to any other adult movie
theater, adult bookstore, or adult entertainment facility.
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.09 Excavations
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing    135.10 Property Owner’s Responsibility for
                                  Maintenance
135.03 Placing Debris On          135.11 Failure to Maintain
135.04 Playing In                 135.12 Dumping of Snow
135.05 Traveling on Barricaded    135.13 Driveway Culverts
Street or Alley
135.06 Use for Business Purposes  135.14 Snow at Private Drives
135.07 Washing Vehicles           135.15 Mailboxes in Right-of-Way
135.08 Burning Prohibited
 
135.01 REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.
   It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy or
carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard or other
article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed
thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places
in said street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02 OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.
   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface or injure any street or
alley in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03 PLACING DEBRIS ON.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any
glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, leaves, grass or any other debris likely to be washed into the storm
sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any person,
animal or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04 PLAYING IN.
   It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets or
alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05 TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.
   It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street
or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed
thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer or
member of the Fire Department.
135.06 USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.
   It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any
machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering
same for sale, without permission of the Council.
135.07 WASHING VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street, or alley
for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does
not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or
equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
135.08 BURNING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or other combustible
material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09 EXCAVATIONS.
   No person shall dig, excavate, or in any manner disturb any street, parking
or alley except in accordance with the following:
   1.   Permit Required. No excavation shall be commenced without first
obtaining a permit. A written application for such permit shall be filed with
the City and shall contain the following:
      A.   An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in
front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
      B.   A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is
to be made;
      C.   The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and
restoration of the street or alley surface; and
      D.   Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
   2.   Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner
that will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the
uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street.
   3.   Barricades, Fencing and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing and
warning lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be so placed as to
protect the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or
maintaining adequate barricades, fencing or warning lights shall be paid to the
City by the permit holder/property owner.
   4.   Bond Required. The applicant shall post with the City a penal bond in
the minimum sum of $1,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to issue
such bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for
any damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs
incurred by the City in the course of administration of this section. In lieu
of a surety bond, a cash deposit of $1,000.00 may be filed with the City.
   5.   Insurance Required. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of
insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance
in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents
and employees for the following minimum amounts:
      A.   Bodily Injury - $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
      B.   Property Damage - $50,000.00 per accident.
   6.   Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the
condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner
satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the permit holder/property owner.
   7.   Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City.
Backfill shall not be deemed completed, and no resurfacing of any improved
street or alley surface shall begin, until such backfill is inspected and
approved by the City. The permit holder/property owner shall provide the City
with notice at least 24 hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is
desired.
   8.   Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be
discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of 24 hours after the
approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the City
has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and charge any expenses
for such work to the permit holder/property owner.
   9.   Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the
excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner. The
permit holder and owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
   10.   Notification. At least 48 hours prior to the commencement of the
excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, the person
performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and
provide the center with the information required under Section 480.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
   11.   Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application and filing of bond and
insurance certificate, a permit shall be issued. A separate permit shall be
required for each excavation.
135.10 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
   The abutting property owner shall maintain all property outside the lot and
property lines and inside the curb lines upon public streets and shall keep
such area in a safe condition, free from nuisances, obstructions, and hazards.
In the absence of a curb, such property shall extend from the property line to
that portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes. The
abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead
wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes, but
is not limited to, timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up
litter and debris. The abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused
by failure to maintain the publicly owned property or right-of-way.† 1
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
 
Notes
1 †  EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Section 136.04 relating to property owner's
  responsibility for maintenance of sidewalks.
135.11 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
   If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the
above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required
action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the
same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12 DUMPING OF SNOW.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be
thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters,
or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a
hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial
drives in the business district it is absolutely necessary to move the snow
onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed
promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt removal of
such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.13 DRIVEWAY CULVERTS.
   The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert deemed
necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s property, and
before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the City.
In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall
be the responsibility of the property owner to make such repairs, and, in the
event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the right to make the
repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for the cost of said
repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer and specially
assessed against the property as by law provided.
135.14 SNOW AT PRIVATE DRIVES.  
   It is the responsibility of property owners to remove any snow placed into
private driveways by City plows. Snow from private driveways may not be placed
on or pushed across a City street.
135.15 MAILBOXES IN RIGHT-OF-WAY.  
   1.   Paragraphs 1 and 2 are hereby grandfathered to the existing mailboxes
as of July 15, 2024 until the property is sold and changes ownership at which
time the grandfathered mailbox must be removed.
      A.   North on Myrtle St. from 3rd to 4th Streets on east side.
      B.   East on 4th St. from Myrtle to Valor Rd. on south side.
      C.   North on Valor Rd. to City limits on east side.
      D.   East on E. 2nd St. in front of First Trust & Savings Bank to Myrtle
St. on south side.
      E.   South on Myrtle St. from E, 2nd St. to Highway 7 on west side.
      F.   East of Highway 7 from Myrtle St. to City limits on south side.
      G.   North on Hickory St. from W. 3rd St. to Highway 7 on east side.
   2.   Mailboxes must be in compliance with postal regulations identified as
T2 (traditional) style measuring 21 ¼ inches in length, 8 ¼ inches in width,
and 10 ½ inches in height. Mailbox owners will be responsible for all costs of
the erecting, maintaining, repairs or replacements if the boxes are damaged by
snowplows or by any other means.
   3.   No additional mailboxes may be erected in City parking or City right-
of-way as of July 15, 2024.
   4.   All mailboxes shall be removed accordingly, if the post-road route is
changed or eliminated.
   5.   Violations of this ordinance shall be municipal infractions and
penalties may be incurred accordingly, and the City shall have the right to
remove the mailbox(s) if not in compliance after a 10-day written notice by
certified mail to the owner.
(Section 135.15 – Ord. 708 – Aug. 24 Supp.)
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose                               136.11 Interference with Sidewalk
                                             Improvements
136.02 Definitions                           136.12 Awnings
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice, and             136.13 Encroaching Steps
Accumulations
136.04 Property Owner’s Responsibility for 136.14 Openings and Enclosures
Maintenance
136.05 City May Order Repairs                136.15 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
136.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered         136.16 Defacing
136.07 Permit Required                       136.17 Debris on Sidewalks
136.08 Sidewalk Standards                    136.18 Merchandise Display
136.09 Barricades and Warning Lights         136.19 Sales Stands
136.10 Failure to Repair or Barricade
 
136.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement, or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner
and to minimize the liability of the City.
136.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the
sidewalk when it is hardening.
   2.    “Defective sidewalk” means any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more
of the following characteristics:
      A.   Vertical separations equal to three-fourths inch or more.
      B.   Horizontal separations equal to one inch or more.
      C.   Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more and at
least four inches in diameter.
      D.   Spalling over 50 percent of a single square of the sidewalk with one
or more depressions equal to one-half inch or more.
      E.   Spalling over less than 50 percent of a single square of the
sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more.
      F.   A single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that no part
thereof has a piece greater than one square foot.
      G.   A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth.
      H.   A change from the design or construction grade equal to or greater
than three-fourths inch per foot.
   3.   “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the
particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
   4.   “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete
is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
   5.   “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any
sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification
required herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.
   6.   “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.
   7.   “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or
suburban areas.
   8.   “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement, or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
   9.   “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing
the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
136.03 REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS.
   It is the responsibility of the abutting property owner to:
   1.   Remove snow and ice from public sidewalks within 24 hours after snow
ceases to fall or after ice forms. The City may remove accumulations that have
not been removed from the public sidewalks within a reasonable time. The actual
cost of such removals may be assessed to the abutting property owners.
   2.   Prevent waster from eaves, drains, or roofs from falling onto public
sidewalks.
   3.   Keep sidewalks clear of other debris, including dirt and grass, and to
trim trees and bushes that encroach within the vertical plane along both sides
of the sidewalk up to eight feet above the sidewalk.
   The abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused by failure to
remove snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e])
136.04 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
   The abutting property owner shall repair, replace, or reconstruct, or cause
to be repaired, replaced, or reconstructed, all broken or defective sidewalks
and maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalk outside the lot
and property lines and inside the curb lines or, in the absence of a curb, any
sidewalk between the property line and that portion of the public street used
or improved for vehicular purposes. The abutting property owner may be liable
for damages caused by failure to maintain the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
136.05 CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.
   If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the
Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner
to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if
such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the Council
may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the abutting
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d & e])
136.06 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.
   The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any
street or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such
improvement to abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.07 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall remove, reconstruct, or install a sidewalk unless such
person has obtained a permit from the City and has agreed in writing that said
removal, reconstruction, or installation will comply with all ordinances and
requirements of the City for such work. A written application for such permit
shall be filed with the City.
136.08 SIDEWALK STANDARDS.
   Sidewalks repaired, replaced, or constructed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards:
   1.   Cement. Portland cement shall be the only cement used in the
construction and repair of sidewalks.
   2.   Construction. Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction.
   3.   Sidewalk Base. Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-
drained soil. Where soil is not well drained, a three-inch sub-base of compact,
clean, coarse gravel or sand shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil drainage
is to be determined by the City.
   4.   Sidewalk Bed. The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the constructed
sidewalk will be at established grade.
   5.   Length, Width and Depth. Length, width and depth requirements are as
follows:
      A.   Residential sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and four
inches thick, and each section shall be no more than four feet in length.
      B.   Business District sidewalks shall extend from the property line to
the curb. Each section shall be four inches thick and no more than six feet in
length.
      C.   Driveway areas shall be not less than six inches in thickness.
   6.   Location. Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge
(edge nearest the abutting private property) on the property line, unless the
Council establishes a different distance due to special circumstances.
   7.   Grade. Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the street,
which is the established grade.
   8.   Elevations. The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation even
with the curb at the curb or not less than one-half inch above the curb for
each foot between the curb and the sidewalk.
   9.   Slope. All sidewalks shall slope one-fourth inch per foot toward the
curb.
   10.   Finish. All sidewalks shall be finished with a broom finish or wood
float finish.
   11.   Curb Ramps and Sloped Areas for Persons with Disabilities. If a
street, road, or highway is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped
area shall be constructed or installed at each intersection of the street,
road, or highway with a sidewalk or path. If a sidewalk or path is newly built
or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed or installed
at each intersection of the sidewalk or path with a street, highway, or road.
Curb ramps and sloped areas that are required pursuant to this subsection shall
be constructed or installed in compliance with applicable federal requirements
adopted in accordance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act,
including (but not limited to) the guidelines issued by the Federal
Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)
136.09 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue,
highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when
any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons
having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or
lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be
deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at
each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in
the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to
keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades
both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using
the street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable
for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act
or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any
misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply
with provisions hereof.
136.10 FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.
   It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the
owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of
failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or
erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.11 INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
   No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon
any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or
destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove,
destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove or
deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.12 AWNINGS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any
sidewalk unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight feet above
the surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck, canvas or
other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets securely fastened
to the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct the
sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians.
136.13 ENCROACHING STEPS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any
building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the
Council.
136.14 OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.
   It is unlawful for a person to:
   1.   Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any
cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any
portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the
Council.
   2.   Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating, or cover to any vault on
any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the
public.
   3.   Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings
on or within six feet of any sidewalk.
136.15 FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to
place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.16 DEFACING.
   It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint, or writing
on any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.17 DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass,
nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal,
or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal, or
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
136.18 MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.
   It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods
or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with
the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case
shall more than three feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for
such purposes.
136.19 SALES STANDS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand
for the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any
sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.
CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
 
137.01 Power to Vacate                137.04 Findings Required
137.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 137.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or
                                      Alleys
137.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing     137.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
 
137.01 POWER TO VACATE
   When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of
the City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds, the
Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])
137.02 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
   Any proposal to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public
grounds shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for its study and recommendation prior to further consideration by the Council.
The Commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the
Council within 30 days after the date the proposed vacation is referred to the
Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
137.03 NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING
   The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the
time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.
137.04 FINDINGS REQUIRED
   No street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds shall be vacated
unless the Council finds that:
   1.   Public Use. The street, alley, portion thereof, or any public ground
proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore,
its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified.
   2.   Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of
property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
137.05 DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS
   When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the
City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public ground,
the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7, Code
of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
137.06 DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED
   The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a governmental
body for a public purpose or to a fair.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.15[2] & 364.7[3])
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public
grounds and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public
grounds and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO.                      ADOPTED         ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
Ch. 58 (Revised Ordinance No. 500) May 22, 1957
613                                July 25, 1994
614                                August 15, 1994
 
CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES
 
138.01 Established Grades 138.02 Record Maintained
 
138.01 ESTABLISHED GRADES
   The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks, which have been heretofore
established by ordinance, are hereby confirmed, ratified, and established as
official grades.
138.02 RECORD MAINTAINED
   The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning such grades upon request.
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED           ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
75            August 13, 1951
77            May 4, 1953
552           February 26, 1979
562           October 13, 1981
 
CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS
 
139.01 Naming New Streets      139.04 Official Street Name Map
139.02 Changing Name of Street 139.05 Revision of Street Name Map
139.03 Recording Street Names
 
139.01 NAMING NEW STREETS
   New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:
   1.   Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are
natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the
existing street.
   2.   Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a
subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
   3.   Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred
to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
139.02 CHANGING NAME OF STREET
   The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street.
139.03 RECORDING STREET NAMES
   Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk
shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor and County
Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.04 OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP
   Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map,
which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify
that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section 139.04 of the
Code of Ordinances of Aurelia, Iowa.”
139.05 REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP
   If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in
street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map
promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry on the
Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the City
Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map:
(brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by
the Clerk.
CHAPTER 140
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
 
140.01 Exercise of Police Power 140.04 Access Controls Imposed
140.02 Definition               140.05 Permitted Access Points
140.03 Right of Access Limited
 
140.01 EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER
   This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City
under Chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and for the promotion of the general welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1)
140.02 DEFINITION
   The term “controlled access facility” means a highway or street especially
designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or occupants of
abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only a controlled
right or easement of access, light, air, or view by reason of the fact that
their property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for any other
reason.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2)
140.03 RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED
   No person has any right of ingress or egress to or from abutting lands onto
or across any controlled access facility, except at such designated points at
which access is permitted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)
140.04 ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED
   There are hereby fixed and established controlled access facilities within
the City, described as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3)
   1.   Project No. F-37(15). On the Primary Road System extension improvement,
Project No. F-37(15), Primary Road IA No. 7, within the City, described as
follows:
From the west corporation line (Station 77+07.0) to Station 2+19.9
   regulating access to and from abutting properties along said highway all in
accordance with the plans for such improvement identified as Project No. F-37
(15), on file in the office of the Clerk.
140.05 PERMITTED ACCESS POINTS
   Points of access are hereby permitted as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)
   1.   Project No. F-37(15). The compiled list furnished by the Iowa Highway
Commission of drives and entrances provided for access under the improvement
specified as Project No. F-37(15) is hereby recorded as follows:
STATION SIDE USE
STATION        SIDE  USE
37+47          south Local Road West
37+80          north CL Maple Street
38+00 to 40+20 north Commercial
40+36          north CL Alley North
40+77.5        north CL Second Street East
41+00 to 41+50 south Commercial Drive
42+40          south Commercial Drive
43+01          north CL Pearl St. North
43+60          north Commercial Drive
44+10          north Commercial Drive
44+37          north Commercial Drive
44+06          south Commercial Drive
44+50          south Commercial Drive
44+84          south Commercial Drive
45+50          south Commercial Drive
47+60 to 49+12 north Commercial Drive
49+15          north CL Alley North
50+00          north Commercial Drive
50+00          south Commercial Drive
51+21          north CL Myrtle St. North
51+21          south Commercial Drive
51+75          north Commercial Drive
51+50          south Commercial Drive
52+00          south Commercial Drive
52+52          south Commercial Drive
53+00          north Commercial Drive
53+00          south Commercial Drive
54+14 to 55+00 south Commercial Drive
55+50          south Commercial Drive
55+83          north 15 foot Conc. Res. Drive
56+80          south Commercial Drive
58+20          north Farm Entrance
 
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
 
145.01 Enforcement Officer          145.05 Conduct of Hearing
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe 145.06 Posting of Signs
145.03 Unsafe Building              145.07 Right to Demolish; Municipal
                                    Infraction
145.04 Notice to Owner              145.08 Costs
 
145.01 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
   The Mayor is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
145.02 GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE
   All buildings or structures that are structurally unsafe or not provided
with adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise
dangerous to human life, or that in relation to existing use constitute a
hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose
of this chapter, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation,
demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 & 364.12[3a])
145.03 UNSAFE BUILDING. “Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home
meeting any or all of the following criteria:
   1.   Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any
portion thereof, because of: (i) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (ii)
faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement, or instability of any portion
of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the
deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause,
is likely to partially or completely collapse.
   2.   Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure,
or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is
being used.
   3.   Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer
to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is
likely to cause sickness or disease.
   4.   Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
   5.   Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
145.04 NOTICE TO OWNER
   The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building
or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such
is found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement
officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice
stating the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in
charge of the building or premises, within 48 hours or such reasonable time as
the circumstances require, to commence either the required repairs or
improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions
thereof, and all such work shall be completed within 90 days from date of
notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement officer. If necessary,
such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to
be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and
improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the enforcement officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   1.   Notice Served. Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail
to the owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa, if
the owner is found within the City limits. If the owner is not found within the
City limits, such service may be made upon the owner by registered mail or
certified mail. The designated period within which said owner or person in
charge is required to comply with the order of the enforcement officer shall
begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.
   2.   Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she may
request a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written request
for hearing within the time provided in the notice.
145.05 CONDUCT OF HEARING
   If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the
date, time and place of hearing.
   2.   Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why
the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
   3.   Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and
may issue such order as it deems appropriate. † 11
 
Notes
   †  EDITOR’S NOTE: Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order of the
   Council for the administration of this chapter are provided in the APPENDIX to
11 this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this procedure. We
   recommend you review the situation with your attorney before initiating
   procedures and follow his or her recommendation carefully.
145.06 POSTING OF SIGNS
   The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. CITY OF AURELIA,
IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required demolition, removal
or repairs are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written
permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the building
except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the
building.
145.07 RIGHT TO DEMOLISH; MUNICIPAL INFRACTION
   In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to
repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or
portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as
a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement
officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the
cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council. As an alternative to
this action, the City may utilize the municipal infraction process to abate the
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
145.08 COSTS
   Costs incurred under Section 145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury.
Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and levied as
a special assessment against the land on which the building or structure is
located, and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for collection in the
manner provided for other taxes. In addition, the City may take any other
action deemed appropriate to recover costs incurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
CHAPTER 146
FIRE ZONE
 
146.01 Fire Zone Established  146.05 Reconstruction Prohibited
146.02 Plans Submitted        146.06 Special Permit
146.03 Buildings Prohibited   146.07 Removal of Buildings
146.04 Construction Standards 146.08 Storage of Materials Restricted
 
146.01 FIRE ZONE ESTABLISHED
   A Fire Zone is established to include all of the territory within the
boundaries of the City limits.
146.02 PLANS SUBMITTED
   It is unlawful to build, enlarge, or alter any structure, building, or part
thereof, within the Fire Zone until a plan of the proposed work, together with
a statement of materials to be used has been submitted to the Council, who
shall, if in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, issue a permit for
the proposed work.
146.03 BUILDINGS PROHIBITED
   The erection of any building or structure of any kind, or additions thereto,
or substantial alterations thereof, involving partial rebuilding, are
prohibited in the Fire Zone, unless constructed in strict compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
146.04 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
   The construction standards for all buildings, structures, or parts thereof
within the Fire Zone shall be of Type I, Type II, or, at a minimum, Type III
fire resistant construction, as specified in the International Building Code.
146.05 RECONSTRUCTION PROHIBITED
   Any building within the Fire Zone not constructed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter which is hereafter damaged by fire, decay, or
otherwise shall not be rebuilt, altered, or reconstructed except in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
146.06 SPECIAL PERMIT
   The Council may, by four-fifths vote, issue a special permit to improve any
property within the Fire Zone contrary to the provisions of this chapter, on
condition that such improvement shall not increase the rates for fire insurance
or the fire hazard potential of the area, or to allow any person to erect or
move in any building or structure for temporary purposes for a period of time
not exceeding six months from the date of such permission.
146.07 REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS
   Any person who erects any building in the Fire Zone, contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, shall be given written notice by the Mayor to
remove or tear down the same, and if such removal or taking down is not
completed within 30 days from the time of the service of such notice, the Mayor
shall cause the same to be removed or taken down. The Mayor shall report an
itemized bill of the expense to the Clerk, and the same shall be charged to the
person owning such building. The Clerk shall present the bill to the owner of
the property and if the bill is not paid within 10 days from the date it is
presented, the amount of the bill shall be certified, by the Clerk, to the
County Treasurer, as a lien against the property and collected the same as
other taxes.
146.08 STORAGE OF MATERIALS RESTRICTED
   No person shall have or deposit any grain stack, pile of rubbish,
explosives, hazardous chemicals or other flammable substance within the Fire
Zone, nor shall any person have or deposit any cord wood or fire wood, within
the Fire Zone without written permission from the Mayor, specifying the maximum
amount of such cord wood or fire wood, that may be kept, stored, or deposited
on any lot or part of a lot within the Fire Zone, unless the same be within one
of the buildings allowed by this chapter. No person shall build or allow any
fires, whether trash fires or otherwise, within the Fire Zone as described in
this chapter.
[The next page is 711]
CHAPTER 147
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
 
147.01 International Property Maintenance Code 147.03 Attached by Reference
Adopted
147.02 Additions, Insertions, Deletions, and   147.04 Conflict of Laws
Changes
147.01 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.
   That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office
of the City Clerk of the City of Aurelia, Iowa, being marked and designated as
the International Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as Chapter 147 Property
Maintenance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Aurelia, in the State of
Iowa for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and
the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use,
and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City of Aurelia, Iowa
are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in Section 2 of this ordinance.
147.02 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS, AND CHANGES
   The following sections are hereby revised:
   1.   Section 101.1. Insert: City of Aurelia, Iowa.
   2.   Section 103.5. Insert: [APPROPRIATE SCHEDULE]
   3.   Section 112.4. Insert: [DOLLAR AMOUNT IN TWO LOCATIONS]
   4.   Section 302.4. Insert: 8 (eight) inches.
   5.   Section 304.14. Insert: [DATES IN TWO LOCATIONS]
   6.   Section 602.3. Insert: [DATES IN TWO LOCATIONS]
   7.   Section 602.4. Insert: [DATES IN TWO LOCATIONS]
147.03 ATTACHED BY REFERENCE.
   Attached hereto and incorporated by this reference are sections of 2015
Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, which are hereby
modified. These sections include Section 202: General Definitions, Subsection
302.4 Weeds, Subsection 302.8 Motor Vehicles, Subsection 304.1.1 Unsafe
Conditions, and Section 308 Junk, Rubbish, and Garage.
147.04 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   Wherever this ordinance conflicts with Chapter 50 Nuisance Abatement
Procedure, Chapter 51 Junk and Junk Vehicles, or Chapter 145: Dangerous
Buildings, this ordinance shall supersede said chapters. These ordinances shall
be limited by the provisions Iowa Code Section 364.
(Ch. 147 – Ord. 706 – Oct. 23 Supp.)
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
 
150.01 Definitions        150.03 Building Numbering Plan
150.02 Owner Requirements
 
150.01 DEFINITIONS
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
   2.   “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision
thereof.
150.02 OWNER REQUIREMENTS
   Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:
   1.   Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to
the principal building from the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
   2.   Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed
and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous
place to the street in figures not less than two and one-half inches in height
and of a contrasting color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
   3.   Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein
provided, or fails to do so for a period of 30 days after being notified in
writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the assigned number
on the principal building and assess the costs against the property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
150.03 BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN
   Building numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the building numbering
plan on file in the office of the Clerk.
CHAPTER 151
TREES
 
151.01 Definition            151.04 Trimming Trees to Be Supervised
151.02 Planting Restrictions 151.05 Disease Control
151.03 Duty to Trim Trees    151.06 Inspection and Removal
 
151.01 DEFINITION
   For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street, avenue, or
highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and
the curb line or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue, or
highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually
traveled by vehicular traffic.
151.02 PLANTING RESTRICTIONS
   No tree shall be planted in any parking or street except in accordance with
the following:
   1.   Alignment. All trees planted in any street shall be planted in the
parking midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the curb. In the
event a curb line is not established, trees shall be planted on a line 10 feet
from the property line.
   2.   Spacing. Trees shall not be planted on any parking that is less than
nine feet in width, or contains less than 81 square feet of exposed soil
surface per tree. Trees shall not be planted closer than 20 feet from street
intersections (property lines extended) and 10 feet from driveways. If it is at
all possible, trees should be planted inside the property lines and not between
the sidewalk and the curb.
   3.   Prohibited Trees. No person shall plant in any street any fruit-bearing
tree or any tree of the kinds commonly known as cottonwood, poplar, box elder,
Chinese elm, evergreen, willow, or black walnut.
151.03 DUTY TO TRIM TREES
   The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees on, or
overhanging the street, trimmed so that all branches will be at least 15 feet
above the surface of the street and eight feet above the sidewalks. If the
abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve notice on
the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken within five
days. If such action is not taken within that time, the City may perform the
required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c, d & e])
151.04 TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED
   Except as allowed in Section 151.03, it is unlawful for any person to trim
or cut any tree in a street or public place unless the work is done under the
supervision of the City.
151.05 DISEASE CONTROL
   Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub that may harbor serious insect
or disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
151.06 INSPECTION AND REMOVAL
   The Council shall inspect or cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in
the City reported or suspected to be dead, diseased or damaged, and such trees
and shrubs shall be subject to the following:
   1.   City Property. If it is determined that any such condition exists on
any public property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line of
private property, the Council may cause such condition to be corrected by
treatment or removal. The Council may also order the removal of any trees on
the streets of the City which interfere with the making of improvements or with
travel thereon.
   2.   Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty that
any such condition exists on private property and that danger to other trees or
to adjoining property or passing motorists or pedestrians is imminent, the
Council shall notify by certified mail the owner, occupant or person in charge
of such property to correct such condition by treatment or removal within 14
days of said notification. If such owner, occupant, or person in charge of said
property fails to comply within 14 days of receipt of notice, the Council may
cause the condition to be corrected and the cost assessed against the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b & h])
CHAPTER 155
RIGHTS-OF-WAY
155.01 Purpose and Rule of            155.10 Design Notice to City
Interpretation
155.02 License or Lease Required      155.11 Above-Ground Cables, Wires,
                                      Conduits and Poles
155.03 Fees Required                  155.12 Assignment
155.04 Limit on Term                  155.13 Forfeiture
155.05 Placement of Facilities        155.14 Application
155.06 Indemnification and Bond       155.15 Removal of Material; Bond Required
155.07 Regulation by the City         155.16 Home Rule
155.08 Construction and Excavation by 155.17 New Technologies
Holders
155.09 City Construction and Paving
155.01 PURPOSE AND RULE OF INTERPRETATION
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform rules and controls to
ensure public safety and provide efficient delivery of services by the City and
others wishing to utilize streets and other public property for the delivery of
utility or other services, in order to protect public and private investment,
ensure orderly use of public property and ensure the health, safety and welfare
of the population, to provide for the regulation and administration of the
public streets and other public property and secure the rights of the City to a
return on its investment in public property. This chapter is to be interpreted
in light of these findings for the benefit of the public and users of the
streets and other public property.
155.02 LICENSE OR LEASE REQUIRED
   No person or other entity shall use the public right-of-way or other public
property without first obtaining a license or lease from the City. The City
shall not enter into or issue any license or lease that grants exclusive
rights. An application for a license or lease shall be filed with the City
Director of Public Works on a form provided by the City and shall include as a
minimum the following information: the name, address and telephone number of
the applicant; the name, address and telephone number of a person whom the City
may notify or contact at any time concerning the license or lease; an
engineering site plan showing the proposed location of the facilities including
any manholes, the size, type and proposed depth of any conduit or other
enclosures; and any additional information the City may require. All licenses
or leases required by this section shall be granted by the Council.
155.03 FEES REQUIRED
   No license or lease for the use of public right-of-way or other public
property shall be granted without requiring the grantee thereof to pay a
reasonable and competitively neutral fee for the use of public right-of-way or
other public property. The fees will be as follows:
   1.   A license or lease fee will be assessed on all new licenses or leases
for space in the right-of-way. This license or lease fee is a one-time fee for
the term of the license or lease. Payment is expected when the license or lease
is signed; however, a payment schedule may be entered into between the City and
the licensee or lessee. If the license or lease is renewed, a new license or
lease fee will be assessed. The fee shall be based on the term of the renewal.
The fee to be paid shall be as follows:
      A.   A person or entity whose end use is solely dedicated to a
governmental use, including education, shall pay a fee based on an annual fee
of 13 cents per linear foot of right-of-way used.
      B.   All other persons or entities shall pay a fee based on an annual fee
of 65 cents per linear foot of right-of-way used.
   2.   In addition to the license or lease fee, an annual right-of-way
management fee will be assessed on July 1 of each year that the license or
lease is in force. The fee is based on the number of linear feet of wire laid
in the City right-of-way, and reflects the actual management cost the City
incurs while managing the right-of-way. The fee is established as follows:
      Each entity or person shall pay an annual fee of three cents per linear
foot of right-of-way used. Payment shall be made within 30 days after the
beginning of each year the license or lease is in force.
   3.   In addition to the license or lease fee and annual management fee, any
person or other entity shall pay a fee every time their facility requires
excavation in the right-of-way. This fee will cover costs for street
degradation and replacement, inspection and obstruction and routing of
pedestrian and vehicle traffic. The fee to be paid for each cut into the street
will be based on a Degradation Fee schedule maintained by the City Director of
Public Works. All or part of this fee may be waived if work is done in
conjunction with City construction. In addition, no fee will be charged if
lateral boring is done and there is no cut into the street.
155.04 LIMIT ON TERM
   No license or lease for use of the public right-of-way or other public
property shall be granted for a term of more than 10 years.
155.05 PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES
   The facilities, fixtures and equipment of the distribution, transmission or
sale of any utility services, or services provided under license or lease or
easement, shall be placed and maintained so as not to unnecessarily or
unreasonably interfere with the travel on the streets, highways, avenues,
alleys, bridges and public places in the City, nor shall such facilities,
fixtures and equipment interfere with the proper use of the same, including,
but not limited to, ordinary drainage, or the functioning of the sewers,
underground pipe or other property of the City. In the event that facilities,
fixtures and equipment of any person or other entity located within a public
right-of-way must be relocated because of paving, road construction or road
reconstruction, sewer construction or sewer reconstruction or the construction
or reconstruction of public drainage systems or similar public works or the
construction or reconstruction of the facilities of any City-owned utility,
such relocation, at the written request of the City, shall be completed by the
owner of such facilities at the owner’s cost. The City shall upon request of
any person or other entity holding a license or lease, review any plans for the
construction of facilities, fixtures and equipment within the public right-of-
way and advise the person or other entity of any conflict such construction may
have with planned or anticipated public improvements, but failure of the City
to so advise such person or other entity will not relieve the owner of such
facilities of its obligations under this chapter. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Director of Public Works may require placement of equipment or
facilities belonging to any holder of a license or lease be limited to
locations designated by the Director of Public Works if such limitation is
deemed by the Director of Public Works to be necessary to protect the integrity
of use of present and future users of the public right-of-way or other public
property.
155.06 INDEMNIFICATION AND BOND
   The holder of any license or lease shall indemnify and hold the City
harmless at all times during the term of the license or lease from and against
all claims for injury or damage to any person or property, including payments
under worker’s compensation laws, caused by the construction, erection,
operation or maintenance of its facilities, fixtures or equipment, or the
negligence of its contractors or its employees. In case of any suit or action
at law being commenced against the City, upon any claim for damage arising out
of any loss, injury or damage claimed to have been caused by any installation,
improvement, obstruction or excavation made or left in, under or upon such
street, sidewalk, alley or public place by the holder of a license or lease,
its agents, contractors or employees, upon being notified in writing by the
City of such action or proceeding, the holder of said license or lease shall
appear and make proper defense thereto at the expense of the holder of the
license or lease; and if any judgment or decree shall in any such case be
rendered against the City therein, the holder of said license or lease shall
assume, pay and satisfy such judgment or decree, with the cost thereof.
Immediately upon issuance of the license or lease, the holder of the license or
lease shall purchase general liability insurance. The amount of insurance shall
be a minimum of $1,000,000.00 with a maximum deductible of $5,000.00. The
holder of the license or lease shall file with the Clerk a certificate of
insurance which clearly discloses on its face coverage in conformity with these
requirements. Upon request of the City, the holder of the license or lease
shall at the holder’s cost submit a certified copy of the policy.
155.07 REGULATION BY THE CITY
   The City reserves the right to make reasonable general regulations for the
use of streets and other public property which unless otherwise specifically
provided shall apply to any holder of a license or lease.
155.08 CONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION BY HOLDERS
   A written permit will be obtained from the Director of Public Works whenever
it becomes necessary for the holder of any license or lease to excavate in
streets or public grounds of the City. Such permits shall state a particular
part or point of the street where the excavation is to be made and the length
of time in which such permit shall authorize the work to be done. An exception
to a requirement for a permit shall be made in cases of emergency involving
public safety, in which case a permit will be obtained at the earliest
opportunity after the work has started. In making excavations in the streets,
the holder of any license or lease shall proceed with such work as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the public. The holder of any license or lease
shall properly protect, according to safety standards generally accepted at the
time of placement as may be determined from time to time by the Director of
Public Works, all excavations and obstructions by proper placement of shoring,
surface plates, barricades, warning lights and such other or additional devices
as circumstances may warrant. If in the opinion of the Director of Public Works
such excavation or obstruction is not properly and safely protected, the Clerk
shall notify such holder of a license or lease, who shall immediately comply
with such reasonable instructions. Immediately after use, any trenches for
excavations which the holder of a license or lease has opened shall be filled.
However, no trench or excavation in the streets shall be filled or covered
without giving the City the right to inspect the same. All backfilling in
streets will be according to City specifications. Temporary street surfacing
will be placed in such excavations as soon as the same has been backfilled.
Pavements, sidewalks, curbs and gutters or other portions of streets and public
places opened, disturbed or damaged shall be promptly restored and replaced
with like materials at the expense of the holder of a license or lease and left
in as good condition as before the opening, disturbance or damage occurred. In
the event like replacement materials are not available, the holder of the
license or lease shall notify the Director of Public Works, who must approve
the use of any alternate materials. In the event that the holder of a license
or lease fails to comply with the provision of this section, after having been
given reasonable notice, the City may do such work as may be needed to properly
repair such pavements, sidewalks, curbs and gutters or other portions of
streets and public places and the cost thereof shall be repaid to the City by
the holder of the license or lease. In cases where a cut or disturbance is made
in a section of street paving or sidewalks, but causes greater disturbance than
to just the area cut, rather than replace only the area cut, the holder of a
license or lease shall replace that area as may be ordered by the Director of
Public Works, which in no event shall exceed the panel or panels disturbed.
155.09 CITY CONSTRUCTION AND PAVING
   Whenever the City shall pave or repave any street or shall change the grade
line of any street or public place or shall construct or reconstruct any
conduit, water main service or water connection, sewer or other City-owned
public works or City-owned utility, it shall be the duty of the holder of any
license or lease, when so ordered by the City, to relocate its service lines
and other property in the streets or other public places at its own expense so
as to conform to the established grade or line of such street or public place
and so as not to interfere with the public improvements so constructed or
reconstructed. In the case of other public improvements, including but not
limited to urban renewal projects, the City may require the holder of a license
or lease to relocate its poles, service lines and appurtenances in the streets
at the owner’s expense. The City may at its discretion assign personnel for
inspection of excavation and related work being performed by the holder of a
license or lease. Should the holder of the license or lease fail or refuse to
do and perform the things provided in this section, the City may, after
reasonable notice, perform the work and charge the expense thereof to the
holder of the license or lease and the holder of the license or lease shall
promptly pay said charges.
155.10 DESIGN NOTICE TO CITY
   The holder of a license or lease shall promptly, upon request, furnish the
Council a detailed map or maps of its distribution system both within the City
limits and the area within two miles surrounding the City unless that area is
within another city. The holder of a license or lease shall thereafter update
the map or maps at least annually or upon request, showing all subsequent
additions or deletions to the distribution system. Prior to any excavation by
the City or its agents, a representative must contact the holder of any license
or lease regarding current information on the location of underground lines or
facilities in the area concerned. The obligation to contact the holder of a
license or lease under this section shall be satisfied if contact is made with
the corporation organized pursuant to Code of Iowa Chapter 480 or an entity
with a similar function utilized by both the City and the company, currently
the Iowa One Call System.
155.11 ABOVE-GROUND CABLES, WIRES, CONDUITS AND POLES
   All cables, wires, and conduits shall be placed underground except where
above-ground connection to buildings or other locations above ground is
reasonably necessary. Such above-ground connection shall be by means of poles
located, as far as reasonably practical, within alleys. No such poles shall be
installed or erected until the Council has approved the proposed location,
construction and pole heights.
155.12 ASSIGNMENT
   No sale or assignment of any license or lease of the use of the public
right-of-way or other public property shall be effective until it is approved
by the Council and until the holder thereof has filed in the office of the
Clerk written notice of the proposed sale, transfer, disposition or assignment,
such notice to clearly summarize the proposed procedure and the terms and
conditions thereof. If the City determines it needs additional information, the
holder of the license or lease shall be required to provide said information.
The City shall be reimbursed by the holder of the license or lease for its
reasonable costs incurred in reviewing all matters relating to said sale or
assignment, including the reasonable costs for consultants or technical
experts. Such approval by the City shall not be unreasonably withheld. The
proposed vendee, assignee or lessee shall similarly file an instrument, duly
executed, reciting such proposal, accepting the terms of the license or lease
and agreeing to perform all of the conditions thereof.
155.13 FORFEITURE
   The violation of any material portion of a license or lease by the holder
thereof or its successors or assigns or its failure promptly to perform any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be cause for forfeiture of said license or
lease and the termination of all rights thereunder. Such forfeiture shall be
accomplished by ordinance of the City after written notice to the holder
thereof and a continuation of the violation, failure or default specified on
the notice for at least 30 days from the date the notice was served.
155.14 APPLICATION
   This chapter shall apply to all licenses or leases and easements granted by
the City, including all existing licenses or leases and easements.
155.15 REMOVAL OF MATERIAL; BOND REQUIRED
   The holder of any license or lease, at the termination of said license or
lease, shall remove from the public property or public right-of-way whatever
was placed in said right-of-way and shall restore the property to a condition
reasonably comparable to the condition it was in prior to the right-of-way
being used. Before a license or lease is issued to any person or entity, a bond
shall be obtained to insure that the holder of the license or lease shall be
responsible for removing whatever was placed in the public property or right-
of-way and to further insure that said public property or right-of-way shall be
restored to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition it was in prior
to the right-of-way being used. The amount of the bond to be secured shall be
determined by the City and shall be dependent upon the amount of the cable,
wire or other material that is being placed in the right-of-way and the
estimated cost it would take to remove said material and restore the property
at the expiration of said license or lease.
155.16 HOME RULE
   This chapter is intended to be and shall be construed as consistent with the
reservation of local authority contained in the 25th Amendment to the Iowa
Constitution granting cities Home Rule powers. To such end, any limitation on
the power of the City contained herein is to be strictly construed and the City
reserves to itself the right to exercise all power and authority to regulate
and control its local affairs and all ordinances and regulations of the City
shall be enforceable against the holder of any license or lease.
155.17 NEW TECHNOLOGIES
   Should, within the term of any license or lease, developments within the
field for which the grant was made offer to the holder thereof the opportunity
to effectively, efficiently and economically serve its customers through use of
a substance or material other than those for which the grant was originally
made, then the holder of the license or lease may petition the Council, which,
with such requirements or limitation as it deems necessary to protect public
health, safety and welfare, may allow the use of such substances under the
terms and conditions of the license or lease.
CHAPTER 160
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
 
160.01 Definitions                      160.06 Standards for Floodplain
                                        (Overlay District
160.02 Statutory Authority, Findings of 160.07 Establishment of Appeal and
Fact and Purpose                        Variance Procedures
160.03 General Provisions               160.08 Nonconforming Uses
160.04 Administration                   160.09 Penalties for Violation
160.05 Establishment of Zoning          160.10 Amendments
(Overlay) Districts
160.01   DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   1.   “Appurtenant structure” means a structure which is on the same parcel
of the property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which
is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
   2.   “Base flood” means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also commonly referred to as the “100-year
flood”).
   3.   “Base flood elevation” (BFE) means the elevation floodwaters would
reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
   4.   “Basement” means any enclosed area of a structure which has its floor
or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see “lowest
floor.”
   5.   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or
materials. “Development” does not include minor projects or routine maintenance
of existing structures and facilities, as defined in this section. It also does
not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices that do not involve
filling or grading.
   6.   “Enclosed area below lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest
enclosed area in a structure when all the following criteria are met:
      A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions
of Section 160.06(5)(A) of this chapter; and
      B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as structure access, parking, or
storage; and
      C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot above the base flood elevation; and
      D.   The enclosed area is not a basement, as defined in this section.
   7.   “Existing construction” means any structure for which the start of
construction commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
   8.   “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
   9.   “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means
the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   10.   “Factory-built home” means any structure, designed for residential use
which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled
in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a
building site. For the purpose of this chapter factory-built homes include
mobile homes, manufactured homes, and modular homes; and also includes
recreational vehicles which are placed on a site for greater than 180
consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
   11.   “Factory-built home park or subdivision” means a parcel or contiguous
parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or
lease.
   12.   “500-year flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which has a two-
tenths percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which,
on average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every 500 years.
   13.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or
rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
   14.   “Flood insurance rate map” (FIRM) means the official map prepared as
part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which
delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
   15.   “Flood insurance study” (FIS) means a report published by FEMA for a
community issued along with the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map(s). The
study contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water
surface elevations that were used to prepare the FIRM.
   16.   “Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water as a result of a flood.
   17.   “Floodplain management” means an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing, and floodplain management regulations.
   18.   “Flood proofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such
structures.
   19.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions
of the floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to
carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood
flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot.
   20.   “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the special flood hazard
area outside the floodway.
   21.   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   22.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
      A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the National Register;
      B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either: (i) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   23.   “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
structure including a basement except when the criteria listed in the
definition of “enclosed area below lowest floor” are met.
   24.   “Maximum damage potential development” means hospitals and like
institutions; buildings or building complexes containing documents, data, or
instruments of great public value; buildings or building complexes containing
materials dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; power
installations needed in emergency or other buildings or building complexes
similar in nature or use.
   25.   “Minor projects” means small development activities (except for
filling, grading, and excavating) valued at less than $500.00.
   26.   “New construction” (new structures, factory-built home parks) means
those structures or development for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations
adopted by the community.
   27.   “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after
the effective date of the effective date of the first floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
   28.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
      A.   Built on a single chassis;
      B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
      D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   29.   “Routine maintenance of existing structures and facilities” means
repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do
not trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general
improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs
include:
      A.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing
roofing tiles and replacing siding.
      B.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting,
cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.
      C.   Basement sealing.
      D.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes.
      E.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating, or air
conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
   30.   “Special flood hazard area” (SFHA) means the land within a community
subject to the base flood. This land is identified on the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, and/or A99.
   31.   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory structures such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the structure, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the structure.
   32.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories,
sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities,
and/or other similar uses.
   33.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be
included in the estimated cost of repair.
   34.   “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
      A.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure
either: (i) before the start of construction of the improvement; or (ii) if the
structure has been substantially damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions. The term also does not include any alteration of
a historic structure, provided the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
designation as a historic structure.
      B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a structure
by 25 percent or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of
the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community shall be
added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in
original floor space would exceed 25 percent.
   35.   “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of
the floodplain management regulations.
   36.   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
160.02   STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE.
   1.   The Legislature of the State of Iowa has, in Chapter 414 of the Code of
Iowa, as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to
secure safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.
   2.   Findings of Fact.
      A.   The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic
inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of
the community.
      B.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused
by: (i) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages
which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or
otherwise protected from flooding; and (ii) the cumulative effect of
obstructions on the floodplain causing increases in flood heights and
velocities.
      C.   This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood
hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Department of
Natural Resources.
   3.   Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the City and its residents and
to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and
convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses described in
Paragraph 2(A) of this section with provisions designed to:
      A.   Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows
so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
      B.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
      C.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
      D.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
      E.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
160.03   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   1.   Lands to Which Chapter Applies. The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City which are located within
the boundaries of the Floodplain (Overlay) District as established in this
section.
   2.   Establishment of Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) for Cherokee County and Incorporated Areas, City of Aurelia,
Panels 19035C0277C, 19035C0279C, 19035C0281C, and 19035C0283C, dated December
2, 2021, which were prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Cherokee
County is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map. The Cherokee County Flood Insurance Study is hereby
adopted by reference and is made a part of this chapter for the purpose of
administering floodplain management regulations.
   3.   Rules for Interpretation of Floodplain (Overlay) District. The
boundaries of the Floodplain (Overlay) District areas shall be determined by
scaling distances on the official Flood Insurance Rate Map. When an
interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the City Clerk
shall make the necessary interpretation. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the City Clerk in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   4.   Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be used, and no
structure shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
   5.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   6.   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.
   7.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The standards required by this
chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside the designated Floodplain (Overlay) District areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
   8.   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
160.04   ADMINISTRATION.
   1.   Appointment, Duties and Responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
      A.   The City Clerk is hereby appointed to implement and administer the
provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the Administrator.
      B.   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but
not necessarily be limited to the following:
         (1)   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure
that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
         (2)   Review floodplain development applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from federal, State, and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of
Natural Resources for floodplain construction.
         (3)   Record and maintain a record of: (i) the elevation (in relation
to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all new or substantially improved structures; or (ii) the elevation to which
new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
         (4)   Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of
Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
         (5)   Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other
transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this
chapter.
         (6)   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administration an annual report
concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administration.
         (7)   Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations
or modifications to the community’s boundaries.
         (8)   Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Zoning Board of
Adjustment of potential conflict.
         (9)   Maintain the accuracy of the community’s Flood Insurance Rate
Maps when:
            a.   Development placed within the Floodway (Overlay) District
results in either of the following: (i) an increase in the base flood
elevations; or (ii) alteration to the floodway boundary;
            b.   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not
include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base elevation; or
            c.   Development relocates or alters the channel.
         Within six months of the completion of the development, the applicant
shall submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for a Letter
of Map Revision.
         (10)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the
standards of this chapter.
         (11)   Forward all requests for variances to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment for consideration. Ensure all requests include the information
ordinarily submitted with applications as well as any additional information
deemed necessary to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
   2.   Floodplain Development Permit.
      A.   Permit Required. A Floodplain Development Permit issued by the
Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any manmade
change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, storage of
materials and equipment, excavation, or drilling operations), including the
placement of factory-built homes.
      B.   Application for Permit. Application shall be made on forms furnished
by the Administrator and shall include the following:
         (1)   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
         (2)   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(e.g., lot, block, track, street address or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done.
         (3)   Location and dimensions of all structures and additions.
         (4)   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work
is intended.
         (5)   Elevation of the base flood.
         (6)   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of structures or of the level to which a
structure is to be floodproofed.
         (7)   For structures being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the structure prior to the improvements.
         (8)   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
      C.   Action on Permit Application. The Administrator shall, within a
reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or
disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed,
in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The Administrator shall not issue
permits for variances except as directed by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
      D.   Construction and Use to Be as Provided in Application and Plans.
Floodplain Development Permits based on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement, or
construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be
required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor,
as appropriate, registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished fill,
structure floor elevations, flood proofing, or other flood protection measures
were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to
the use or occupancy of any structure.
160.05   ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS.
The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided
into the following districts:
   1.   Floodplain (Overlay) District – those areas identified as Zone A on the
Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
The boundaries shall be as shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. Within
these districts, all uses not allowed as permitted uses are prohibited unless a
variance to the terms of this chapter is granted after due consideration by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
160.06   STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT.
   1.   Permitted Uses.
      A.   All development within the Floodplain District shall be permitted to
the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying
zoning district) and provided they meet the applicable performance standards of
the Floodplain District.
      B.   Any development which involves placement of structures, factory-
built homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment,
excavation or alteration of a watercourse shall be reviewed by the Department
of Natural Resources to determine (i) whether the land involved is either
wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe and (ii) the base flood
elevation. The applicant shall be responsible for providing the Department of
Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make the
determination.
      C.   Review by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources is not required
for the proposed construction of new or replacement bridges or culverts where:
         (1)   The bridge or culvert is located on a stream that drains less
than two square miles, and
         (2)   The bridge or culvert is not associated with a channel
modification that constitutes a channel change as specified in 567-71.2(2),
Iowa Administrative Code.
   2.   Performance Standards. All development must be consistent with the need
to minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable performance
standards. Where base flood elevations and floodway data have not been provided
in the Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be
contacted to compute such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing
the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to
make such determination. All development shall:
      A.   Be designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
      B.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
      C.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage.
   3.   Residential Structures. All new or substantially improved residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum
of one foot above the base flood elevations. Construction shall be upon
compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the
base flood elevations and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the
limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such
as piers or extended foundations) may be allowed, subject to favorable
consideration by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, where existing topography,
street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the
methods used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the
various forces and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential
structures located in areas that would become isolated due to flooding of
surrounding ground shall be provided with a means of access that will be
passable by wheeled vehicles during the base flood. However, this criterion
shall not apply where the Administrator determines there is sufficient flood
warning time for the protection of life and property. When estimating flood
warning time, consideration shall be given to the criteria listed in 567-75.2
(3), Iowa Administrative Code.
   4.   Nonresidential Structures. All new or substantially improved
nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with
attendant utility and sanitary systems, be flood proofed to such a level. When
flood proofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of
Iowa shall certify that the flood proofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with the base flood; and that the structure, below the
base flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
   5.   All New and Substantially Improved Structures.
      A.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
         (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
         (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, structure access
and low damage potential storage.
      B.   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
      C.   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with
electric meter, electrical service panel box, hot water heater, heating, air
conditioning, ventilation equipment (including ductwork), and other similar
machinery and equipment elevated (or in the case on non-residential structures,
optionally floodproofed to) a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation.
      D.   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with
plumbing, gas lines, water meters, gas meters, and other similar service
utilities either elevated (or in the case of non-residential structures,
optionally floodproofed to) a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation or designed to be watertight and withstand inundation to such a
level.
   6.   Factory-Built Homes.
      A.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure
is a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation.
      B.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame
ties to ground anchors. Anchorage systems may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors as required by the State
Building Code.
   7.   Utility and Sanitary Systems.
      A.   On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or
designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
      B.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood elevation.
      C.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water
supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with
a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood
elevation.
      D.   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
   8.   Storage of Materials and Equipment. Storage of equipment and materials
that are flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal or plant life is
prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or:
(i) not subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due
to flood waters; or (ii) readily removable from the area within the time
available after flood warning.
   9.   Flood Control Structures. Flood control structural works such as
levees, flood walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from the base
flood with a minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall provide for
adequate interior drainage. In addition, structural flood control works shall
be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
   10.   Watercourse Alterations. Watercourse alterations or relocations must
be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be
approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
   11.   Subdivisions. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation
of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this
chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all
lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during
the base flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots
(whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those areas
located within the Floodplain (Overlay) District.
   12.   Accessory Structures to Residential Uses. Detached garages, sheds, and
similar structures that are incidental to a residential use are exempt from the
base flood elevation requirements where the following criteria are satisfied.
      A.   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential.
Its size shall not exceed 600 square feet in size. Those portions of the
structure located less than one foot above the BFE must be constructed of
flood-resistant materials.
      B.   The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage potential
purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure shall not
be used for human habitation.
      C.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site
so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
      D.   The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
      E.   The structure's service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above the base
flood elevation.
      F.   The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of Subsection 5(A) of this section.
   Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a structure
may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of the
structure and its contents.
   11.   Recreational Vehicles.
      A.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of Subsection
6 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when
the following criteria are satisfied.
         (1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less
than 180 consecutive days; and
         (2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
      B.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180
consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements of
Subsection 6 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built
homes.
   12.   Pipeline Crossings. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be
buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to
prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
   13.   Maximum Damage Potential Development. All new or substantially
improved maximum damage potential uses shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated a minimum of one foot above the elevation of the 500-year
flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed
to such a level. When flood proofing is utilized, a professional engineer
registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the flood proofing methods
used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 0.2 percent annual
chance flood; and that the structure, below the 0.2 percent annual chance flood
elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water. A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in
relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are
flood proofed shall be maintained by the Administrator. Where 0.2 percent
chance flood elevation data has not been provided in the Flood Insurance Study,
the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to compute such
data. The applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural
Resources with sufficient technical information to make such determinations.
160.07   ESTABLISHMENT OF APPEAL AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide: (i) appeals; and (ii)
requests for variances to the provisions of this chapter, and shall take any
other action which is required of the Board.
   1.   Appeals. Where it is alleged there is any error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved party may appeal such action.
The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board and with the official from
whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason for the
appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board
all the documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
   2.   Variance. The Board may authorize upon request in specific cases such
variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. Variances
granted must meet the following applicable standards.
      A.   Variances shall only be granted upon: (i) a showing of good and
sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and (iii) a determination that
the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local codes or ordinances.
      B.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood would result. Consideration of
the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly
situated lands.
      C.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      D.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for structures than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the
applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator
that: (i) the issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance
coverage; and (ii) such construction increases risks to life and property.
      E.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
   3.   Hearings and Decisions of the Board.
      A.   Hearings. Upon the filing with the Board of an appeal or a request
for a variance, the Board shall hold a public hearing. The Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as well as due
notice to parties in interest. At the hearing, any party may appear in person
or by agent or attorney and present written or oral evidence. The Board may
require the appellant or applicant to provide such information as is reasonably
deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance and/or evaluation of
a professional engineer or other expert person or agency, including the
Department of Natural Resources.
      B.   Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal or
variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon an appeal, the Board may, so
long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in
writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decision.
In granting a variance, the Board shall consider such factors as contained in
this section and all other relevant sections of this chapter and may prescribe
such conditions as contained in Subparagraph (2) below.
         (1)   Factors Upon Which the Decision of the Board Shall Be Based. In
passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall consider all relevant
factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
            a.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments.
            b.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
            c.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary
conditions.
            d.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
            e.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the City.
            f.   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
            g.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use.
            h.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
            i.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for the area.
            j.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
            k.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site.
            l.   The cost of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.
            m.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
         (2)   Conditions Attached to Variances. Upon consideration of the
factors listed above, the Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such
conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
            a.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
            b.   Limitation of periods of use and operation.
            c.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.
            d.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
            e.   Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the
flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated
with the regulatory flood. The Board shall require that the applicant submit a
plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
   4.   Appeals to the Court. Any person or persons, jointly or severally,
aggrieved by any decision of the Board may present to a court of record a
petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole
or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be
presented to the court within thirty days after the filing of the decision in
the office of the Board.
160.08   NONCONFORMING USES.
A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the
passage or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject
to the following conditions:
   1.   If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future use
of the structure premises shall conform to this chapter.
   2.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
   3.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless
it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This
limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing
State or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations or
the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued
designation.
Except as provided in Subsection 2 of this section, any use which has been
permitted as a variance shall be considered a conforming use.
160.09   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
the requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not more than $500.00. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy violation.
160.10   AMENDMENTS.
The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to time
be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
(Ch. 160 – Ord. 694 – Oct. 21 Supp.)
CHAPTER 165
ZONING REGULATIONS
165.01 Title                            165.29 Required Conditions for Special
                                        Uses
165.02 Purpose                          165.30 Special Use Restrictions
165.03 Interpretation of Standards      165.31 Procedure for Obtaining Special
                                        Use Permit
165.04 Definitions                      165.32 Off-street Parking and Loading
                                        Areas
165.05 Districts Designated             165.33 Planned Unit Developments (PUD)
165.06 Boundaries                       165.34 Mobile Home Parks
165.07 Conformance Required Generally   165.35 Site Plans
165.08 Continuing Existing Uses         165.36 Structures Permitted Above
                                        Height Limit
165.09 Nonconformance                   165.37 Double Frontage Lots
165.10 Nonconforming Uses               165.38 Rear Yard Adjacent to Alleys
165.11 Street Frontage Required         165.39 Other Exceptions to Yard
                                        Requirement
165.12 Accessory Buildings and Private  165.40 Outdoor Advertising Signs
Garages
165.13 Corner Lots                      165.41 Administration and Enforcement
165.14 Front Yard                       165.42 Building Permits Required
165.15 Side Yard                        165.43 Application for Building Permit
165.16 Fences, Walls and Vision         165.44 Certificates of Zoning
Clearance                               Compliance
165.17 Required Yard Cannot Be Reduced  165.45 Conformity to Application,
                                        Permit and Certificate
165.18 Building Lines on Approved Plats of Zoning Compliance
165.19 Pending Applications for         165.46 Board of Adjustment
Building Permits
165.20 Lots of Record                   165.47 Matters of Appeal
165.21 Energy Efficiency Requirements   165.48 Changes and Amendments
165.22 R-1 Residential District         165.49 Map Replacement
Regulations
165.23 C-1 Commercial District          165.50 Zoning of Annexed Areas
Regulations
165.24 C-2 Commercial District          165.51 Complaints Regarding Violations
Regulations
165.25 I-1 Industrial District          165.52 Schedule of Fees
Regulations
165.26 A Agricultural District          165.53 Enforcement
Regulations
165.27 Flood Plain Regulations          165.54 Penalties for Violation
165.28 Special Uses
165.01 TITLE
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance for
the City of Aurelia, Iowa.”
165.02 PURPOSE
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide adequate light and air; to prevent
the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to
regulate the use of land and to promote the health, safety and general welfare
of the City.
165.03 INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS
   In their interpretation and application, these regulations shall be held to
be minimum requirements. Where these regulations impose a greater restriction
than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules,
regulations or ordinances, these regulations shall control.
165.04 DEFINITIONS
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Accessory use or structure” means a use or structure subordinate to
the principal use of a building on the lot and serving a purpose customarily
incidental to the use of the principal building.
   2.   “Agriculture” means the use of land for agricultural purposes,
including animal husbandry, apiculture, dairying, farming, floriculture,
forestry, groves, horticulture, orchards, poultry husbandry, ranching,
viticulture, and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing
the produce; however, the operation of such accessory uses shall be subordinate
to that of the normal agriculture activities.
   3.   “Alley” means a public way, other than a street, 20 feet or less in
width, affording secondary means of access to abutting property. An alley is
not considered a public thoroughfare, or a private easement, or a private
right-of-way.
   4.   “Automobile service station” means a retail place of business having
pumps and/or storage tanks from which liquid fuel and/or lubricants are
dispensed directly into the motor vehicle. Sales and installation of auto
accessories, washing, polishing, inspections and cleaning, and minor repair but
not steam cleaning, may be carried on incidental to the sale of such fuel and
lubricants.
   5.   “Basement” means a story having more than one-half of its height below
grade. A basement is not counted as a story for the purpose of height
regulations, provided that the finished floor level directly above is less than
six feet above grade. (See “basement, walkout” and “story.”)
   6.   “Basement, walkout” means a basement having a portion of its finished
floor not more than four feet below the finished yard grade at any of its
exterior walls and having not less than two-thirds of the vertical height of an
exterior wall, which has a ground level exit to the outside, above ground. A
walkout basement is considered the ground floor level of the building and is
counted as a story. (See “basement” and “story.”)
   7.   “Billboard” means all structures, regardless of the base or materials
used in construction of the same, that are erected, maintained or used for
public display of posters, painted signs, wall signs, whether the structure is
placed on the wall or painted on the wall itself, pictures or other pictorial
reading matter which advertise a business or attraction which is not carried on
or manufactured in or upon the premises upon which said signs or billboards are
located. (See also definitions for “Sign” and also see Section 50.02[6]).
   8.   “Block” means all that property frontage along one public thoroughfare
lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, road right-
of-way, waterway, golf course, campus, park or other similar open space.
   9.   “Board” means the Board of Adjustment of the City.
   10.   “Building” means any structure having a roof supported by walls or by
columns intended for enclosure, shelter or housing of persons, animals, or
cattle. Temporary buildings and potentially portable structures shall not be
used for dwelling purposes in any district, except when located in a mobile
home park or travel trailer park or when taxed as real estate rather than
chattel.
   11.   “Building, height of” means the vertical distance from the average
finished ground grade at the building line to the highest point of the coping
of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height
level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
   12.   “Building line” means the line of the outside wall, including
overhang, of the building or any enclosed projection thereof nearest the
street.
   13.   “Centerline, public thoroughfare” means a line running parallel with
the thoroughfare right-of-way which is half the distance between the extreme
edges of the official right-of-way width.
   14.   “Commercial use” means a use operated for profits or compensation.
   15.   “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
   16.   “Court” means an open, unoccupied, unobstructed space, except for
trees, shrubs, statuary or other articles normally considered accessory to
landscaping, which is bounded on two or more sides by a building on the same
lot.
   17.   “District” means a section or sections of the City within which the
regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the height and area
of buildings and premises are uniform.
   18.   “Dog kennel, commercial” means:
      A.   The keeping of any dog or dogs, regardless of number, for sale,
breeding, boarding or treatment purposes, (except in a dog hospital, dog beauty
parlor or pet shop, as permitted by law); or
      B.   The keeping of four or more dogs (six months or older) on premises
used for residential purposes; or
      C.   The keeping of more than one dog on vacant property or on property
used for business or commercial purposes. (See also Section 165.22[1][B][1],
Section 165.26[1][A][14] and Chapter 162, Code of Iowa.)
   19.   “Dump” means a premises used for the disposal of tree branches and
similar materials, but not including organic matter of any type such as garbage
or dead animals or portions thereof.
   20.   “Dwelling” means any stationary, permanent building, or portion
thereof, which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, but
not including a tent, cabin, trailer or trailer coach.
   21.   “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms in a dwelling, multiple-
dwelling or apartment hotel used for occupancy by one family as a home or
residence for living or sleeping purposes and in which the cooking and sanitary
facilities are designed for the use of one family only.
   22.   “Dwelling, one-family” means a detached building on a building site
designed for and used exclusively for residential purposes by one family and
containing one dwelling unit.
   23.   “Dwelling, two-family” means a building designed for and used
exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other
and containing two dwelling units.
   24.   “Dwelling, multiple” means a building or buildings on a common lot
designed for and used for occupancy by three or more families living
independently of each other and containing three or more dwelling units.
   25.   “Dwelling, sub-class” includes:
      A.   Attached: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or
more sides by a party wall or walls (i.e., duplex, triplex, condominiums,
etc.).
      B.   Detached: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on
the same lot (i.e., two houses on same lot).
      C.   Condominium: A multiple dwelling as defined herein whereby the fee
title to each dwelling unit is held independently of the others, and meeting
requirements of the Iowa Condominium Statutes.
      D.   Condominium Apartment: A form of cooperative ownership which permits
group ownership of all spaces beyond the specific apartments. Each apartment
can be owned in fee simple, with no restrictions on the sale, rental, or
transfer of same, other than those common restrictions on all real estate.
Condominiums must meet requirements of the Iowa Condominium Statutes.
   26.   “Easement” means an authorization by a property owner for the use by
another of any designated part of his property and for a specified purpose.
   27.   “Family” means:
      A.   An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption and usual servants living together as a single housekeeping unit in a
dwelling unit, or
      B.   A group of not more than four persons, who need not be related,
living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
   28.   “Farm” means an area comprising 10 acres or more which is used for
agricultural purposes. (See “agriculture.”)
   29.   “Frontage” means the distance of a front lot line as measured along
the public thoroughfare. (See “lot lines, front.”)
   30.   “Garage, community” means a structure, or a series of structures under
one roof, and under one ownership, used primarily for storage of vehicles by
three or more owners or occupants of other property in the vicinity.
   31.   “Garage, mechanical” means a structure in which major mechanical
repair or rebuilding of motor powered vehicles is performed for commercial gain
and in which the storage, care and minor servicing is an accessory use.
   32.   “Garage, private” means an accessory building or an accessory portion
of the main building, designed and/or used for the shelter or storage of
vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main building. A private
garage, of less than three car capacity, may be rented for the private vehicles
of persons not residents on the premises.
   33.   “Garage, public” means a structure other than a private garage, used
for the shelter or storage of motor powered vehicles and in which the care,
minor servicing, washing, etc., is an accessory use.
   34.   “Grade” means any wall approximately parallel to and not more than
five feet from a street line is considered as adjoining the street.
      A.   For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation
of the regularly established sidewalk grade at the center of the wall adjoining
the street.
      B.   For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the
average elevation of the regularly established sidewalk grades at the center of
walls adjoining the street.
      C.   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level
of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the
building.
   35.   “Half-story” means a story with at least two of its opposite sides
situated in a sloping roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds
of the floor area of the floor immediately below it. A half-story containing
independent apartments or living quarters is counted as a full story.
   36.   “Home occupation” means any occupation or profession conducted solely
by resident occupants in their place of abode, involving primarily service and
not the sale of commodities upon the premises. No more than one-fourth of the
area of not more than one floor level of the building may be used in pursuit of
the occupation. In connection therewith there is used no sign other than one
name plate affixed to the outer wall, of not more than two square feet in area
that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in
part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling. No more than one person
other than the occupants of a building may be employed therein.
   37.   “Hospital” means an institution for the diagnosis, care or treatment
of two or more unrelated persons suffering from illness, injury or deformity,
or for the rendering of obstetrical or other professional medical care other
than in an emergency. For the purposes of this definition only, nursing care is
not considered to be professional medical care.
   38.   “Hotel” means a building occupied as the more or less temporary
residence of individuals who are lodged, with or without meals, and in which
there are six or more sleeping rooms or suites of rooms with no provisions made
for cooking in any individual room or suite of rooms, and entrance is through a
common lobby or office.
   39.   “Junk yard” means the use of a lot or portion thereof for the
dismantling or wrecking of motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, keeping
or abandonment of junk, dismantled automobiles or other vehicles, or machinery,
or parts thereof, including scrap metals, rags or other scrap materials. The
presence on any lot, parcel or tract of land, of five or more vehicles which
for a period exceeding 30 days have not been capable of operating under their
own power, and from which parts have been removed or are to be removed for
reuse, salvage, or sale, shall constitute prima facie evidence of a junk yard.
   40.   “Kennel” — See “dog kennel, commercial.”
   41.   “Loading space” means any off-street space or berth on the same lot
with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary
parking (less than 24 hours) of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise.
   42.   “Lot” includes the words plot or parcel, and all other words or
phrases used to denote an individual building site which complies with the
minimum provisions of these regulations. “Lot” means a parcel of land or two or
more contiguous parcels to be used as a unit under these regulations, and
having its principal frontage on a dedicated street and may consist of any one
of the following:
      A.   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record
and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record.
      B.   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; in no case of
division or combination shall any residential or other parcel be created which
does not meet these or other City regulations.
      C.   A single lot of record.
   43.   “Lot lines” means:
      A.   Front: The front property line of a lot shall be determined as
follows:
         (1)   Corner Lot. The front property line of a corner lot shall be the
shorter of the two lines adjacent to the streets as platted, subdivided or laid
out. Where the lines are equal, the front line shall be that line which is
obviously the front by reason of the prevailing custom of the other buildings
in the block. If such front is not evident, then either (but not both) may be
considered the front of the lot.
         (2)   Interior Lot. The front property line of an interior lot shall
be the line bounding street frontage.
         (3)   Through Lot. The front property line of a through lot shall be
that line which is obviously the front by reason of the prevailing custom of
the other buildings in the block. Where such front property line is not
obviously evident, the Board of Adjustment shall determine the front property
line. A through lot over 200 feet deep shall be considered, for the purpose of
this definition only, as two lots each with its own frontage.
      B.   Rear. The rear property line of a lot is that lot line opposite the
front property line. Where the side property lines of a lot meet in a point,
the rear property line shall be assumed to be a line not less than 10 feet long
lying within the lot and parallel to the front property line. If the front
property line is a curved line, then the rear property line shall be assumed to
be a line not less than 10 feet long, lying within the lot and parallel to a
line tangent to the front property line at its midpoint.
      C.   Side. The side property lines of a lot are those lot lines
connecting the front and rear property lines of a lot.
   44.   “Lot measurements” means:
      A.   Area. The gross area, exclusive of streets or other public rights-
of-way, within the boundary lines of a lot.
      B.   Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines as measured perpendicular to the midpoint of the mean front lot line. In
the case of an interior triangular or gore-shaped lot, the depth shall be the
horizontal distance between the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines.
      C.   Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines as
measured perpendicular to the line comprising the lot depth at its point of
intersection with the required minimum front setback. Where the lot width is
decreasing from front to rear, the horizontal distance between the side lot
lines as described above shall be measured at its point of intersection with
the required minimum rear setback.
   45.   “Lot of record” means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the deed
of which is recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
   46.   “Lot types” means:
      A.   Corner Lot. A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets, and having the street right-of-way abut the front and one or more side
lines of the lot.
      B.   Double Frontage Lot (Through Lot). A lot other than a corner lot
with frontage on more than one street or public thoroughfare and such frontages
do not intersect one another.
      C.   Interior Lot. A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on but
one street or public thoroughfare.
      D.   Key Lot. A lot so subdivided as to have its side lines coincide with
the rear lot lines of adjacent lots on either or both sides of the aforesaid
key lots.
      E.   Reversed Corner Lot. A corner lot, whose side street line is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its
rear.
   47.   “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure, built under the
authority of 42 U.S.C. See. 5403, which was constructed on or after June 15,
1976, and is required by Federal law to display a seal from the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   48.   “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed or reconstructed
as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or
more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with motive power not
registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home means any such vehicle
built before June 15, 1976, which was not built to a mandatory building code
and which contains no State or Federal seals.
   49.   “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field or tract of land upon
which three or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of
such homes, are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit
enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and electrical services available. The
term “mobile home park” is not to be construed to include mobile homes,
buildings, tents or other structures temporarily maintained by any individual,
educational institution or company on their own premises and used exclusively
to house their own labor or students.
   50.   “Motel or motor hotel” means a building or group of two or more
buildings designed to provide sleeping accommodations for transient or
overnight guests, with garage attached or parking facilities conveniently
located to each such unit.
   51.   “Nonconforming structure” means any building or any portion thereof
which was lawfully established and maintained but which, because of the
application of these regulations to it, no longer conforms to the yard
regulations of the zone in which it is located.
   52.   “Nonconforming use” means the use of a building or of land or any
portion thereof, which was lawfully established and maintained but which,
because of the application of these regulations to it, no longer conforms to
the use regulations of the zone in which it is located.
   53.   “Nursing, convalescent, or rest home” means a building or structure
having accommodations where care is provided for invalid, infirm, aged,
convalescent, or physically disabled persons, not including insane or other
mental cases, inebriate or contagious cases.
   54.   “Occupied” includes the words intended, designed, or arranged to be
occupied.
   55.   “Parking space, automobile” means an area, other than a street or
alley, reserved for the parking of an automobile, such space having a dimension
not less than nine feet by 20 feet, plus such additional area as is necessary
to afford adequate ingress-egress.
   56.   “Place of business” means any vehicle, building, structure, yard,
area, lot, premises, or part thereof, or any other place in or on which one or
more persons engage in a gainful occupation.
   57.   “Principal building” means the building situated or to be placed
nearest the front property line and the use of which conforms to the primary
use permitted by the zoning classification in which it is located.
   58.   “Public thoroughfare” means any right-of-way under the jurisdiction
and maintenance of the governmental agencies of the federal, State and
municipal government, which may be used by the public in general, and which
serves as the frontage street to the abutting property. (See “street.”)
   59.   “Setback” means the building restriction line nearest the front of and
across a lot establishing the minimum distance to be provided between the line,
including overhang, of a building located on said lot and the nearest street
right-of-way line.
   60.   “Sign” means any device designed to inform, or attract the attention
of persons not on the premises upon which the sign is located; provided,
however, the following are not included in the application of the regulations
herein:
      A.   Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only
property numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants of premises, or other
identification of premises not having commercial connotations.
      B.   Flags and insignias of any government except when displayed in
connection with commercial promotion.
      C.   Legal notices; identification, information, or directional signs
erected or required by governmental bodies.
      D.   Integral, decorative or architectural features of buildings, except
letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights.
      E.   Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property,
but bearing no advertising matter.
   For the purpose of determining number and surface area of signs, a sign
shall be considered to be a single display surface or displaying device
confining elements organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where matter
is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements or
where there is reasonable doubt about the relationship of elements, each
element is considered to be a separate sign. (See also definition for
“billboard.”)
   61.   “Sign, off-site” means a sign other than on-site.
   62.   “Sign, on-site” means a sign relating in its subject matter to the
premises on which it is located or to products, accommodations, services or
activities on the premises. On-site signs do not include signs erected by the
outdoor advertising industry in conduct of the outdoor advertising business.
   63.   “Site” — See “lot.”
   64.   “Stables” means:
      A.   Private. A building or structure used, or intended to be used for
housing horses belonging to the owner of the property and for non-commercial
purposes.
      B.   Public and Riding Academy. A building or structure used or intended
to be used only for the housing of horses on a fee basis. Riding instruction
may be given in connection with a public stable or riding academy.
      C.   Riding Club. A building or structure used or intended to be used
only for the housing of horses by a group of persons for non-commercial
purposes.
   65.   “Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface
of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it. If there is no floor
above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it shall
be considered a story. If the finished floor level directly above the basement
or cellar is more than six feet above grade, such basement or cellar shall be
considered a story.
   66.   “Story, half” — See “half-story.”
   67.   “Street” means a public thoroughfare which affords the principal means
of access to the abutting property. (See “public thoroughfare.”)
   68.   “Street line” means a dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of
land and a contiguous street. (See “lot line, front.”)
   69.   “Structural alterations” means any replacement or change in the shape
or size of any portion of a building or of the supporting members of a building
or structure such as walls, columns, beams, arches, girders, floor joist, or
roof trusses, beyond ordinary repairs and maintenance.
   70.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected with a rigid or
fixed location on the ground, or attachment to something having a permanent
location on the ground. Structures include buildings, walls, fences, signs,
light standards, towers, tanks, etc.
   71.   “Subdivision” means a division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
three or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease, building development,
anchorage, right-of-way dedication, or other use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.1)
   72.   “Survey, certified” means a sketch, plan, map or other exhibit bearing
a written statement of its accuracy or conformity to specified standards which
is signed and sealed by a registered land surveyor.
   73.   “Travel trailer” means any vehicular, portable structure built on a
chassis, designed as a temporary dwelling not exceeding eight feet in width and
not exceeding 40 feet in length exclusive of a separate towing unit. The term
“travel trailer” includes pickup coach, motor home, camping trailer, or other
similar mobile and temporary dwellings commonly used for travel, recreation or
vacation quarters. (See also definition for “building.”)
   74.   “Travel trailer park” means a parcel of land upon which two or more
spaces are provided, occupied or intended for occupancy by travel trailers for
transient purposes, not to exceed 30 days.
   75.   “Used” includes the words intended, designed, or arranged to be used.
   76.   “Variance” means a modification of the specific provisions of these
regulations granted by resolution of the Board of Adjustment in accordance with
the terms of these regulations for the purpose of assuring that no property,
because of special circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of
privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone.
(Note: A variance does not amend the ordinance.)
   77.   “Yard, front” means a yard extending across the street frontage of the
lot and measured, using the least distance between the front lot line and the
building or any projection thereof, including the projection of the usual
unenclosed steps or stoop or roof overhang. The narrow frontage on a corner lot
is considered the front line, regardless of where the building entrance is
located.
   78.   “Yard, side” means the yard lying to the sides of the principal
building or between the sides of the building lines and side lot lines.
   79.   “Yard, rear” means a yard extending across the full width of the lot
and measured using the least distance between the rear lot line and the
building or any projections including steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed
porches. On corner lots, the rear yard is considered as adjoining the street
upon which the lot has its greater dimension. On both corner lots and interior
lots, the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
   80.   “Zoning Administrator” means the administrative officer designated or
appointed by the Council to administer and enforce the regulations contained
herein.
165.05 DISTRICTS DESIGNATED
   In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of trades and
industries, and the location of buildings designed for specified uses, to
regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or
altered; to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to
regulate and determine the area of yards, courts, and other open spaces within
and surrounding such buildings, the City is hereby divided into six classes of
districts. The use, height and area regulations are uniform in each class of
district and said districts shall be known as:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.2)
   R-1   Residential District
   C-1   Central Commercial District
   C-2   Suburban Commercial District
   I-1   Industrial District
   A   Agricultural District
   F-1   Flood Hazard Area
165.06 BOUNDARIES
   The boundaries of these districts are indicated upon the OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
of the City, which map is made a part of these regulations by reference. The
said OFFICIAL ZONING MAP and all notations, references, and other matters shown
thereon shall be as if the notations, references and other matters set forth by
said map were all fully described herein. The OFFICIAL ZONING MAP shall be
filed in the office of the Clerk. The OFFICIAL ZONING MAP shall be identified
by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the Clerk under the following words:
This is to certify that this is the OFFICIAL ZONING MAP-- adopted by Ordinance
_______ of the City of Aurelia, Iowa.
The district boundaries are either lot lines or the centerlines of streets and
alleys, unless otherwise shown. Where the districts designated are bounded
approximately by street, alley, or lot lines and are not dimensioned otherwise,
the lot lines or the centerlines of streets and alleys shall be considered to
be the boundary of the district.
165.07 CONFORMANCE REQUIRED GENERALLY
   Except as hereinafter specified, no building or structure shall be erected,
converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, nor shall
any building or land be used which does not comply with all of the district
regulations established by these regulations for the district in which the
building or land is located.
165.08 CONTINUING EXISTING USES
   The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the enactment of these
regulations may be continued even though such use may not conform with these
regulations for the district in which it is located.
165.09 NONCONFORMANCE
   Within the districts established by these regulations or by amendments which
may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, buildings and uses which
were lawful before these regulations were effective or amended, but which would
be prohibited, regulated or restricted under these regulations or future
amendment. It is the intent of this regulation to permit these nonconformities
to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is
further the intent of these regulations that nonconformities shall not be
enlarged upon, expanded or extended, or be used as grounds for adding other
structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. In any district
in which dwellings are permitted, such a use and customary accessory buildings
may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption of
these regulations, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions
contained herein. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through
action of the Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.12)
165.10 NONCONFORMING USES
   No building or land devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the
district in which such building or land is located, except when required by
law, shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, substituted or
structurally altered, unless the use thereof is changed to a use permitted in
the district in which such building, structure or premises is located, except
as follows:
   1.   Substitution. If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming
use of a building or structure may be changed to another nonconforming use of
the same or of a more conforming use, but not less conforming. Whenever a
nonconforming use has been changed to a more conforming use or to a conforming
use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use.
   2.   Discontinuance. In the event that a nonconforming use of any building,
structure and/or land is discontinued for a period of one year, the use of the
same shall conform thereafter to the uses permitted in the district in which it
is located. The use of land upon which no building or structure is erected or
constructed which either does not conform to the provisions of this chapter and
the use of land upon which no building is erected or constructed or which
becomes nonconforming by reason of a subsequent change in this chapter, shall
be discontinued if vacant for a period of 30 days.
   3.   Replacing Damaged Nonconforming Buildings. Any nonconforming building
or structure damaged more than 60 percent of its replacement cost, as
determined by the City Engineer, exclusive of the foundations at the time of
damage by fire, flood, explosion, war, riots, or act of God, shall not be
restored or reconstructed and used as before such happening; but if damage is
less than 60 percent of replacement cost above the foundation, it may be
restored, reconstructed or used as before provided that it be done within 12
months of such happening.
   4.   Additions and Expansions. A structure which does not conform with
district regulations shall not be added to, expanded or enlarged unless such
addition, expansion or enlargement conforms to all the regulations of the
district in which it is located, provided, however, that such addition,
expansion or enlargement maintains a side yard width not less than the side
yard width of the nonconforming structure existing prior to such expansion or
enlargement. A nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded or extended
beyond the area it occupies at the date of adoption of these regulations.
165.11 STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED
   Lots containing any building used in whole or in part for residence purposes
shall abut for at least 40 feet on at least one street, unless it has an
exclusive unobstructed private easement of access or right-of-way access at
least 20 feet wide to a street; and there shall be not more than one single-
family dwelling for such frontage or private access of easement, unless a
common private easement of access at least 50 feet wide shall be provided for
two or more such single-family or for one or more two-family or multiple
dwellings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.1)
165.12 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND PRIVATE GARAGES
   An accessory building or structure which exceeds six feet in height shall be
erected in a required yard or court only as provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.1)
   1.   Principal Building Area. An accessory building or structure which is
located partially or entirely within the principal building area of the lot
(the lot minus the required yards and courts) whether attached or detached to
the principal building shall be subject to the regulations applicable to the
principal building.
   2.   Lot Lines. Accessory buildings shall have no portion of the structure,
including overhang, less than two feet from any lot line, and on a corner lot
they shall conform to the setback regulations on the side street.
   3.   Connection. Accessory buildings, except buildings housing animals or
fowl, may be erected as a part of the principal building or may be connected
thereto by a breezeway or similar structure; however, said building shall then
comply with all yard requirements for a principal building.
   4.   Garage. The garage for any principal building on a lot abutting an
alley may be located in a rear or side yard area which abuts the alley;
providing, however, that such garage building shall comply with the following
requirements:
      A.   The detached garage shall be set back no less than two feet from a
party lot line or alley line, except when any part of such building is within
50 feet of any street or public place upon which the lot abuts, such building
shall be at least six feet from any lot line which serves as the front portion
of a side lot line for any adjoining property; or shall be located no closer
than 24 feet to any garage or principal building which is located on the
opposite side of the alley; whichever is the greater requirement.
      B.   The attached garage building shall be considered an extension of the
principal building and shall comply with all minimum yard requirements for the
principal building other than the exception herein permitting the garage
entrance to be located near the alley, i.e., an attached garage facing an alley
which abuts a side lot line shall not encroach into the required front or rear
yards; an attached garage facing an alley which abuts a rear lot line shall be
set back from the side lot lines no less than the requirements for the
principal building.
      C.   The detached garage building shall not exceed one story or 15 feet
in height.
   5.   Yard Area. Accessory buildings and structures, regardless of height,
which are constructed above the normal ground surface in any required yard area
shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the yard area in which it is located;
however, this regulation shall not be interpreted to prohibit the construction
of a two-car garage not to exceed 576 square feet gross building area. An
accessory building which is not a part of the main building shall be a distance
of at least 10 feet from any other building on the lot including the principal
building.
165.13 CORNER LOTS
   For corner lots, platted after the effective date of these regulations, the
street side yard shall be equal in width to the minimum required side yard for
the district in which it is located, plus 20 feet; i.e., for a minimum required
side yard of 10 feet the street side yard shall be not less than 30 feet;
provided, however, this regulation shall not be interpreted as to require a
side street yard of greater width than the minimum required front yard width.
For corner lots, platted after the effective date of these regulations, the
minimum required lot width shall be increased by any amount not less than 20
feet so as to allow for the additional required street side yard, i.e., for a
minimum required lot width of 80 feet, the minimum width of a corner lot shall
be not less than 100 feet. On corner lots platted and of record at the time of
the effective date of these regulations, the same regulations shall apply
except that this regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the
buildable width of the corner lot of record or as shown by existing contract of
purchase at the time of the effective date of these regulations, to less than
28 feet or to prohibit the erection of an accessory building.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.1)
165.14 FRONT YARD
   In any R District there shall be a minimum front yard required as stated in
the yard requirement for that particular district; however, in no case shall
the front yard depth be less than three-fourths of the smallest front yard
depth of an existing building in the same block, located within 200 feet of
either side lot line and fronting on the same street; however, this regulation
shall not be interpreted as to require a greater setback than double the
minimum required front yard for the district in which it is located; or to
permit a setback which is less than the minimum required front yard for the
district in which it is located.
165.15 SIDE YARD
   In only residential districts the principal structure shall have no portion
of the building closer than five feet to the side lot line.
165.16 FENCES, WALLS AND VISION CLEARANCE
   Regulations for fences, walls and vision clearance are as follows:
   1.   Corner Lot. On a corner lot nothing shall be erected, placed, planted
or allowed to grow in such a manner as to impede vision between a height of two
and one-half feet and 10 feet above the street centerline grades of the area
described as follows: that area bounded by the street right-of-way lines on a
corner lot and a straight line joining points on said right-of-way lines 25
feet from the point of intersection of said right-of-way lines.
   2.   Height Restrictions. In any district, fences and walls not exceeding
eight feet in height are permitted within the limits of side and rear yards. A
fence or wall not exceeding four feet in height is permitted within the limits
of front yards. In the case of retaining walls supporting embankments, the
above requirements shall apply only to the part of wall above the ground
surface of the retained embankment.
      A.   In any district where a fence or wall is required by this chapter,
the Subdivision Ordinance (Chapter 166), or other ordinance, to serve as a
screening wall, buffer wall or other separating or protective wall, the height
limit of that specific ordinance requiring the fence or wall, shall apply.
      B.   Fences and walls on a corner lot shall comply with the vision
clearance requirements of subsection 1 of this section.
165.17 REQUIRED YARD CANNOT BE REDUCED
   No lot shall be reduced in size so as to make the width or total area of the
lot, or any yard, or any other open space, less than the minimum required by
these regulations. No part of a yard or other open space provided about any
building or structure for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this
chapter shall be included as part of a yard or other open space required under
these regulations for another building or structure. Off-street parking and
loading areas may occupy all or part of any required yard or open space except
as otherwise specified in the regulations.
165.18 BUILDING LINES ON APPROVED PLATS
   Whenever the plat of a subdivision approved by the Commission and on record
in the Office of the County Recorder shows a setback building line along any
frontage for the purpose of creating a front yard or side street yard line, the
building line thus shown shall apply along such frontage in place of any other
yard line required in these regulations unless specific yard requirements in
these regulations requires a greater setback.
165.19 PENDING APPLICATIONS FOR BUILDING PERMITS
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layout,
plans, construction size or designated use of any building, or part thereof,
for which approvals and required building permits have been granted before the
enactment of these regulations. The construction in conformance with such plans
shall have been started prior to the effective date of these regulations and
completion thereof carried on in a normal manner and not discontinued for
reasons other than those beyond the builder’s control. Construction shall be
considered to have started when the first construction materials have been
placed in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Demolition or
removal of an existing building begun preparatory to rebuilding shall be deemed
to be actual construction, provided that such work shall be diligently carried
on until completion of the building involved.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.4)
165.20 LOTS OF RECORD
   Any lot of record on the effective date of these regulations which is
located in any R District and which does not comply in area and/or minimum
dimensions with the requirements of the district in which it is located, may be
used for a single-family structure, provided that all setback and other
requirements of this chapter are complied with, and that the owner of such lot
did not directly or indirectly have legal title to or enjoy the beneficial
interest in the lot or lots contiguous thereto since January 10, 1967. No
building permit shall be issued for construction on any sub-standard lot or lot
contiguous or adjacent to said sub-standard lot, which lot was of record at the
time of the adoption of these regulations if said lot is adjacent and
contiguous to another lot which since January 10, 1967, was in the same
ownership or whose ownership had beneficial interest in said lot, unless said
lots are combined into one lot meeting the requirements of the zoning district
which is applicable. On lots of record at the time of adoption or amendment of
these regulations having a width of less than 60 feet, the side yards may be
reduced as follows for a single-family dwelling only:
   1.   Each side yard may be reduced to not less than 10 percent of the lot
width.
   2.   On corner lots, only the interior side yard may be reduced below seven
feet. (See also Section 165.22(5).)
165.21 ENERGY EFFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS
   New structures intended primarily for human occupancy must be certified by
the owner or builder as being energy efficient before they can be provided with
gas or electric service. A statement by the owner or builder must be furnished
to the Zoning Administrator before a building permit is issued. (Editor’s Note:
See Appendix for form to be used for this purpose.)
165.22 R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
   The regulations set forth in this section or elsewhere in these regulations
which are applicable apply in the R-1 Residential District.
   1.   Use Regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the
following purposes:
      A.   Principal Permitted Uses. Principal permitted uses are as follows:
         (1)   A single-family dwelling on each lot or building site.
         (2)   Two-family dwellings.
         (3)   Multi-family dwellings.
         (4)   Manufactured homes.
         (5)   Mobile home parks.
         (6)   Public or private parks, playgrounds, golf courses, and other
outdoor recreational facilities which are commonly, but not necessarily,
operated on a non-profit basis; however, amusement parks, golf-driving ranges,
or miniature golf putting courses, which are normally operated for profit and
employing manufactured or constructed facilities of an unnatural or
nonenvironmental design shall be excluded.
         (7)   Churches.
         (8)   Public and private schools.
         (9)   Funeral home.
         (10)   Hospitals and nursing homes.
      B.   Accessory Uses. Accessory uses are as follows:
         (1)   Normal accessory buildings and structures for a dwelling such as
private garages, swimming pools, children’s playhouses (not used for dwelling
purposes), radio and television receiving antennas, antennas, barbecue pits,
playground equipment, tennis courts, dog houses, dog runs which do not
constitute a commercial kennel, etc.
         (2)   Normal accessory buildings and structures for public recreation
areas such as refreshment stands, playground equipment, all-weather shelters,
tennis courts, barbecue pits, etc.
         (3)   Domestic animals such as cats, dogs, birds, tropical fish, etc.,
which are normally allowed to run free or are housed within the dwelling.
Horses, cows, hogs, sheep, chickens, etc., normally considered farm or wild and
untamed animals shall be excluded except as otherwise provided for in these
regulations.
         (4)   Flower and vegetable gardening for noncommercial gain.
         (5)   Greenhouses and horticultural nurseries for noncommercial gain.
         (6)   Home occupations of a professional, talented or artistic nature
such as: doctor, engineer, lawyer, real estate or insurance agent, tailor,
seamstress, watchmaker, dentist, designer, sculptor; however, those occupations
normally classified as a trade and requiring the substantial use of contractors
or mechanic’s tools or equipment such as: carpenters, electricians, monument
cutters, painters, plumbers, etc., shall be excluded. (See Section 165.40[3].)
         (7)   Signs, On-Site. One sign only, not exceeding 80 square feet in
area, pertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of the building or premises on
which such sign is located. This regulation shall apply to outdoor
identification signs or bulletin boards for hospitals, churches and schools and
other public buildings. (See also Section 165.16 and 165.40.)
   2.   Maximum Height Regulation. No principal building shall exceed two and
one-half stories or 35 feet in height. Accessory Buildings – (See Section
165.12.)
   3.   Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed:
      A.   Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings:
Lot Area:       9,000 square feet;
Lot Frontage:       80 feet;
Front Yard Depths:    30 feet;
Side Yard Least Width
On Any One Side:    5 feet;
Width Minimum Sum of
Both Side Yards:    15 feet;
Rear Yard Depth:    30 feet;
provided however, that as to a lot of record as of January 12, 1981, the front
yard depth shall be the average front yard depth of the dwellings existing as
of January 12, 1981, on the same block and on the same side of the street.
B.   Multi-Family Dwellings:
   Lot Area:    10,000 square feet per building plus 1,500 square feet for each
unit over 2;
Lot Frontage:       80 feet;
Front Yard Depths:    30 feet;
Side Yard Least Width
On Any One Side:    10 feet;
Width Minimum Sum of
Both Side Yards:    20 feet;
Rear Yard Depth:    30 feet;
provided, however, that as to a lot of record as of January 12, 1981, the front
yard depth shall be the average front yard depth of the dwellings existing as
of January 12, 1981, on the same block and on the same side of the street.
C.   Non-Dwellings:
Lot Area:       9,000 square feet;
Lot Frontage:       80 feet;
Front Yard Depths:    40 feet;
Side Yard Least Width
On Any One Side:    10 feet;
Width Minimum Sum of
Both Side Yards:    30 feet;
Rear Yard Depth:    50 feet;
D.   Mobile Home Parks:
Lot Area:    5 acres;
For other requirements, see Section 165.34.
   4.   Off-Street Parking Regulations. See Section 165.32.
   5.   Existing Lots of Record – Side Yards. A single-family dwelling may be
located on any lot or plot of official record as of January 10, 1967,
irrespective of its area or width. The following side yard width requirements
shall apply: The sum of the side yard widths of any such lot or plot shall not
be less than 20 percent of the width of the lot, and the width of any one side
yard shall be not less than 10 percent of the width of the lot. However, in no
case shall the side yard on any one side be less than five feet. (See also
Section 165.20.)
165.23 C-1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
   The regulations set forth in this section and elsewhere in these regulations
which are applicable, apply in the C-1 Commercial District.
   1.   Use Regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the
following purposes:
      A.   Principal Permitted Uses. Principal permitted uses are as follows:
         (1)   Any use permitted in the R District providing such use shall
comply with the minimum requirements of the R District.
         (2)   Commercial establishments, retail and wholesale, including:
            Antique shop.
            Apparel store.
            Bakeries.
            Ballrooms and dance halls.
            Bicycle and motorcycle shop -- sales and repair.
            Billboards.
            Bookbinding.
            Candy shops.
            Carpenter and cabinet shops.
            Commercial parking lots.
            Dairy store -- retail.
            Drugstore.
            Electric substations.
            Florist shop.
            Fruit and vegetable market.
            Funeral homes.
            Furniture store.
            Garages, public and mechanical.
            Gift shop.
            Golf-driving range and miniature golf course.
            Grocery and delicatessen.
            Hardware store.
            Hobby shop.
            Hotel, motel or motor lodge.
            Household appliances, equipment, sales and repair.
            Ice storage and distributing station of not more than five-ton
capacity.
            Jewelry shop.
            Laundry.
            Lawn mower repair shop.
            Locker plants.
            Monument sales and engraving.
            Packaging of candy, confections and/or frozen foods.
            Paint and wallpaper store.
            Photographic studios.
            Radio and television -- sales and repair.
            Real estate office.
            Service stations (gasoline).
            Shoe repair shop.
            Sporting goods and camping equipment.
            Tailor shop.
            Tire repair shops.
            Truck terminals.
            Variety store.
         (3)   Automotive sales and service establishments including:
automobile service stations; automobile, truck, motor cycle, recreational
vehicle, boat, snowmobile trailer, mobile home and farm implement
establishments for display, hire, sales, and minor repairs, including sales
lots.
         (4)   Eating and drinking establishments including: restaurants,
cafes, soda fountains and drive-ins; confectionery and ice cream stores;
cocktail lounge, bar or tavern; night clubs.
         (5)   Service establishments including: launderette; laundry;
messenger office; post office; printing and/or publishing houses; dance and/or
music studio; collection office of a public utility; banks, including drive-in
teller service; barber shop or beauty salon; clothes dry cleaning and laundry.
         (6)   Recreational facilities including: billiard parlors and pool
halls; bowling alley.
         (7)   Other commercial establishments including: animal hospital,
veterinary clinic or commercial kennel, providing any exercising runway or
pasture shall be at least 200 feet from an R District; hotels and motels;
machine shops, but not junkyards; radio or TV broadcasting stations, studios,
and offices but not towers in excess of 100 feet; sign painting shops, and
storage and warehouses.
         (8)   Any use which is found by the Zoning Administrator to be a use
similar to one of the above named uses, and in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, conforms to the intent of this section.
         (9)   Outdoor advertising signs and billboards in accordance with the
provisions of Section 165.40.
         (10)   Business or professional offices supplying commodities or
performing services.
         (11)   Heating, air conditioning and electrical sales and repair
shops.
      B.   Accessory Uses: Any exterior or roof sign the height of which shall
not exceed 18 feet above the roof line.
   2.   Height Regulations. No building shall exceed 45 feet or three stories
in height.
   3.   Lot Area, Lot Frontage and Yard Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed:
      A.   Residential. Lot Area, Lot Width, Lot Area Per Family, Front Yard
Depths, Side Yard Least Width on Any One Side, Width Minimum Sum of Both Side
Yards, and Rear Yard Depths: All same as R-1 District.
      B.   All Other Uses:
         Lot Area:    none;
         Lot Width:    none required;
         Lot Area Per Family:   none;
         Front Yard Depths   none;
         Side Yard Least Width on Any One Side:    none, except abutting an R
District, in which case not less than 10 feet;
         Width Minimum Sum of Both Side Yards:    none;
         Rear Yard Depth:    none;
   4.   Off-Street Parking. See Section 165.32.
   5.   Signs and Canopies. Regulations for signs and canopies are as follows:
      A.   Signs. Projecting and free standing signs encroaching on street
right-of-way shall not be permitted except:
         (1)   Where such signs are between 15 and 18 feet above grade, in
which event such signs, which project 36 inches or less, shall be permitted;
and
         (2)   Where such signs are 18 feet above grade such signs which
project 60 inches or less shall be permitted.
      B.   Canopies and Marquees. Canopies and marquees may be installed over
public right-of-way and may be supported by posts set on public right-of-way
provided the following regulations are met:
         (1)   The horizontal clearance between a marquee and the curb line
shall not be less than seven feet. The posts shall be located two feet from the
curb. Downspouts shall be fastened to the support poles and be so designed that
the water will be deposited into the street gutter. Said downspouts shall not
be laid on top of the sidewalk between the post and gutter nor shall the water
be allowed to run across the sidewalk between the support post and the gutter.
         (2)   A fascia as approved by the City Engineer shall be installed
along the front edge of the marquee.
         (3)   No store names or advertising signs shall be attached to any
part of the marquee.
         (4)   Lighting of the marquees shall be furnished by the individual
property owners.
         (5)   All marquee plans shall have a registered engineer’s certificate
stating that the marquee has been designed in accordance with the above-
mentioned specifications.
         (6)   All marquee plans shall be approved by the City Engineer prior
to obtaining a building permit.
165.24 C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
   The regulations set forth in this section and elsewhere in these regulations
which are applicable, apply in the C-2 Commercial District.
   1.   Use Regulations. Use regulations are as follows:
      A.   Permitted Uses. Any use permitted in any C-1 District.
      B.   Accessory Uses. Accessory uses permitted are as follows:
         (1)   Accessory uses permitted in any C-1 District are also permitted
in any C-2 District.
         (2)   Billboards – See Section 165.40.
   2.   Building Height Limit. Building height limit is three stories, but not
exceeding 45 feet in height, without prior approval of Council and
recommendation of Commission.
   3.   Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements. Lot area, frontage and yard
requirements are as follows:
      A.   Residential: Lot Area; Lot Width; Lot Area Per Family; Front Yard
Depth; Side Yard Least Width on Any One Side; Width Minimum Sum of Both Side
Yards; Rear Yard Depth: Same as R-1 District.
      B.   All Other:
         Lot Area:    building floor area shall not exceed 50 percent of lot
area;
         Lot Width:    none required;
         Lot Area Per Family:   none;
         Front Yard Depth   30 feet minimum;
         Side Yard Least Width on Any One Side:    none, except abutting an R
District, in which case not less than 25 feet;
         Width Minimum Sum of Both Side Yards:    none;
         Rear Yard Depth:    25 feet minimum;
   4.   Off-Street Parking. See Section 165.32.
165.25 I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
   The regulations set forth in this section and elsewhere in these regulations
which are applicable apply in the I-1 Industrial District.
   1.   Use Regulations. A building or premises may be used for any of the
following permitted uses and for any other purpose whatsoever subject to the
requirements and conditions contained in this section:
      A.   Principal Permitted Uses. Principal permitted uses are as follows:
         (1)   Any business or service establishment permitted in a C-
2 District, except residential. A residential use for caretaker’s quarters
incidental to a permitted industrial use is permitted.
         (2)   Industrial, manufacturing, major repair, processing, storage and
wholesale establishments and services such as the following:
         Anhydrous storage.
         Automobile construction, assembly or factories specializing in the re-
work or re-building of automobile components.
         Bag, carpet and rug cleaning.
         Concrete mixing concrete products manufacture.
         Contractor’s equipment and materials storage yard.
         Creamery, bottling works, dairy ice cream manufacturing, ice
manufacturing and cold storage plant.
         Enameling, lacquering or japanning.
         Fertilizer storage.
         Flammable liquids, underground storage only, not to exceed 25,000
gallons and located not less than 200 feet from any R District.
         Foundry casting lightweight non-ferrous metals or electric foundry not
causing noxious fumes or odors.
         Grain storage.
         Junk yard (wrecking, dismantling, storage, salvage, etc., but not
abandoning).
         Laboratories - experimental, film or testing.
         Milk distributing station.
         Motor freight terminal.
         Plumbing shops, heating and air-conditioning manufacturing shops.
         Radio and TV transmitting stations and towers. (See Section 165.36.)
         Sawmill, planing mill, including manufacture of wood products.
         Sheet metal shops.
      B.   Accessory Uses. Any accessory use customarily accessory and
incidental to a permitted principal use.
   2.   Required Conditions. Required conditions are as follows:
      A.   Hazardous. No use shall be permitted to be established or maintained
which by reason of its nature or manner of operation is or may become
hazardous, noxious, offensive or pollute the air or water due to the emission
of cinders, dust, gas fumes, noise, odor, smoke, refuse matter or water-carried
waste.
      B.   Disposal of Refuse. The best practical means known for the disposal
of refuse matter or water-carried waste, the abatement of obnoxious or
offensive odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, or similar nuisance, shall be
employed.
      C.   Location. All principal buildings and all accessory buildings or
structures, including loading and unloading facilities, shall be located at
least 200 feet from any R District and not less than 100 feet from any other
district except an I District.
   3.   Lot Area, Lot Frontage and Yard Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed:
      A.   All Uses:
         Lot Area:    10,000 square feet;
         Lot Width:    no minimum;
         Front Yard Depth * 2    45 feet;
         Side Yard Each Side * 3 :    10 feet; * ** *
         Rear Yard Depth:    50 feet; * 4 *
   4.   Height Regulations. No structure shall exceed in height the distance
measured to the centerline of the nearest street from any portion of the
proposed building or structure, except as hereinafter modified by Section
165.36.
   5.   Off-Street Parking. See Section 165.32.
 
Notes
   All yards in the I-1 District, abutting a public thoroughfare, shall be
2  considered front yards and shall comply with the requirements for a front
   yard.
   All yards in the I-1 District, abutting a public thoroughfare, shall be
3  considered front yards and shall comply with the requirements for a front
   yard.
   For any I-1 District adjacent to any R District the minimum setback shall be
** 50 feet from the I-1 District boundary line, except in such cases where the
   district is adjoining a railroad right-of-way, in which case none is
   required.
4   
    
165.26 A AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
   The regulations set forth in this section or elsewhere in these regulations
which are applicable, apply in the A Agricultural District.
   1.   Use Regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the
following purposes:
      A.   Principal Permitted Uses. Principal permitted uses are as follows:
         (1)   Agriculture and the usual agricultural buildings and structures.
         (2)   Truck gardening and nurseries, provided that no permanent
dwelling units are erected thereon unless the tract contains 10 or more acres.
         (3)   Mining and extraction of minerals or raw material, subject to
prior recommendation from the Commission and approval by the Council.
         (4)   Forest and forestry.
         (5)   Non-commercial parks, playgrounds, golf courses (both public and
private) and recreational uses.
         (6)   Any use erected or maintained by a public agency.
         (7)   Public utility structures and equipment necessary for the
operation thereof.
         (8)   Dumping of non-combustible materials for landfill purposes.
         (9)   Outdoor advertising off-site signs and billboards in accordance
with the provisions of Section 165.40, and provided in addition, that prior
recommendations are obtained for such signs and/or billboards from the
Commission and approval granted by resolution of the Council.
         (10)   Churches.
         (11)   Public and private schools.
         (12)   One and two family dwellings.
         (13)   Cemetery.
         (14)   Commercial kennel.
      B.   Accessory Uses. Accessory uses permitted are as follows:
         (1)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the
above uses.
         (2)   Bulletin boards and signs appertaining to the lease, hire or
sale of a building or premises, or signs appertaining to any material that is
grown or treated within the district; provided however, such signs shall be
located upon or immediately adjacent to the building or in the area in which
such materials are treated, processed, or stored.
   2.   Height Regulations. Any building hereafter erected or structurally
altered may be erected to any height not in conflict with other existing or
future ordinances of the City.
   3.   Lot Area, Lot Frontage and Yard Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed:
      A.   All Uses:
         Lot Area:    40,000 square feet;
         Lot Width:    200 feet;
         Front Yard Depth:   45 feet;
         Side Yard Least Width On Any One Side:    25 feet;
         Width Minimum Sum of Both Side Yards:    75 feet;
         Rear Yard Depth:    45 feet;
165.27 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS. See
Chapter 160.
165.28 SPECIAL USES
   The regulations set forth in this section and in Section 165.29, 165.30 and
165.31, or elsewhere in these regulations which are applicable apply to the
special uses listed in this chapter. It is recognized that certain uses possess
characteristics of such unique and special form as to make impractical their
being included automatically in any classes of use as set forth in the various
districts established by these regulations; therefore, these uses shall be
subject to certain conditions and standards set forth in this and the following
three sections, and the authority for the location thereof shall be subject to
review by the Commission and the issuance of a special use permit by the Board;
provided, however, a special use permit may not be granted for a use in a
zoning district from which it is specifically excluded by the provisions of
this and the following three sections. The following uses are declared “Special
Uses” and upon the issuance of a special use permit, such special uses may be
authorized in any zoning district, except as it is specifically excluded or
limited by the provisions of this section.
   1.   Public Uses. Accessory or branch structures and facilities for public
utilities and public service uses, including reservoirs and tanks, pumping
stations, telephone exchanges and power and transformer stations; providing,
however, equipment storage yards and garages which are considered commercial,
business and industrial uses are not permitted in any R District.
   2.   Quarries. Borrow pits and quarries for rock, sand gravel or other soil
deposits; providing, however, these uses are specifically excluded from an R or
C District.
   3.   Government Buildings. Buildings and uses owned by a county, city and
county, city or other political subdivision which are operated for the social
benefit or convenience of the public; providing, however, equipment storage
yards and garages, etc., which are operated and maintained for the necessary
business and industrial service of the community shall not be permitted in any
R District.
   4.   Clubs, lodge and fraternal buildings which are operated by non-profit
benevolent organizations for the social benefit or convenience of the public.
   5.   Columbaria, crematories and mausoleums unless inside a cemetery;
providing, however, these uses are specifically excluded from any R District.
   6.   Educational schools, facilities and institutions including elementary
schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges, both public and
privately owned, providing for the general education of mankind. Schools which
specialize in limited short business, commercial and industrial training
courses and are operated for commercial gain, are specifically excluded from
this section and are considered as a regular business or commercial use.
   7.   Establishments or enterprises involving large assemblages of people or
automobiles as follows, (provided, however, these uses are specifically
excluded from any R District):
      A.   Amusement parks.
      B.   Carnivals, circuses and fairgrounds, except as hereinafter provided.
      C.   Commercial sport or recreational enterprises, including non-profit
amphitheaters, convention halls and auditoriums.
      D.   Race tracks and rodeo grounds.
   8.   Golf, swimming and tennis clubs or country clubs and similar public and
privately owned uses.
   9.   Mental hospitals; provided, however, this use is specifically excluded
from any R District.
   10.   Mining operations, providing, however, this use is specifically
excluded from any R District.
   11.   Mink ranch – A District only.
   12.   Museums and libraries not operated for profit.
   13.   Nursery schools for the day care or temporary overnight care of
children.
   14.   Radio and television transmitters.
   15.   Rescue missions and leagues; provided, however, these uses are
specifically excluded from R District.
   16.   Refuse and garbage dumps, incinerators and other waste disposal
methods providing, however, these uses are specifically excluded from R, C or I
District.
   17.   Sewage disposal plant.
   18.   Shooting ranges, including pistol, rifle, skeet and trap ranges.
   19.   Temporary offices, billboards and buildings incidental to the
development and construction of commercial, industrial and residential
projects.
   20.   Travel Trailer Parks. A parcel of land upon which two or more spaces
are provided, occupied or intended for occupancy by travel trailers for
transient purposes, not to exceed 30 days’ duration. (A and C-2 and I-
1 Districts only).
      A.   Minimum Requirements for Park.
         (1)   Front Yard. Same as district or 50 feet, whichever is greater.
This requirement shall apply to any and all roads or streets upon which “park”
abuts.
         (2)   Side Yard. 35 feet.
         (3)   Rear Yard. 35 feet.
         (4)   Minimum Area. 1½ acres.
         (5)   Maximum Density. 20 unit spaces per gross acre of park site.
         (6)   Drives. 25 feet in width with asphaltic concrete surface, or
gravel.
         (7)   A common service building providing laundry facilities, short
order, food service, accessory supplies, etc., may be included in the “parks”
permitted in the A District, provided such building is located within the
central “park” area, is not visible to passing traffic; and is restricted to
the use of the park occupants. Such service buildings are permitted in the C
District providing such use conforms to the requirements provided in the C
District Regulations.
         (8)   The rear and/or side yards shall be screened from adjacent
property access by planting screen not less than 10 feet in width or by an
unclimbable fence wall.
      B.   Requirements for Trailer Spaces.
         (1)   Minimum Space Size. 20 feet by 55 feet.
         (2)   Off-Drive Parking. One parking space for and within the area of
each trailer space.
         (3)   Minimum Front Yard. 10 feet.
         (4)   Minimum Rear Yard. 5 feet.
         (5)   Minimum Side Yard. 5 feet.
         (6)   Trailer Separation. The minimum distance between any two
trailers shall be not less than 10 feet.
   21.   Junk yards.
165.29 REQUIRED CONDITIONS FOR SPECIAL USES.
   1.   Generally. A special use permit shall not authorize a use which does
not comply with the minimum requirements of the district in which it is
located. A special use permit shall not authorize a use which is in conflict
with any ordinance of the City or law of the State of Iowa regulating
nuisances, pollution or hazardous occupation.
   2.   Required Site Plan and Statistical Information. The request for
authorization of special use shall be accompanied by a site plan in compliance
with Section 165.35 of this chapter.
165.30 SPECIAL USE RESTRICTIONS
   Restrictions are as follows:
   1.   Authorization for a special use permit shall not be granted unless all
of the following conditions are met:
      A.   Buildings involving the large assemblages of people shall not be
located less than 200 feet from any existing dwelling site.
      B.   Uses involving nuisances such as noise, vibration, pollution, etc.,
shall not be located less than 500 feet from an R District or less than 1,000
feet from an existing dwelling.
      C.   Uses involving the large assemblages of people shall not be located
in a vicinity where the arterial traffic system is inadequate to provide for
the increased traffic density.
      D.   Uses involving the extensive use of exterior lighting shall not be
located in a vicinity where such lighting may be hazardous to air or ground
trafficways and such uses shall not be located less than a distance required to
reduce the light intensity to normal residential street lighting intensity at
any R District boundary.
Uses of a utility or public service which are located within an R or C
District, for the benefit of improved public service, shall be screened from
public view by a buffer or strip parks in accordance with Section 165.35(4)(F).
165.31 PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING SPECIAL USE PERMIT
   The procedure for obtaining a special use permit is as follows:
   1.   Written Applications. Written applications on approved forms shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by such plans as
required by the provisions of this chapter in quadruplicate.
   2.   Referral of Application. The application shall be referred to the
Commission. The Commission shall make a written report to the Board regarding
the recommended disposition of the application within 45 days from the date of
receiving the application.
   3.   Public Hearing. The Board shall hold a public hearing and make a
decision within 30 days after receiving the certification of said recommended
disposition by the Commission.
   4.   Notice of Hearing. Notice of hearing by the Board shall be given to all
property owners within 500 feet of the boundary of the property on which the
special use is to be located. Such notice shall be by United States mail at
least 10 days prior to the hearing and shall contain the time and location of
such hearing.
   5.   Special Permit Issued. The special permit issued by the Board may
include time limits, and other conditions or safeguards deemed necessary or
appropriate by the Board. Violations of such conditions and safeguards shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable under the provisions of this
chapter. In addition, the special permit in connection with such violation
shall be subject to revocation by the Board.
   6.   Denial of Permit. Whenever an application for special permit has been
denied or revoked by the Board, no new application for a special permit
including the same property or any portion thereof shall be filed or considered
by the Board until six months shall have elapsed from the date of the official
denial or revocation of the first application.
165.32 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AREAS
   It is the intent of this section to prevent traffic congestion and to
provide for proper traffic safety by preserving the public thoroughfares for
the unimpaired movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Therefore, it is
recognized that the requirements of this section are minimum and that in
certain uses of land, these requirements may be inadequate. Where review of the
site plans and intended land use indicate through the application of proven
standards or experience that the requirements herein are inadequate for the
specific land use adaptation, a greater requirement for off-street parking
space is justified and may be required to preserve the intent of this section.
   1.   Off-Street Loading Space Required. In any district, except the C-
1 Commercial District, in connection with every building or part thereof
hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more,
which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display,
retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry
cleaning or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by
vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on
the same lot with such building, at least one off-street loading space plus one
additional such loading space for each 20,000 square feet or major fraction
thereof of gross floor area so used in excess of 10,000 square feet. In
addition:
      A.   Each loading space shall be not less than 10 feet in width and 40
feet in length.
      B.   Such space may occupy all or any part of any required yard or court
space.
   2.   Off-Street Parking Area Required. Off-street parking is required as
follows:
      A.   Schedule for Parking and Storage Space. In all districts, except the

C-1 Commercial District, in connection with every industrial, commercial,
business, trade, institutional, recreational, or dwelling use, and similar
uses, space for parking and storage of vehicles shall be provided and
maintained on the same lot with such building in accordance with the following
schedule:
         (1)   Automobile sales and service garages - one parking space for
each 300 square feet of floor area and one parking space for each four persons
regularly employed on the premises.
         (2)   Banks, business and professional offices - one parking space for
each 200 square feet of floor area and one parking space for each office in the
principal building or one and one-quarter parking spaces for each person
regularly employed on the premises, whichever is greater.
         (3)   Bowling alley - five spaces for each alley and one space for
each five spectator seats.
         (4)   Churches - one parking space for each four seats and one parking
space for each classroom.
         (5)   Dance halls, assembly halls - one parking space for each 100
square feet of floor area or one parking space for each four seats of maximum
seating capacity, whichever is greater.
         (6)   Dwellings, residential:
            (a)   One and two-family dwellings - two parking spaces for each
dwelling unit, exclusive of private garages.
            (b)   Multi-family dwelling - two parking spaces for each of the
first 12 dwelling units and one and one-quarter parking spaces for each
additional dwelling unit. One garage parking space for each dwelling unit may
be counted as a portion of the parking requirement; or each garage parking
space may be counted as a portion of the parking requirement when a separate
visitor parking area equal to one parking space for each dwelling unit is
provided.
         (7)   Funeral homes, mortuaries - one parking space for each five
seats in the principal auditorium or four parking spaces for each service or
viewing room, whichever is greater. In addition, one parking space for each two
persons regularly employed on the maximum working shift on the premises shall
be provided.
         (8)   Furniture, appliance and other retail stores displaying large
and bulky merchandise - one parking space for each 400 square feet of floor
area.
         (9)   Hospitals, sanitariums and nursing, convalescent or rest homes -
one parking space for each four patient beds and one parking space for each two
persons regularly employed on the premises on the maximum working shift.
         (10)   Hotels, motels, lodging houses - one parking space for each
room or suite of rooms offered for tourist accommodations and one parking space
for each two persons regularly employed on the premises on the maximum working
shift.
         (11)   Industrial or manufacturing plants - one parking space for each
two employees on the maximum working shift; or one parking space for each 1,000
square feet of floor area up to 10,000 square feet and then one parking space
for each additional 1,500 square feet thereafter, whichever is greater.
         (12)   Restaurants, taverns, night clubs or similar places dispensing
food, drink or refreshments - one parking space for each 50 square feet of
floor area devoted to patron use within the establishment. In addition, one
parking space must be provided for each four persons regularly employed or
intended to be regularly employed on the premises on the maximum working shift.
         (13)   Retail stores, super markets, drug and sundry stores,
department stores, etc.
            (a)   For stores over 2,000 square feet floor area - one parking
space for each and every 100 square feet of floor area.
            (b)   For stores and shops under 2,000 square feet - one parking
space for each and every 500 square feet of floor area, and one space for each
person regularly employed on the premises on the maximum working shift;
provided, however, there shall not be less than five parking spaces.
         (14)   Schools and other places of education or instruction.
            (a)   Elementary, junior high and other places for under driving
age students - one parking space for each and every person regularly employed
on the premises. In addition, one parking space for each 20 student desks or
classroom seating facilities.
            (b)   High Schools - one parking space for each and every person
regularly employed on the premises. In addition, one parking space for each 10
student desks or classroom seating facilities.
            (c)   Colleges, trade schools and other places of young adult
learning - one parking space for each and every person regularly employed on
the premises on the maximum working shift. In addition, one parking space for
each four student desks or classroom seating facilities.
            (d)   Parking spaces required by (a), (b) and (c) above shall be in
addition to requirements for sports arenas, auditoriums, etc.
         (15)   Sports arenas, theaters, auditoriums and other similar places
of public assembly - one parking space for each four persons of maximum
standing and seating capacity.
         (16)   Wholesale establishments or warehouses - one space for each
person regularly employed on the premises on the maximum working shift.
      B.   Similar Uses Not Mentioned. In case of any building, structure or
premises, the use of which is not specifically mentioned herein, the provisions
for a use which is mentioned and to which said use is similar, shall apply.
      C.   Lots Without Public or Private Alley Access. Where a lot does not
abut on a public or private alley or easement of access, there shall be
provided an access drive not less than 10 feet in width in the case of a
dwelling, and not less than 20 feet in width in all cases leading to the
loading or unloading spaces and parking or storage areas required hereunder in
such manner as to secure the most appropriate development of the property in
question. Except where provided in connection with a use permitted in a
residential district, such easement of access or access drive shall not be
located in any residential district.
      D.   Requirements for Parking Area Development. Every parcel of land
hereafter used as a public or private parking area, including a commercial
parking lot, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements:
         (1)   No part of any parking space shall be closer than five feet to
any established street right-of-way or alley line. In case the parking lot
adjoins an R District, it shall be set back at least five feet from the R
District boundary and shall be effectively screen-planted.
         (2)   Any off-street parking area and its service drives, including
any commercial parking lot for more than two vehicles shall be surfaced with an
asphaltic or Portland cement binder pavement, gravel or such surface as shall
be specified by the City Engineer so as to provide a durable and dustless
surface; shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water
accumulation within the area; and shall be so arranged and marked as to provide
for orderly and safe loading or unloading and parking and storage of self-
propelled vehicles.
         (3)   Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area
including any commercial parking lot, shall be so arranged as to reflect the
light away from adjoining premises in any R District.
      E.   Ingress and Egress Requirements. Off-street parking facilities for
all uses, except one and two-family dwellings fronting on a residential street
shall be designed so as to permit entrance and exit by forward movement of the
vehicle. The backing or backward movement of vehicles from any off-street
parking facility on to a major thoroughfare, including all thoroughfares
designated on the Major Thoroughfares Plan as other than residential is
strictly prohibited. Circular drives, interior turnarounds, etc., may be used
to comply with the foregoing requirements.
165.33 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD).
   The owner of any tract of land comprised of an area not less than four acres
may submit to the Zoning Administrator a plan for the use and development of
all of the tract of land for any use permitted in the district in which it is
located. Such plan shall meet requirements and procedures outlined in Section
165.35. The approval and recommendations of the Commission shall be accompanied
by a report stating the reasons and basis for approval of the plans with
particular consideration with regard to the following:
   1.   The effect on the value of adjacent property. To this end the
Commission may make appropriate requirements.
   2.   Consistency of the plan with the principle that dwelling units be
restricted to one-family, two-family, and/or multiple-family dwellings and the
usual accessory buildings and uses such as garages, and storage space; or
community activities, including churches.
   3.   Density proposed in the plan shall be no greater than allowable in the
district for which the tract is zoned.
   4.   Adequacy of area reserved for play and recreation facilities.
   If the Council approves the plan, building permits and certificates of
zoning compliance may be issued, although the use of the land and the location
of the buildings to be erected on the land, the yards and open spaces
contemplated by the plan, do not conform in all respects to the regulations of
the district in which it is located. In event of any variation in the plan, as
approved by the Council, the Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit and the
applicant for such permit may revise or amend his plan and resubmit the same to
the Council for approval as on the original plan.
165.34 MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   1.   Conversion to Real Property. A mobile home or manufactured home which
is located outside a mobile home park shall be converted to real estate by
being placed on a permanent foundation and shall be assessed for real estate
taxes except in the following cases:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26 & Sec. 435.35)
      A.   Dealer’s Stock. Mobile homes or manufactured homes on private
property as part of a dealer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not used as a place
for human habitation.
      B.   Existing Homes. A taxable mobile home or manufactured home which is
located outside of a mobile home park as of January 1, 1995, shall be assessed
and taxed as real estate, but is exempt from the permanent foundation
requirement of this section until the home is relocated.
   2.   Foundation Requirements. A mobile home or manufactured home located
outside of a mobile home park shall be placed on a permanent frost-free
foundation system which meets the support and anchorage requirements as
recommended by the manufacturer or required by the State Building Code. The
foundation system must be visually compatible with permanent foundation systems
of surrounding residential structures. Any such home shall be installed in
accordance with the requirements of the State Building Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.10)
   3.   Regulations to Which Mobile Home Park Owners Are Subject. No person
shall construct, establish or expand a mobile home park within the City except
in accordance with these regulations and without first obtaining a building
permit from the Zoning Administrator. Prior to the issuance of a “building
permit” for construction of a mobile home park, a comprehensive site plan in
accordance with Section 165.35 shall be submitted for review and approval of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 435)
   4.   Mobile Home Park Design Standards. All mobile home parks constructed,
established or expanded within the City shall meet the following design
standards:
      A.   The Site. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke,
dust, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion shall be subject
to predictable sudden flooding or erosion or used for any purpose which would
expose persons or property to hazards. Conditions of soil, ground water level,
drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health
or safety of the occupants.
      B.   Minimum Site Size. The minimum site for a mobile home park shall be
five acres.
      C.   Minimum Recreation Area. Not less than eight percent of the gross
site area shall be devoted to recreation facilities, generally provided in a
central location. Recreation areas may include space for community buildings
and community use facilities, such as indoor recreation area, swimming pool,
hobby and repair shops and service buildings. The site of centralized
recreation areas shall be calculated on a basis of at least 100 square feet per
lot, provided that no recreation area shall contain less than 5,000 square
feet.
      D.   Mobile Home Setback from Public Streets and Park Boundaries. All
mobile homes shall be located at least 25 feet from any park property boundary
lines abutting upon a public street or highway and at least 10 feet from other
park property boundary lines.
      E.   Screening. There shall be a minimum distance of 10 feet between the
mobile home and the abutting park street. All mobile home parks located
adjacent to industrial or commercial land uses shall be provided screening,
such as fences or natural growth along the property boundary line separating
the park and such adjacent non-residential area.
      F.   Park Entrances. If possible, a minimum of two vehicular entrances
shall be provided for each mobile home development. One entrance may be kept
closed to the general public if provision is made for emergency access.
      G.   Trailer and Boat Storage. A trailer and boat storage area shall be
provided.
      H.   Identification Sign. One permanent identification sign shall be
permitted at any main entrance to a mobile home development. Such sign shall be
of ornamental stone, masonry, or other permanent material and shall indicate
only the name of such mobile home development. Such sign shall not exceed 20
square feet in surface area.
   5.   Density. Density requirements are as follows:
      A.   Maximum Density. The maximum density of mobile homes shall be eight
per acre.
      B.   Relationship to Other Mobile Homes. No mobile homes shall be located
closer than 20 feet from any other mobile home or permanent building within the
mobile home park.
      C.   Lot Coverage. A mobile home shall not occupy an area in excess of
one-third of the respective lot area. The accumulated occupied area of the
mobile home and its accessory structures on a mobile home lot shall not exceed
two-thirds of the respective lot area.
   6.   Streets. Provisions for streets are as follows:
      A.   Access From Abutting Public Streets. All mobile home developments
shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting
public streets or roads to each mobile lot. Such access shall be provided by
streets, driveways, or other means.
      B.   Entrances. Entrance to mobile home developments shall have direct
connections to a public street and shall be designed to allow free movement of
traffic on such adjacent public streets.
      C.   Parking Spaces. Two parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile
home lot, plus one guest parking space for each 10 mobile home lots.
   7.   Accessory Structures. Accessory structures remain as per definition
dependent upon the mobile home and shall not be used as complete independent
living units with permanent provisions for sleeping, cooking and sanitation.
Such structures shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance
of the mobile home development and shall be erected and constructed as required
by applicable zoning regulations.
165.35 SITE PLANS.
   1.   Site Plans Required. Site plans which are required for Mobile Home Park
Developments, Planned Unit Development (PUD) or elsewhere in this chapter shall
comply with this section.
   2.   Preliminary Site Plan. A preliminary site plan may be submitted to the
Commission for preliminary land use approval, providing, however, that the
final site plan required by this section shall be submitted to, reviewed and
approved by the Council prior to the issuance of a building or construction
permit by the Zoning Administrator.
   3.   Procedure. Procedures for approval of site plans are as follows:
      A.   Referral to City Engineer. The Clerk shall immediately refer a copy
of the site plan to the City Engineer, who shall review said site plan as to
its compliance with the regulations of the City, its effect upon public
utilities and the public street system, and submit findings as soon as possible
to the Commission.
      B.   Referral to Commission. The Clerk shall also immediately submit a
copy of the site plan to each member of the Commission. The Commission shall,
after receiving the engineer’s report, review the site plan for conformity with
the regulations and design standards contained herein, and may confer with the
developer on changes deemed advisable in such site plan.
      C.   Action by Commission. The Commission shall forward its
recommendations either for approval or disapproval of the site plan to the
Council within two calendar months of the date of the submission of the said
site plan to the Commission. If the Commission does not so act within two
calendar months, unless the developer in writing agrees to an extension
thereof, the site plan of the proposed development shall be deemed to be
approved by the Commission.
      D.   Public Hearing. The Chairperson of the Commission may, in his or her
sole discretion, by written order, fix a date, time and place for a public
hearing to be held by the Commission on the site plan of the proposed
development and prescribe the notice thereof and to whom such notice shall be
given. If the Chairperson of the Commission orders a public hearing, the
Commission shall hold such hearing at such date, time and place and at such
hearing all affected property owners shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
      E.   Filing by Commission. Upon final action by the Commission on any
site plan, a copy of such site plan and the accompanying development schedule
with the action of the Commission noted thereon and signed by the Chairperson
of the Commission shall be filed with the Clerk.
      F.   Action by Council. The Council shall, upon receipt of the
recommendation of the Commission, either approve or disapprove of the site plan
of the proposed development.
      G.   Issuance of Permits. No building permit or certificate of zoning
compliance and occupancy for any structure within any district for which a site
plan is required shall be issued until the site plan therefor shall have been
approved as provided herein.
      H.   Compliance with Plan. If the Zoning Administrator finds that any
construction or proposed construction or occupancy of a development on a tract
of land for which a site plan has been approved will not substantially comply
with the site plan as approved, or if the Zoning Administrator finds that the
construction and development of the tract is not being carried out in
accordance with the development schedule filed with the site plan, the Zoning
Administrator shall suspend all building permits for the development and order
all construction stopped until such time as the owner of the project, or the
owner’s successors in interest, shall have provided the Zoning Administrator
with proof satisfactory to said official that the site plan and schedule of
development will be complied with. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a
certificate of zoning compliance and occupancy for any structure within the
development while the building permit for the development has been suspended
pursuant to this paragraph. Any person aggrieved by any decision or action of
the Zoning Administrator under this paragraph may appeal such action or
decision to the Board.
      I.   Time Extension. If the owner or developer of a tract of land for
which a site plan has been approved determines that an extension of time is
necessary in the development schedule, or that a modification of the site plan
would provide for a more appropriate or more practicable development of the
site, said owner or developer may apply for an amendment of the site plan. The
Commission may grant an extension of time or a modification of a previously
approved site plan if the Commission determines that such modification of the
site plan would provide for a more appropriate development of the site, or if
because of exceptional circumstances, it is impractical to adhere to the
development schedule.
   4.   Design Standards. Design standards are as follows:
      A.   Standards are Minimum. The standards of design herein contained are
intended only as minimum requirements so that the general arrangement and
layout of the development requiring the site plan may be adjusted to a wide
variety of circumstances.
      B.   Compliance with Other Regulations. All proposed developments for
which site plans are required shall conform to the development plan of Aurelia;
the provisions of this chapter; the subdivision regulations of Aurelia, if
applicable; and all other applicable City ordinances and statutes and
regulations of the State of Iowa.
      C.   Entrances and Exits. The proposed development shall have such
entrances and exits upon public streets as are necessary for safety and the
general welfare, and shall have such interior drives as are necessary for free
movement of emergency vehicles, and shall have such pedestrian walkways as are
necessary for safety and general welfare.
      D.   Natural Features. The proposed development shall be designed with a
proper regard to topography, surface drainage, natural drains and streams,
wooded areas, and other natural features which will lend themselves to proper,
harmonious and attractive development of the site.
      E.   Water and Sewer. The proposed development shall be designed with
adequate water mains, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewers and drains and flood
control, in accordance with the ordinances and regulations of the City and
statutes and regulations of the State of Iowa, and good engineering practices
so as to protect the public health and welfare and so as not to overload any
existing public utilities.
      F.   Relationship to Surrounding Property. The development shall be
designed and the buildings and improvements shall be located within the tract
or parcel, in such a manner as to not unduly diminish or impair the use and
enjoyment of adjoining or surrounding property and to such end shall have such
buffers, screen fences and landscaping as may be proper, and shall not impair
an adequate supply of light and air to adjoining or surrounding property.
      G.   Safety and General Welfare. The proposed development shall not
unduly increase the public danger of fire or diminish the public safety, and
shall be designed to adequately safeguard the health, safety and general
welfare of the public and of persons residing and working in the development
and in the adjoining or surrounding property.
      H.   Design Principles. The proposed development shall be designed in
accordance with recognized principles of civic design, land use planning and
landscape architecture.
      I.   Quality Environment. The proposed development and all structures
therein shall be designed in such a manner as to create a quality environment
and to such end shall be architecturally and aesthetically harmonious and
attractive.
   5.   Site Plan Requirements. All site plans shall be drawn in accordance
with platting laws as adopted by the State of Iowa. Twelve copies of the site
plan shall be submitted to the Clerk. The purpose of the site plan is to show
all the facts needed to enable the engineer and the Commission to determine
whether the proposed development meets the requirements of this chapter and is
satisfactory from the standpoint of the community welfare and public interest.
   6.   Information Required. The final site plan required shall include the
following information concerning the proposed development:
      A.   Names. Names of all persons having an interest in the property,
legal description of property, point of compass, scale and date.
      B.   Present Zoning. Applicant’s name, planned land use and present
zoning location and names of adjoining subdivisions, the numbers of the
adjoining lots therein and the names and addresses of adjoining landowners.
      C.   Applicant’s Interest. If the applicant is other than the legal
owner, the applicant’s interest shall be stated.
      D.   Site Plan. Name and address of person who prepared the site plan.
   7.   Development Schedule. The site plan shall be accompanied by a
development schedule indicating the approximate date on which construction of
the project will begin, the staging of development, if any, and the completion
date. The development schedule as approved shall become a part of the
development plan and shall be adhered to by the owner of the property and any
successors in interest unless a modification thereof is approved by the
Commission as approved herein.
   8.   Required Illustrations. The final site plan shall clearly illustrate
and enumerate the following information concerning the proposed development:
      A.   Boundaries and Areas. Property boundary lines, dimensions and total
areas of the proposed development.
      B.   Contours. Contour lines of the proposed development at intervals of
not more than five feet, City datum. (If substantial topographic change is
proposed, the existing topography of the development and of the surrounding
area shall be illustrated on a separate map, and the proposed finished
topography shown on the final site plan.)
      C.   Utilities. The availability, location, size and capacity of existing
utilities and of proposed utilities.
      D.   Buildings and Structures. The proposed location, size, height,
shape, use and architectural theme of all buildings or structures in the
proposed development.
      E.   Floor Area. The total square feet of building floor area, both
individually and collectively in the proposed development.
      F.   Number of Dwelling Units. The number of dwelling units in the
proposed development.
      G.   Vicinity Sketch. A vicinity sketch showing detailed existing land
uses within 500 feet of the development, and general existing land uses within
1,000 feet of the development.
      H.   Existing Environmental Information. Existing buildings, rights-of-
way, street improvements, railroads, easements, drainage courses, streams and
wooded areas.
165.36 STRUCTURES PERMITTED ABOVE HEIGHT LIMIT.
   The building height limitations of these regulations shall be modified as
follows:
   1.   Tall Structures. Chimneys, cooling towers, fire towers, grain
elevators, monuments, penthouses, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks,
silos, water towers, ornamental towers and spires, radio or television towers
or dishes or essential mechanical appurtenances may be erected to a height in
excess of applicable district regulations by special permit issued by the
Board.
   2.   Public or Semi-public Buildings. Public, semi-public, or public service
buildings, hospitals, sanatoriums or schools when permitted in a district, may
be erected to a greater height than otherwise permitted in the district if the
building is set back from each property line at least one foot in addition to
the minimum yard requirements, for each two feet of additional building height
above the height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the building
is constructed.
165.37 DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS
   Buildings on double frontage lots extending through from street to street
shall be buffered from the rear street by a buffer and access to the rear
street shall be prohibited and shall provide the required front yard on both
streets.
165.38 REAR YARD ADJACENT TO ALLEYS
   In computing the depth of a rear yard where the rear yard opens on an alley,
one-half of the alley width may be included as a portion of the rear yard.
165.39 OTHER EXCEPTIONS TO YARD REQUIREMENT
   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed with any
building or structure, except for a permitted accessory building in a rear
yard, and except for ordinary projections not to exceed 24 inches including
roof overhang.
165.40 OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS
   In all districts where permitted, billboards shall be set back from the
right-of-way line of any street or highway at least as far as the required
front yard depth for a principal building in such districts; at the
intersection of streets and/or highways, the setback of any outdoor advertising
sign or billboard (not including, however, business identification and
directional and other incidental signs otherwise permitted under the provisions
of this chapter) shall not be less than the required front yard depth for a
principal building in such district, from each street and/or highway. (See also
Section
50.02[6].) Special provisions with regard to outdoor advertising signs are as
follows:
   1.   Real Estate Signs in R Districts. In the R Districts, real estate signs
not exceeding six square feet in area advertising the sale, lease or rental of
buildings or land on which said signs are located are permitted. Such signs
shall be a distance of at least 25 feet from the street lot line, or not more
than five feet in front of the main building.
   2.   Announcement Signs or Bulletin Boards in R Districts. In the R
Districts, announcement signs or bulletin boards may be erected upon the
premises of a charitable, religious or public institution for its own use. (See
Section
165.22[1][A][7].)
   3.   Home Occupation Signs in R Districts. In the R Districts, signs not
exceeding two square feet in area on which are displayed only the occupant’s
name and home occupation may be erected not nearer than 25 feet to the front
lot line or more than five feet in front of the main building.
165.41 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced and administered by the
Zoning Administrator. If the Zoning Administrator finds that any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated, said official shall notify in
writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of
the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The Zoning
Administrator shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or
structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions,
alterations or structural changes thereto or the discontinuance of any illegal
work being done, or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to
insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
165.42 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED
   Buildings or other structures shall not be erected, moved, added to,
modified or structurally altered without a permit therefor, issued by the
Zoning Administrator. Building permits shall be issued in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter, or upon written order from the Board of Adjustment.
Fees for building permits shall be as provided by Section 165.52 of this
chapter. Building permits issued in accordance with the provisions of this
section shall be null and void at the end of six months from the date of issue
if the construction, alteration, or change of use has not commenced during the
six month period. Construction must be completed within two years after the
date of the issue of the permit. After the permit has expired, a new permit
must be applied for before any further construction can begin or continue.
165.43 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT
   All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plan showing
the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon, and the location
and dimensions of the existing or proposed building or alteration. The
application shall include existing or proposed building or alteration; existing
or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping
units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions
existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine
conformance with and enforcement of this chapter.
165.44 CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
   It is unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or
structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued
therefor by the Zoning Administrator stating that the proposed use of the
building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter. Certificates of
zoning compliance shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for
a building permit and shall be issued within 10 days after the lawful erection
or alteration of the building is completed in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter. A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by the
Zoning Administrator for a period not exceeding six months during alterations
or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that such
temporary certificate may require such conditions and safeguards as will
protect the safety of the occupants and the public. The Zoning Administrator
shall maintain a record of all certificates of zoning compliance and copies
shall be furnished upon request to any person. Failure to obtain a certificate
of zoning compliance shall be a violation of this chapter.
165.45 CONFORMITY TO APPLICATION, PERMIT AND CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
   Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of
plans and applications, approved by the Zoning Administrator, authorize only
the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and
applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Any use,
arrangement or construction in conflict with that authorized shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter.
165.46 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   1.   Board Created. A Board of Adjustment is hereby established which shall
consist of five members. The term of office of the members of the Board shall
be as provided by Section 414.8, Code of Iowa. The Board shall be appointed by
the Council.
   2.   Meetings. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson, and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such
Chairperson, or in the absence of the Chairperson, the acting Chairperson may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the
Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately
filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. The presence of
three members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.9 and 414.14)
   3.   Appeals. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or
by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by any
decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within 10 days
of the decision by filing with the Zoning Administrator and with the Board a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from is taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator
certifies to the Board after notice of appeal shall have been filed with the
Zoning Administrator, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay
would in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record
upon application or notice to the Zoning Administrator and upon due cause
shown.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.10 and 414.11)
   4.   Fee For Appeal. The fee for appeal to the Board of Adjustment is
$10.00.
   5.   Hearings; Notice. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing
on the appeal. Notice of the hearing shall be published twice in the Council-
designated paper with no less than 14 days between the date of the first
publication and the date of the hearing. Written notice to all property owners
within 200 feet of the property shall be sent 14 days prior to the hearing. At
the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
   6.   Powers -- Administrative Review. The Board has the power to hear
appeals where it is alleged there is error in requirements, decision or
determination made by Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of these
regulations.
   7.   Powers -- Special Exceptions. The Board has the power to permit the
following exceptions to the district regulations set forth in this chapter
subject to the requirements of this section:
      A.   Public Service Uses and Buildings. To permit erection and use of a
building or the use of premises or vary the height and the regulations in any
location for a public service corporation for public utility purposes or for
purposes of public communication, which the Board determines is reasonably
necessary for the public convenience or welfare.
      B.   Extension of a Use. To permit the extension of a use into a district
where it would be otherwise prohibited in a case where a district boundary line
is so located that a lot or plot is in more than one district.
      C.   Special Exceptions. To hear and decide only such other special
exceptions as the Board is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of
this chapter; to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether
special exceptions should be granted; and to grant special exceptions with such
conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this chapter, or to deny
special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this
chapter. A special exception shall not be granted by the Board unless and until
all of the following conditions are met:
         (1)   A written application for special exception is submitted
indicating the section of this chapter under which the special exception is
sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested.
         (2)   Notice of public hearing shall be given in advance of public
hearing. The owner of the property for which special exception is sought or
said owner’s agent and any other affected property owners shall be notified by
mail. Notice of hearing may also be posted on the property for which special
exception is sought.
         (3)   The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in
person, or by agent or attorney
         (4)   The Board shall make a finding that it is empowered under the
section of this chapter described in the application to grant the special
exception, and that the granting of the special exception will not adversely
affect the public interest. In granting any special exception, the Board may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this
chapter. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the
terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation
of this chapter. The Board may prescribe a time limit within which the action
for which the special exception is required shall be begun or completed, or
both. Failure to begin or complete, or both, such action within the time limit
set shall void the special exception.
   8.   Powers -- Variances. The Board has the power to authorize upon appeal
in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be
contrary to the public interest where owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary
hardship. A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by the
Board unless and until all of the following are met:
      A.   Written Application. A written variance is submitted demonstrating:
         (1)   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved, and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings, in the same district; and
         (2)   That literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same district under the terms of this chapter; and
         (3)   That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from
the actions of the applicant; and
         (4)   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands,
structures or buildings in the same district. No nonconforming use of
neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district, and no
permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be
considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
      B.   Hearing Notice. Notice of the hearing shall be published twice in
the Council-designated paper with no less than 14 days between the date of the
first publication and the date of the hearing. Written notice to all property
owners within 200 feet of the property shall be sent 14 days prior to the
hearing. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney.
      C.   Hearing. The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in
person or by agent or by attorney.
      D.   Findings as to Requirements of this Section. The Board shall make
findings that the requirements of this section have been met by the applicant
for a variance.
      E.   Findings as to Reasons Stated in Application. The Board shall
further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify
the granting of the variance.
      F.   Conditions on Variance. The Board shall further make a finding that
the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or
otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. In granting any variance, the
Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with
this chapter. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of
the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter. Under no circumstances shall the Board grant a variance to allow
a use not permissible under the terms of this chapter in the district involved
or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter
in said district.
   9.   Decisions of the Board of Adjustment. In exercising the above-mentioned
powers, the Board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms
of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end
shall have powers of the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken.
The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse
any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator
or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required
to pass under this chapter or to effect any variation in the application of
this chapter.
   10.   Appeals From Decision of the Board Of Adjustment. Any taxpayer or any
officer, department, board or bureau of the City or persons jointly or
severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board may present to a court of
record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal,
in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition
shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision
in the office of the Board. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part,
or may modify the decision brought up for review.
165.47 MATTERS OF APPEAL
   It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of interpretation and
enforcement shall be first presented to the Zoning Administrator and that such
questions shall be presented to the Board only on appeal from the decision of
the Zoning Administrator, and that recourse from the decisions of the Board
shall be to the courts as provided by law. It is further the intent of this
chapter that the duties of the Council in connection with this chapter shall
not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement
that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in
this section and in this chapter. Under this chapter, the Council shall have
only the duties of:
   1.   Considering Proposed Amendments. Considering and adopting or rejecting
proposed amendments or the repeal of this chapter as provided by law and
specified in Section
165.48,
165.49 and
165.50 of this chapter.
   2.   Considering Applications. Considering applications for special permits
for temporary uses as specified in Sections
165.33,
165.34 and
165.35 of this chapter.
165.48 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
   The Council may on its own motion or on petition after public notice and
hearing by the Council as provided by law (See Code of Iowa Section 414.4), and
after report by the Commission, amend, supplement or change the boundaries or
regulations herein or subsequently established. Any owner or owners of property
may present a petition duly signed and verified, requesting an amendment,
supplement or change in the regulations prescribed for a district or part
thereof. Amendments, supplements, or changes of the boundaries of districts as
shown on the official zoning map shall be made by ordinance. The amending
ordinance shall refer to the official zoning map and shall set out the
identification of the area affected by legal description and identify the
zoning district as the same exists and the new district designation applicable
to said property. The Commission shall make a report to the Council within 60
days from the date of receipt of such petition. In case the proposed amendment,
supplement or change is disapproved by the Commission, or in case of a protest
against any proposed amendment or change signed by the owners of 20 percent or
more, either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of
those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof, extending the depth of one lot
or not to exceed 200 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto,
extending the depth of one lot or not to exceed 200 feet from the street
frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective
except by the favorable vote of at least four-fifths of all the members of the
Council. Said ordinance shall, after adoption and publication, be recorded by
the Clerk as other ordinances and a certified copy thereof attached to the
official zoning map. Such amendatory ordinance shall, however, not repeal or
re-enact said map, but only amend it. The official zoning map, together with
amending ordinances, shall be the final authority as the current zoning status
of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the City. (See
EDITOR’S NOTE at the end of this chapter for ordinances amending the zoning
map.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.5)
165.49 MAP REPLACEMENT
   In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost
or difficult to interpret because of use, the Council may by resolution adopt a
new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map.
The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions
in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect
of amending the original zoning ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof.
The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor
attested by the Clerk, under the following words:
This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the
Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced)
as part of Ordinance No. ________ of the City of Aurelia, Iowa.
165.50 ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS
   Procedures for the zoning of annexed areas are as follows:
   1.   Voluntary Annexations. All applications for voluntary annexation of
land to the City shall, in addition to the necessary requirements for
annexation, designate the zoning classification which the applicant wishes for
the property. Upon receipt thereof, the application shall be referred to the
Commission for recommendation on both the annexation and the requested zoning.
The Commission shall have the same time periods for its consideration as in any
rezoning matter. The Commission may recommend approval of the requested zoning
or the denial thereof. In the event the Commission recommends denial, they
shall make an additional recommendation as to what zoning classification the
Commission would recommend. A copy of this report shall be forwarded to the
applicant and shall be on the agenda for the next meeting of the Council. The
Council shall set the zoning matter for public hearing, prescribing the same
notice requirements as for a rezoning application and shall specify the
proposed zoning for consideration. If the Council approves the zone, it shall
be set by ordinance. No zoning classification not recommended by the Commission
shall become effective except by the favorable vote of four-fifths of the
members of the Council and no voluntary annexation not recommended by the
Commission shall be approved by the Council except by a favorable vote of four-
fifths of the members of the Council. The resolution providing for annexation
shall be acted upon by the Council at the time of the public hearing on the
zoning classification. In the event the applicant fails to designate a zoning
classification in the application, the Commission shall recommend a district
designation to the Council and the Council shall act upon the recommendation as
provided in this chapter.
   2.   Involuntary Annexations. Whenever, after public hearing thereon, the
Council determines that involuntary annexation proceedings should be undertaken
against lands to be annexed, the matter shall be referred to the Commission for
its recommendation as to the zoning of said lands. Upon receipt of said
recommendation, the Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, prescribing
the regular notice for rezoning set forth in this chapter. If the Council
approves said zoning, it shall adopt an ordinance setting forth the various
zoning classifications for said lands. The Council may approve a higher
classification or more restrictive classification than recommended by the
Commission after the hearing but prior to approval of any lower classification
or less restrictive classification, the Council must send the matter back to
the Commission for action on the lower classification. This may be done prior
to the public hearing. In the event it is returned subsequent to the public
hearing, a new public hearing shall be held thereon. If the Commission
recommends against the lower classification, it shall not become effective
except by a favorable vote of four-fifths of the members of the Council.
165.51 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS
   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the
causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. The
Zoning Administrator shall record properly such complaint, immediately
investigate and take action thereon as provided by this chapter.
165.52 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
 
Certificate of Zoning Compliance for   $25.00 up to first $20,000 valuation.
New Structure                          Over $20,000 valuation, $1.00 per $1,000
                                       valuation above that.
Building Permit (includes certificates $25.00 up to first $20,000 valuation.
of zoning compliance for new           Over $20,000 valuation, $1.00 per $1,000
construction)                          valuation above that.
Special Exception or Variance Request  $100.00
(Ord. 690 - Oct. 20 Supp.)
165.53 ENFORCEMENT
   All departments, officials and employees of the City who are vested with the
duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall issue no such permit or
license for any use, structure or purpose if the same would not conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
165.54 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. In addition to the standard
penalty, violators shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each
day such violations continue shall be considered a separate offense. The owner
or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any
architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates
in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a
separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official Zoning Map
described in Section 165.48 of this chapter and have not been included as a
part of this Code of Ordinances but have been specifically saved from repeal
and are in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. DATE ADOPTED DESCRIPTION
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official Zoning Map
described in Section 165.48 of this chapter and have not been included as a
part of this Code of Ordinances but have been specifically saved from repeal
and are in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. DATE ADOPTED DESCRIPTION
640           9-15-03      Rezoning from I to R1
659           8-27-07      Rezoning from R-1 to C-1
667           8-15-11      Rezoning from C-1 to A
CHAPTER 166
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
166.01 Purpose                          166.28 Release or Reduction of
                                        Performance Bond
166.02 Policy                           166.29 Maintenance of Improvements
166.03 Definitions                      166.30 Deferral or Waiver of Required
                                        Improvements
166.04 Application and Jurisdiction     166.31 Issuance of Certificates of
                                        Occupancy
166.05 Interpretation                   166.32 Improvements Required
166.06 Action Under Prior Provisions    166.33 Design Standards Are Minimum
166.07 Procedure                        166.34 Conformance to Applicable Rules
                                        and Regulations
166.08 Pre-submission Consultations     166.35 Subdivision Name
166.09 Requirements of Preliminary Plat 166.36 Monumentation
166.10 Submission of Preliminary Plat   166.37 Character of the Land
166.11 Referral of Preliminary Plat     166.38 Lots
166.12 Review of Preliminary Plat       166.39 Blocks
166.13 Action by the Commission on      166.40 Streets — General Requirements
Preliminary Plat
166.14 Action by Council on Preliminary 166.41 Streets — Design Standards
Plat
166.15 Effective Period of Tentative    166.42 Storm Sewers and Drainage
Approval
166.16 Completion of Improvements       166.43 Water Facilities
166.17 Performance Bond                 166.44 Sewage Facilities
166.18 Final Plat                       166.45 Sidewalks
166.19 Requirements of the Final Plat   166.46 Utilities
166.20 Submission of Final Plat         166.47 Preservation of Natural Features
                                        and Amenities
166.21 Referral of Final Plat           166.48 Nonresidential Subdivisions
166.22 Action by the Commission on      166.49 School and Park Reservations
Final Plat
166.23 Action by the Council on Final   166.50 Improvements within
Plat                                    Unincorporated Jurisdiction
166.24 Resubdivision of Land            166.51 Variations and Exceptions
166.25 Completion of Improvements       166.52 Changes and Amendments
166.26 Performance Bond                 166.53 Enforcement, Violations and
                                        Penalties
166.27 Inspection of Improvements
166.01 PURPOSE
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the
design, development and improvement of all new subdivisions and resubdivisions
so that existing developments will be protected and so that adequate provisions
are made for public services and to promote the health, safety and general
welfare in the City.
166.02 POLICY
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to consider the
subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided land as
subject to the control of the City to provide for the orderly, efficient and
economical development of the City. And further:
   1.   Character of Land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character
that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or
peril from fire, flood or other menace.
   2.   Regulations to Supplement and Facilitate. It is intended that these
subdivision regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of
provisions and standards, ordinances or regulations of the City.
166.03 DEFINITIONS
   For use in this chapter, the following terms or words are defined.
   1.   “Alley” means a public way other than a street, twenty (20) feet or
less in width, affording secondary means of access to abutting property. An
alley is not considered a public thoroughfare or a private easement or a
private right-of-way.
   2.   “Applicant” means the owner of land to be subdivided or said owner’s
representative.
   3.   “Block” means all that property frontage along one public thoroughfare
lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, road
rights-of-way, waterway, golf course, campus, park or other similar open space.
   4.   “Bond” means any form of security including a cash deposit, surety
bond, collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form
satisfactory to the Council.
   5.   “Building” means any structure having a roof supported by walls or by
columns intended for enclosure, shelter or housing of persons, animals or
chattel.
   6.   “Building line” means the line of the outside wall of the building or
any enclosed projection thereof nearest the street.
   7.   “Central water system” means a private water system established by the
developer to serve a new subdivision or resubdivision. It includes water
treatment and distribution facilities.
   8.   “Central sewage system” means a private sewer system including
collection and treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a new
subdivision or resubdivision.
   9.   “City Engineer” means the person designated by the Council to furnish
engineering assistance for the administration of these regulations.
   10.   “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
   11.   “Cul-de-sac” means a municipal service street with only one outlet and
having an appropriate terminal for safe and convenient reversal of traffic
movement.
   12.   “Developer” means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided (or said
owner’s representative).
   13.   “Easement” means an authorization by a property owner for the use by
another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of said person’s
property.
   14.   “Engineer” means a registered engineer authorized to practice civil
engineering as defined by the Registration Act of the State.
   15.   “Frontage” means that portion of a lot abutting on a street or way and
complying with the setback and front yard requirements as they may exist,
however, the longer side shall not be considered as the frontage of a corner
lot.
   16.   “Individual sewage disposal system” means a private septic tank,
seepage tile sewage disposal system or any other approved sewage treatment
device.
   17.   “Local board of health” means the Cherokee County Board of Health.
   18.   “Lot” means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership
or for building development.
   19.   “Municipal arterial streets” means those streets which connect
principal traffic generating areas or connect such areas with other street
systems.
   20.   “Municipal collector streets” mean those streets that collect traffic
from municipal service streets and connect to other street systems.
   21.   “Municipal service streets” means those streets that primarily provide
access to property.
   22.   “Owner” means any person having legal title to or sufficient
proprietary interest in the land to be sought to be subdivided under these
regulations.
   23.   “Plat” means a map, drawing or chart on which the developer’s plan of
the subdivision of land is presented and which the developer submits for
approval and intends, in final form, to record.
   24.   “Public improvement” means any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway,
sidewalk, pedestrian crosswalk, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot
improvement or other facility for which the City may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an
improvement for which City responsibility is established.
   25.   “Right-of-way” means a strip of land occupied or intended to be
occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line,
oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees or
for another special use. The usage of the term “right-of-way” for land platting
purposes means that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a
final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining
such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots
or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm drains or any other use involving maintenance by a
public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on
which such right-of-way is established.
   26.   “Roadway” means that portion of the street available for vehicular
traffic and where curbs are laid, the portion from back to back of curbs.
   27.   “Street” means and includes any public way, highway, street, avenue,
boulevard, parkway or other public thoroughfare, and each of such words
includes every other of them, and also includes the entire width between
property lines.
   28.   “Subdivider” means the person undertaking the subdivision or
resubdivision of a tract or parcel of land.
   29.   “Subdivision” means the division of land into three (3) or more lots
or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or building development. The term, when appropriate to
the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided,
or the resubdivision of land heretofore divided or platted into lots or other
divisions of land, or, if a new street is involved, any division of land.
   30.   “Surveyor” means a land surveyor licensed and registered under the
provisions of Chapter 542B of the Code of Iowa.
166.04 APPLICATION AND JURISDICTION
   Every owner (or agent) of any tract or parcel of land lying within the City
or, pursuant to Section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa, within two miles of the
corporate limits of the City who has subdivided or shall hereafter subdivide
the same into three or more parts for the purpose of laying out an addition,
subdivision, building lot or lots, or acreage lots, shall cause plats of such
area to be made in the form, and containing the information, as hereinafter set
forth before selling any lots therein contained or placing the plat on record.
166.05 INTERPRETATION
   In their interpretation or application, the provisions of these regulations
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety and general welfare. Specifically:
   1.   Relationship to Other Public Provisions. These regulations are not
intended to interfere with or to abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or
regulation, statute or other provision of law. Where any provision of these
regulations imposes a restriction different from those imposed by any other
provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or
other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose
higher standards shall control.
   2.   Relationship to Private Provisions. These regulations are not intended
to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or
restriction, provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement,
covenant or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these
regulations shall govern.
166.06 ACTION UNDER PRIOR PROVISIONS
   These regulations do not abate any action now pending under or by virtue of
prior existing subdivision regulations. Nor do they discontinue, abate, modify
or alter any penalty accrued or about to accrue or affect the liability of any
person or waive any right of the City under any section or provision existing
at the time of adoption of these regulations. Nor do they vacate or annul any
rights obtained by any person by lawful action of the City except as expressed
in these regulations.
166.07 PROCEDURE
   Before seeking tentative approval of a proposed subdivision by the Council,
the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat in accordance with the
requirements of Section 166.09 and install the required improvements or provide
a performance bond.
166.08 PRE-SUBMISSION CONSULTATIONS
   Prior to the submission of the preliminary plat of any subdivision, the
subdivider is encouraged to meet with the City Engineer and other City
officials responsible for the administration of these regulations to be advised
of the procedural steps, design standards, required improvements and platting
requirements. During such meetings, no commitments shall be made which will be
binding upon the City.
166.09 REQUIREMENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
   Every proposed subdivision shall be submitted for tentative approval in the
form of a preliminary plat prior to the submission of a final record plat. The
purpose of the preliminary plat and accompanying material is to provide all
facts needed for the Council to determine whether the proposed subdivision is
satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interest. The following graphic
and descriptive material is required to be provided on the preliminary plat and
on the accompanying material.
   1.   Contents of Preliminary Plat. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by
a registered land surveyor at a convenient scale of not more than one inch
equals 100 feet, may be prepared in pen or pencil, and the sheets shall be
numbered in sequence if more than one sheet is used. The following information
shall be shown on the preliminary plat:
      A.   Title, scale, north point and date.
      B.   Subdivision boundary lines, showing dimensions, bearings, angles,
and references to section, townships and range lines or corners. Exterior
boundaries are to be indicated with a solid heavy line.
      C.   Present and proposed streets, alleys and sidewalks, with their
rights-of-way, in or adjoining the subdivision, including dedicated widths,
approximate gradients, types and widths of surfaces, curbs, and planting
strips, and location of street lights, fire hydrants and street signs.
      D.   Proposed layout of blocks and lots, showing dimensions, radii,
chords and the square foot areas of lots that are not rectangular, and the lot
and block numbers in numerical order.
      E.   Building setback or front yard lines.
      F.   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds, or other public, semi-public or community purposes.
      G.   Present and proposed easements, showing locations, widths, purposes
and limitations.
      H.   Location and names of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided and
subdivided land.
      I.   Boundaries of the highest known flood of record affecting the
subdivision and the source of information.
      J.   If the proposed subdivision borders on a lake or stream, the
distances and bearings of meander lines established not less than twenty (20)
feet back from the mean high water mark of the lake or stream.
      K.   Existing blocks, lots and buildings.
      L.   Present and proposed utility systems, including sanitary and storm
sewers, other drainage facilities, water lines, gas mains, electric utilities,
and other facilities, with the size, capacity, invert elevation and location of
each. If the subdivision is within one mile of public sewer or water or both,
notation shall be made of the direction and distance to such facilities.
      M.   Proposed name of the subdivision.
      N.   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, builder and surveyor
who prepared the preliminary plat, and the surveyor who will prepare the final
plat.
      O.   Official legal description of the property being platted.
      P.   Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet if the
general slope of the site is less than 10 percent and at vertical intervals of
not more than five feet if the general slope is 10 percent or greater, unless
the Council waives this requirement.
      Q.   Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed subdivision and
adjoining property.
      R.   Location of all proposed monuments.
   2.   Information to Be Provided in Accompanying Material. The following
information shall accompany a plat when filing:
      A.   A complete listing of all existing covenants which apply to the land
to be subdivided, and a complete listing of all covenants which are proposed by
the developer to apply to the subdivided land.
      B.   A table of the following information:
         (1)   Total acreage of the subdivision.
         (2)   Total number of lots.
         (3)   Minimum, average and maximum lot area.
         (4)   Acreage of public lands to be dedicated or reserved other than
streets.
      C.   If any portion of the subdivision is to have access on a State or
County jurisdictional street, a written and signed statement acknowledging and
permitting the access by the duly authorized official of the appropriate
jurisdiction.
166.10 SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
   The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat in accordance with the
provisions of Section
166.09 and shall file with the Clerk an application in triplicate for the
tentative approval of the plat. The application shall:
   1.   Forms and Fees. Be made on forms available from the Clerk together with
a fee of $10.00 per lot.
   2.   Number of Plats. Be accompanied by a minimum of 10 copies of the
preliminary plat.
   3.   Time of Submission. Be presented to the Clerk at least four weeks prior
to the meeting of the Commission.
166.11 REFERRAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
   The Clerk shall immediately refer two copies of the preliminary plat to the
City Engineer and seven copies to the Commission. In the case of a subdivision
outside the corporate limits of the City, the Clerk shall refer one copy of the
preliminary plat to the County Board of Supervisors.
166.12 REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
   The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the Commission to determine its
conformity with these regulations and all other ordinances and regulations in
force affecting subdivisions. Copies of the preliminary plat may be transmitted
to other City or school officials, as the Commission deems necessary, for their
recommendations concerning matters within their jurisdiction. Their
recommendations, along with those of the City Engineer, shall be transmitted to
the Commission within three weeks after the date the plat is filed. The
Commission may confer with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the
kind and extent of such improvements to be made.
166.13 ACTION BY THE COMMISSION ON PRELIMINARY PLAT
   The Commission, as soon as possible, but within 30 days after receiving the
preliminary plat, shall pass upon the preliminary plat as originally submitted
or modified. If the Commission does not act within 30 days, the preliminary
plat shall be deemed to be approved; provided, however, the subdivider may
agree to an extension of the time period, not to exceed an additional 60 days.
It shall then set forth its recommendations in writing, whether of approval,
modification or disapproval. If no action is taken by the Commission after the
agreed to 60-day extension, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be
approved.
   1.   Reasons for Changes or Disapproval. In the event that substantial
changes or modifications are made by the Commission or the Commission
recommends disapproval of the plat, it shall give its reasons therefor and it
may request and cause the revised preliminary plat to be resubmitted in the
same manner as the original plat; however, no additional fee shall be required.
   2.   Tentative Approval. If the Commission recommends approval, it shall
express its approval as “Tentative Approval” and state the conditions of such
approval, if any.
   3.   Documenting Approval. The action of the Commission shall be documented
on seven copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any
conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one copy
shall be retained by the Commission, and five copies shall be referred to the
Council, with the completed checklist for plats.
166.14 ACTION BY COUNCIL ON PRELIMINARY PLAT
   Within 30 days of its receipt of the preliminary plat, the Council shall, by
resolution, tentatively approve or disapprove the plat. If the preliminary plat
is disapproved, objections to it shall be returned to the Commission for
further review and the Clerk shall notify the subdivider of such action. If
approved, the Clerk shall affix his or her signature to five copies of the
preliminary plat with the notation of the date the preliminary plat received
the Council’s tentative approval. One copy shall be returned to the Commission
and three copies shall be returned to the subdivider. The “Tentative Approval”
by the Council shall not constitute final acceptance of the addition or
subdivision by the City but an authorization to proceed with preparation of the
final plat.
166.15 EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF TENTATIVE APPROVAL
   The tentative approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period
of one year at the end of which time final approval must have been obtained.
Any plat not receiving final approval within this period of time shall be void,
and the subdivider shall be required to resubmit a new plat for tentative
approval subject to all new zoning restrictions and subdivision regulations.
166.16 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
   Before the Council will approve the final plat, all of the required
improvements shall be constructed and either accepted by formal resolution of
the Council or provided for as under Section
166.17. Before passage of said resolution of acceptance, the City Engineer
shall report that said improvements meet all City specifications and ordinances
or other City requirements, and the agreements between subdivider and the City.
166.17 PERFORMANCE BOND
   The completion requirement for improvements may be waived in whole or in
part if the subdivider will post a performance bond with the Council
guaranteeing that improvements not completed will be constructed within a
period of one year from final acceptance of the plat. A performance bond for
street paving is required guaranteeing that paving will be completed no less
than 12 months and no more than 24 months after completion and acceptance of
water and sewer. However, final acceptance of the plat will not constitute
final acceptance by the City of any improvements to be constructed.
Improvements will be accepted only after their construction has been completed.
Such performance bond shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney as to form,
sufficiency and manner of execution. Upon recommendation of the Commission, the
Council may extend the completion date set forth in the bond for a maximum
period of one additional year.
166.18 FINAL PLAT
   The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved, and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to
record and develop at the time, provided, however, that such portion conforms
to all requirements of these regulations.
166.19 REQUIREMENTS OF THE FINAL PLAT
   The following graphic and descriptive material is required to be provided on
the final plat and in the accompanying material.
   1.   Contents of the Final Plat. Every plat of a subdivision offered for
record shall conform to all of the following provisions where applicable:
      A.   The plat shall be a permanent copy or a photographic print made on a
stable plastic film. Exact copies of the plat to be recorded shall be provided
to and filed with the County Recorder, Assessor and Auditor. The original plat
drawing shall remain the property of the registered land surveyor.
      B.   The size of each sheet showing any portion of the subdivided lands
shall not be greater than 18 inches by 24 inches nor less than eight and one-
half by 11 inches.
      C.   Whenever more than one sheet is used to accurately portray the lands
subdivided, each sheet shall display the number of the sheet and the total
number of sheets included in the plat, as well as clearly labeled match lines
indicating where the other sheets adjoin. An index sheet shall be provided to
show the relationship between the sheets.
      D.   A maximum scale of 100 feet to one inch shall be used. The scale
used shall be clearly stated and graphically illustrated by a bar scale drawn
on every sheet showing any portion of the lands subdivided.
      E.   Subdivisions shall be designated, by name or as otherwise
prescribed, in bold letters inside the margin at the top of each sheet included
in the plat.
      F.   An arrow indicating the northern direction shall be drawn in a
prominent place on each sheet included in the plat, as well as the scale and
date.
      G.   All monuments to be of record shall be adequately described and
clearly identified on the plat. When additional monuments are to be established
subsequent to the recording of the plat, the location of the additional
monuments shall be shown on the plat.
      H.   Sufficient survey data shall be shown to positively describe the
bounds of every lot, block, street, easement or other areas shown on the plat,
as well as the outer boundaries of the subdivided lands.
      I.   All distances shall be shown in feet to the nearest one-hundredth of
a foot, and in accordance with the definition of a foot adopted by the United
States Bureau of Standards. All measurements shall refer to the horizontal
plane.
      J.   The course of every boundary line shown on the plat shall be
indicated by a direct bearing reference or by an angle between the boundary
line and an intersecting line having a shown bearing, except when the boundary
line has an irregular or constantly changing course, as along a body of water,
or when a description of the boundary line is better achieved by measurements
shown at points or intervals along a meander line having a shown course. All
bearings and angles shown shall be given to at least the nearest minute of arc.
      K.   Curve data shall be stated in terms of radius, central angle and
tangent, or length of curve. In all cases, the curve data must be shown for the
line affected.
      L.   The minimum unadjusted acceptable error of closure for all
subdivision boundaries shall be 1:10,000 and shall be 1:5,000 for any
individual lot.
      M.   When any lot or portion of the subdivision is bounded by an
irregular line, the major portion of that lot or subdivision shall be enclosed
by a meander line showing complete data with distances along all lines
extending beyond the enclosure to the irregular boundary shown with as much
certainty as can be determined or as “more or less,” if variable. In all cases,
the true boundary shall be clearly indicated on the plat.
      N.   All interior excepted parcels shall be clearly indicated and
labeled, “not a part of this plat.”
      O.   All adjoining properties shall be identified and where such
adjoining properties are a part of a recorded subdivision, the name of that
subdivision shall be shown. If the subdivision platted is a resubdivision of a
part or the whole of a previously recorded subdivision, sufficient ties shall
be shown to controlling lines appearing on the earlier plat to permit an
overlay to be made. Re-subdivisions shall be labeled as such in a subtitle
following the name of the subdivision wherever the name appears on the plat.
      P.   The purpose of any easement shown on the plat shall be clearly
stated and shall be confined to only those easements pertaining to public
utilities including gas, power, telephone, water, sewer and such drainage
easements as are deemed necessary for the orderly development of the land
encompassed within the plat.
      Q.   A strip of land shall not be reserved by the subdivider unless the
land is of sufficient size and shape to be of some practical use or service as
determined by the Council.
      R.   The purpose of all areas dedicated to the public must be clearly
indicated on the plat.
      S.   Street names and clear designation of public alleys.
      T.   Block and lot numbers.
      U.   Name and address of owner and subdivider.
      V.   Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or reserved for
public use.
      W.   The plat shall be signed and acknowledged by the subdivision land
owner and his or her spouse.
      X.   A sealed certification of the accuracy of the plat by the registered
land surveyor who drew the plat.
   2.   Information to be Provided in Accompanying Material. The following
material shall be submitted with the final plat:
      A.   A correct legal description of the subdivision land;
      B.   A statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that the
plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire,
signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the
acknowledgments of deeds. The statement by the proprietors may also include a
dedication to the public of all lands within the plat that are designated for
streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school property, or other public use, if
the dedication is approved by the Council;
      C.   A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if any, that
the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their
desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the
acknowledgment of deeds. An affidavit and bond as provided for in Section
354.12 of the Code of Iowa may be recorded in lieu of the consent of the
mortgage or lienholder. When a mortgage or lienholder consents to the
subdivision, a release of mortgage or lien shall be recorded for any areas
conveyed to the City or dedicated to the public.
      D.   An opinion by an attorney-at-law who has examined the abstract of
title of the land being platted. The opinion shall state the names of the
proprietors and holders of mortgages, liens or other encumbrances on the land
being platted and shall note the encumbrances, along with any bonds securing
the encumbrances. Utility easements shall not be construed to be encumbrances
for the purpose of this section.
      E.   A certificate of the County Treasurer that the land is free from
certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free from
certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are secured by bond
in compliance with Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa.
      F.   A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council and for
signatures of the Mayor and Clerk.
      G.   Specifications and engineering construction drawings including
profiles, cross-sections and details of all public improvements. Elevations
shall be referred to mean sea level as exhibited in standard U.S. Geological
Survey Maps. Specifications and references shall meet those required by the
City’s construction and specification standards, including a site grading plan
for the entire subdivision.
      H.   A certificate by the City Engineer that all required improvements
and installations have been completed according to the construction plans
submitted to the City prior to construction or with the final plat if not
constructed, or that a performance bond guaranteeing completion has been
approved by the City Attorney and filed with the Clerk, or that the Council has
agreed that the City will provide the necessary improvements and installations
and assess the costs against the subdivider or future property owners in the
subdivision.
166.20 SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAT
   The subdivider shall prepare a final plat in accordance with the provisions
of Section
166.19 and shall file with the Clerk an application in triplicate for the final
approval of the plat. The application shall:
   1.   Forms and Fees. Be made on forms available from the Clerk together with
a fee of $10.00 per lot.
   2.   Number of Copies of Plat. Be accompanied by a minimum of 10 copies of
the final plat.
   3.   Offers of Dedication. Be accompanied by all formal irrevocable offers
of dedication to the public of all streets, City uses, utilities and easements,
in a form approved by the City Attorney.
   4.   Time of Submission. Be presented to the Clerk at least four (4) weeks
prior to the regular meeting of the Council.
166.21 REFERRAL OF FINAL PLAT
   The Clerk shall immediately refer two copies of the final plat to the City
Engineer and seven copies to the Commission. In the case of a subdivision
outside the corporate limits of the City, the Clerk shall refer one copy of the
final plat to the County Board of Supervisors.
166.22 ACTION BY THE COMMISSION
   The Commission shall, upon receiving the final plat, as soon as possible,
but within 30 days of receiving the final plat, consider the final plat, and if
the same is recommended for approval, shall submit its recommendation of
approval to the Council together with a certified copy of its resolution
showing the action of the Commission. If the Commission recommends approval of
the final plat, such approval and the date thereof shall be noted on the plat
over the signature of both the Chairperson and Secretary of the Commission and
the plat and five copies shall be transmitted to the Council, and one copy
shall be returned to the subdivider.
166.23 ACTION BY THE COUNCIL
   Upon receipt of the certification by the Commission, the Council shall,
within 60 days, either approve or disapprove the final plat.
   1.   Disapproval of Plat. In the event that said plat is disapproved by the
Council, such disapproval shall be expressed in writing and shall point out
wherein said proposed plat is objectionable.
   2.   Acceptance of Plat. In the event that said plat is found to be
acceptable and in accordance with this chapter, the Council shall accept the
same.
   3.   Final Approval and Recording of Plat. The passage of a resolution by
the Council accepting the plat shall constitute final approval of the platting
of the area shown on the final plat, but the subdivider or owner shall cause
such plat to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder, and shall file
satisfactory evidence of such recording in the office of the Clerk before the
City shall recognize the plat as being in full force and effect.
166.24 RESUBDIVISION OF LAND
   The following requirements shall govern the resubdividing of land.
   1.   Procedure for Resubdividing. For any change in a map of an approved or
recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on
such map, or area reserved for public use indicated on the map, or any lot
line, or if it affects any map or plan legally established prior to the
adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be
approved by the same procedure, rules and regulations as for a subdivision.
   2.   Acreage Lots. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the
subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land
and there are indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into
smaller building sites, the Commission and Council may require that such parcel
of land allow for future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of
adjacent streets. Easements providing for the future opening and extension of
such streets may be made a requirement of the plat.
166.25 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
   Before the final plat is approved by the Council, all applicants shall be
required to complete, in accordance with the Council’s decision and to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer, all the street, sanitary sewer, water and
other improvements as required in these regulations, specified in the final
plat, and as approved by the Council, and to dedicate the same to the City,
free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property and public
improvements thus dedicated.
166.26 PERFORMANCE BOND
   The Council in its discretion may waive the requirement that the applicant
complete and dedicate all public improvements prior to approving the final
plat, and that, as an alternative, the applicant post a bond in accordance with
Section
166.17 at the time of application for final plat approval in an amount
estimated by the Council as sufficient to secure to the City the satisfactory
construction, installation and dedication of the incomplete portion of required
improvements. In addition:
   1.   Approved by City Attorney. Such performance bond shall comply with all
statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney as to
form, sufficiency, and manner of execution as set forth in these regulations.
   2.   Completion Period. The period within which required improvements must
be completed shall be specified by the Council in the resolution approving the
final plat shall be incorporated in the bond, and shall not exceed one year
from date of final approval.
   3.   Extension of Completion Period. The performance bond shall be approved
by the Council as to the amount and surety and conditions satisfactory to the
Council. The Commission may, upon proof of difficulty, recommend to the Council
an extension of the completion date set forth in such bond for a maximum period
of one additional year. The Council may at any time during the period of such
bond accept a substitution of principal or sureties on the bond.
   4.   Temporary Improvements. The applicant shall build and pay for all costs
of temporary improvements required by the Council and shall maintain same for
the period specified by the Council. Prior to the construction of any temporary
facility or improvement, the developer shall file with the City a separate
suitable bond for temporary facilities, which bond shall insure that the
temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained and removed.
   5.   Failure to Complete Improvement. For subdivisions for which no
performance bond has been posted, if the improvements are not completed within
the period specified by the Council in the resolution approving the plat, the
approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where a performance
bond has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within
the terms of such performance bond, the City may declare the bond to be in
default and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the
extent of the building development at the time the bond is declared to be in
default.
166.27 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS
   The Council shall provide for inspection of required improvements during
construction and insure their satisfactory completion. The applicant shall pay
to the City an inspection fee equal to the actual cost of inspection. These
fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the City and no building permits
or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. The
subdivider shall furnish the Council with a construction schedule prior to the
commencement of any and all construction, and notify the City not less than 24
hours in advance of readiness for required inspections.
166.28 RELEASE OR REDUCTION OF PERFORMANCE BOND
   The performance bond may not be released or reduced except as follows:
   1.   Certificate of Satisfactory Completion. The Council will not accept
dedication of required improvements, nor release or reduce a performance bond,
until the City Engineer has submitted a certificate stating that all required
improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until the applicant’s
engineer has certified to the City through submission of detailed “as built”
plans of the subdivision indicating location, dimensions, materials and other
information required by the City, that all public improvements are in
accordance with construction plans for the subdivision.
   2.   Reduction of Performance Bond. A performance bond may be reduced upon
actual dedication of public improvements and then only to the ratio that the
public improvement dedicated bears to the total public improvements for the
plat.
166.29 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
   Improvements shall be maintained and a maintenance bond provided as follows:
   1.   Maintenance of Improvements Before Acceptance. The applicant shall be
required to maintain all improvements on the individual subdivided lots and
provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks, if required, until
acceptance of said improvements by the Council. If there are any certificates
of occupancy on a street not dedicated to the City, the City may, on 12 hours’
notice, plow the street or effect emergency repairs and charge same to
applicant.
   2.   Maintenance Bond. The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance
bond with the Council, prior to dedication, in an amount considered adequate by
the Council and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, in order to assure
the satisfactory condition of the required improvements for a period of two
years after the date of their acceptance by the Council and dedication of same
to the Council.
166.30 DEFERRAL OR WAIVER OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
   Required improvements may be deferred or waived as follows:
   1.   Waiver of Required Improvements. The Council may defer or waive at the
time of final approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any
or all such improvements as in its judgment are not requisite in the interests
of the public health, safety and general welfare, or which are inappropriate
because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities.
   2.   Deferral of Required Improvements. Whenever it is deemed necessary by
the Council to defer the construction of any improvement required herein
because of incompatible grades, future planning, inadequate or lack of
connecting facilities, or for other reasons, the applicant shall pay his or her
share of the costs of the future improvements to the City prior to the approval
of the final plat, or the applicant may post a bond insuring completion of said
improvements upon demand of the City.
166.31 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the extent of street
improvement is adequate for vehicular access by the prospective occupant and by
police and fire equipment.
166.32 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED
   The subdivider shall install and construct all improvements required by
these regulations in accordance with the specifications and under the
supervision of the Council and to its satisfaction.
166.33 DESIGN STANDARDS ARE MINIMUM
   The standards and details of design herein contained are intended only as
minimum requirements so that the general arrangement and layout of a
subdivision may be adjusted to a wide variety of circumstances. However, in the
design and development of the subdivision, the subdivider shall use standards
consistent with the site conditions so as to assure an economical, pleasant and
durable neighborhood.
166.34 CONFORMANCE TO APPLICABLE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdividers shall
comply with the following laws, rules and regulations.
   1.   State Statutes. All applicable statutes of the State of Iowa.
   2.   City Plans. Any comprehensive plan, public utilities plan and capital
improvements program of the City.
   3.   State Agency Rules. The requirements and rules of State agencies such
as the State Department of Natural Resources, State Department of Health and
the State Department of Transportation, where applicable.
   4.   County Standards and Regulations. The standards and regulations of the
County Board of Supervisors and County commissions, boards and agencies where
applicable.
   5.   City Standards and Regulations. The standards and regulations adopted
by the Council, boards, commissions and agencies of the City.
   6.   Plat Approval and Conformity. Plat approval may be withheld if a
subdivision is not in conformance with the above guides or policy and purposes
of these regulations.
166.35 SUBDIVISION NAME
   The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too closely
approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the area covered
by these regulations. The Council, after consultation with the Commission,
shall have the final authority to designate the name of the subdivision which
shall be determined at preliminary plat approval.
166.36 MONUMENTATION
   Monuments shall be in conformance with the following requirements:
   1.   Establishment of Permanent Control Monuments. Prior to the offering of
the plat of any subdivision for record, the surveyor shall confirm the prior
establishment of permanent control monuments at each controlling corner on the
boundaries of the parcel or tract of land being subdivided. If no permanent
control monuments exist, the surveyor shall establish at least two permanent
control monuments for each block created, or if the area subdivided into lots
is less than a block in size, at least two permanent control monuments shall be
established for the subdivision. Permanent control monuments shall be
constructed of reasonably permanent material solidly embedded in the ground and
capable of being detected by commonly used magnetic or electronic equipment.
The surveyor shall affix a cap of reasonably inert material bearing an embossed
or stencil cut marking of the Iowa registration number of the surveyor to the
top of the monument.
   2.   Other Monuments of Record. Other monuments established prior to the
recording of the plat of the subdivision and described on the plat shall be
considered monuments of record and shall be given the same weight as original
permanent control monuments if the monuments remain undisturbed in their
original positions. The additional monuments shall be constructed and embedded
according to the provisions for permanent control monuments prescribed in
subsection 1 of this section.
   3.   Establishment and Recording of Other Monuments. Monuments other than
the permanent control monuments required in subsection 1 of this section shall
not be required to be established before the recording of the plat or the
conveyancing of lands by reference to the plat if the registered land surveyor
includes in the surveyor’s statement on the plat that the additional monuments
required by these regulations shall be established before a specified future
date.
   4.   Additional Monuments Required. Additional monuments shall be
constructed and embedded according to the provisions for permanent control
monuments prescribed in subsection 1 of this section, and shall be set in all
of the following locations whether set prior to the recording of the plat, or
subsequent to such recording:
      A.   At every corner and angle point of every lot, block or parcel of
land created.
      B.   At every point of intersection of the outer boundary of the
subdivision with an existing or created right-of-way line of any street,
railroad or other way.
      C.   At every point of curve, tangency, reversed curve or compounded
curve on every right-of-way line established.
   5.   Placement of Monument. When the placement of a monument required by
this chapter at the prescribed location is impractical, it is permissible to
establish a reference monument in close proximity to the prescribed location.
If the reference monument is established prior to the recording of the plat and
its location properly shown on the plat, the reference monument shall have the
same status as other monuments of record. Where any point requiring
monumentation has been previously monumented, the existence of the monument
shall be confirmed by the surveyor. The existing monument shall be considered a
monument of record when properly shown and described on the recorded plat.
166.37 CHARACTER OF THE LAND
   Land which the City finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development
due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse
earth formations or topography, utility easements or other features which will
reasonably be harmful to the safety, health and general welfare of the present
or future inhabitants of the subdivision or its surrounding areas or both,
shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by
the subdivider and approved by the Council, upon recommendation of the
Commission, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions.
Such land shall be set aside for uses as shall not involve such a danger.
166.38 LOTS
   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for
the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
   1.   Lot Size. Minimum lot dimensions and sizes shall conform to the
requirements of the zoning regulations where applicable, but in no case shall a
lot contain less than 5,000 square feet of area or be less than 50 feet wide
measured at the building line.
      A.   Residential lots where not served by public sewer shall be of
sufficient size, as determined by the City and subject to any applicable State
or County rules or regulations, to accommodate the type of private sewage
disposal system proposed by the developer.
      B.   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial
and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service
and parking facilities required by the type of use and development
contemplated.
      C.   Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra 20 feet of width
to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets.
   2.   Street Access. Each lot shall be provided with satisfactory access to a
public street.
   3.   Double Frontage and Reverse Frontage Lots. Double frontage and reverse
frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of
residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at
least 10 feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be
provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other
disadvantageous use.
   4.   Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles
to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
   5.   Lot Drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage
away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with
the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so
as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent
lots.
   6.   Building Lines. Building lines conforming with zoning standards shall
be shown on all lots within the platted area. Where the subdivided area is not
under zoning control, the Council may require building lines in accordance with
the needs of each subdivision.
166.39 BLOCKS.
   Blocks shall conform to the following requirements:
   1.   Provision for Lots. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for
two tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions shall be permitted in
blocks adjacent to arterial streets, railroads or waterways.
   2.   Design Considerations. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall
be determined with due regard to:
      A.   Provision for adequate building sites.
      B.   Zoning requirements where applicable.
      C.   Topography.
      D.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic.
   3.   Block Lengths. The lengths of blocks shall be appropriate to the type
of development contemplated, but block lengths in residential developments
shall not exceed 2,000 feet, or be less than 500 feet. Wherever practicable,
blocks along arterials and collector streets shall not be less than 1,000 feet
in length.
   4.   Easement Reservation. In blocks over 800 feet in length, the Council
may require the reservation of an easement to accommodate utilities, drainage
facilities or pedestrian traffic.
   5.   Pedestrian Crosswalks. Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than 10 feet
wide, may be required by the Council through the center of blocks more than 800
feet in length. Pedestrian crosswalks shall not exceed 12 percent in grade
unless steps of an approved design are to be constructed.
166.40 STREETS – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
   Streets shall conform with the following general requirements:
   1.   Frontage on Improved Roads. No subdivision shall be approved unless the
area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access from an existing
street.
   2.   Grading and Improvement Plan. Streets shall be graded and improved and
conform to the City construction standards and specifications and shall be
approved as to design and specifications by the City Engineer, in accordance
with the construction plans required to be submitted.
   3.   Topography and Arrangement. Streets shall be in conformance with the
following requirements related to topography and arrangement:
      A.   Streets shall be related appropriately to be topography. All streets
shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the building sites at
or above the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely
as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and
curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in the design
standards of these regulations.
      B.   All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of streets and dedicated right-of-way.
      C.   All arterials shall be properly related to special traffic
generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches and
shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and
proposed land uses.
      D.   Municipal service streets shall be laid out to conform as much as
possible to the topography to discourage use by through traffic, to permit
efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of
streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property.
      E.   Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the
tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical
conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Council such extension is not
necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision
with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of
adjacent tracts.
      F.   In business and industrial developments, the streets and other
accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings,
location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and
maneuvering areas, and walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of
movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian.
   4.   Access to State or County Jurisdictional Roads. Whenever any part of a
subdivision is designed with access to a road under State or County
jurisdiction, permission for access to such roads shall be obtained from the
appropriate jurisdiction and such access shall be designed according to the
standards of the appropriate jurisdiction.
   5.   Access to Arterial Streets. Where a subdivision borders on or contains
an existing or proposed arterial street, the Council may require that lot
access to such streets be limited by one of the following means:
      A.   Lots shall be designed so as to back onto the primary arterial and
front onto a parallel municipal service street; no access shall be provided
from the arterial street, and screening shall be provided in a strip of land
along the rear property line of such lots.
      B.   A series of cul-de-sacs entered from and designed generally at right
angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots
backing onto the arterial street.
      C.   A frontage or service road, separated from the primary arterial by a
planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points.
   6.   Street Names. Streets that are in alignment with others already
existing shall bear the name of the existing streets. The proposed names of new
streets shall not duplicate or sound similar to existing street names. Street
names shall be subject to the approval of the Council and Commission.
   7.   Street Name Signs. Street name signs are to be placed at all
intersections within or abutting the subdivision, the type and location of
which to be approved by the Council. The City shall install all street name
signs. The applicant shall deposit with the City at the time of final
subdivision approval the estimated cost of installation of each street sign
required by the Council.
   8.   Street Lights. Installation of street lights shall be required in
accordance with design and specification standards approved by the Council
after consultation with the Board of Trustees of the Aurelia Municipal Electric
Utility.
   9.   Construction of Streets and Dead-end Streets. Streets and dead-end
streets shall be in conformance with the following requirements:
      A.   Construction of Streets. The arrangement of streets shall provide
for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such
continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire
protection, and for efficient provision of utilities. If the adjacent property
is undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-
of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary T or L shaped
turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets, with the
notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal street right-of-
way shall revert to abutters whenever the street is continued. The Council may
limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design
standards of these regulations.
      B.   Permanent Dead-end Streets. Where a road does not extend to the
boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the Council
for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to
such boundary than 150 feet. However, the Council may require the reservation
of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian
traffic or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a
permanent dead-end street in accordance with City construction standards and
specifications. For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police
and fire protection, permanent dead-end streets shall, in general, be limited
in length in accordance with the design standards of these regulations.
166.41 STREETS – DESIGN STANDARDS
   The following design standards shall apply to the design of streets:
   1.   General. In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width
and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory
access to police, fire fighting, snow removal, sanitation and street
maintenance equipment, and to coordinate streets so as to compose a convenient
system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following design
standards for streets are hereby required:
      A.   A tangent of at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on municipal arterial and municipal collector streets, and 75
feet on municipal service streets.
      B.   When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one
point by more than 10 degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius
adequate to insure a sight distance of not less than 100 feet for municipal
service and municipal collector streets, and of such greater radii as the
Council shall determine for special cases.
      C.   Minimum Roadway and Right-of-way Standards:
         (1)   Municipal arterial streets shall have a right-of-way width of
not less than 80 feet and a roadway width of not less than 44 feet.
         (2)   Municipal collector streets shall have a right-of-way width of
not less than 60 feet and a roadway width of not less than 36 feet.
         (3)    Municipal service streets shall have a right-of-way width of
not less than 50 feet and a roadway width of not less than 26 feet.
         (4)   Frontage streets shall have a right-of-way width of not less
than 40 feet and a roadway width of not less than 26 feet.
         (5)   Cul-de-sacs shall meet all the requirements for a municipal
service street and, in addition, shall provide a turnaround with a right-of-way
radius of 50 feet and a roadway radius of 40 feet. No cul-de-sac shall exceed
500 feet in length.
      D.   Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following:
         (1)   Municipal arterial streets – six percent;
         (2)   Municipal collector streets – eight percent;
         (3)   Municipal service streets – 10 percent;
         (4)   Frontage streets – six percent.
      E.   All changes in street grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
minimum length in feet equal to 20 times the algebraic difference in
percentages of grade.
      F.   No street grade shall be less than one-half of one percent.
   2.   Street Surfacing and Improvements. At least 12 but not more than 24
months after sewer, water and other utilities to be located underground within
the right-of-way have been installed by the applicant, the applicant shall
construct curbs and gutters and shall surface or cause to be surfaced roadways
to the widths prescribed in these regulations. Said surfacing shall be of
Portland concrete cement. Adequate provisions shall be made for culverts,
drains and bridges. All road pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and
structure, curbs, turnarounds and sidewalks shall conform to all construction
standards and specifications adopted by the City, and shall be incorporated
into the construction plans required to be submitted by the developer for plat
approval.
   3.   Excess Right-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards
designated in these regulations shall be required whenever, due to topography,
additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. Such slopes
shall not be in excess of three to one.
   4.   Railroads and Limited Access Highways. Railroad rights-of-way and
limited access highways were so located as to affect the subdivision of
adjoining lands shall be treated as follows:
      A.   In residential districts, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth
in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall be
provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This
strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat:
“This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of structures hereon is
prohibited.”
      B.   In districts zoned for business, commercial or industrial uses, the
nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad
shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure
suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.
      C.   Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting a street which
crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be at a
distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance
shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for
future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients.
   5.   Intersections. The following standards shall apply to the design of
intersections:
      A.   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an angle of less
than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved
approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at
least 100 feet therefrom. No more than two streets shall intersect at any one
point unless specifically approved by the Council.
      B.   Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street
shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the
opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than
150 feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected street has
separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where
streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous.
Intersection of major streets shall be at least 800 feet apart.
      C.   Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two municipal service
streets shall be at least 20 feet; and minimum curb radius at an intersection
involving a municipal collector street shall be at least 25 feet. Abrupt
changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in
accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular
movement.
      D.   Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a
leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a two percent rate at a
distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the
intersecting street.
      E.   Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing
vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting
visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation, including
trees, in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent
deemed necessary to provide an adequate sight distance.
      F.   The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections, shall be
three percent or less.
   6.   Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined by
the Council, shall be constructed at the full expense of the applicant without
reimbursement from the City. The sharing expense for the construction of
bridges not of primary benefit to the applicant as determined by the Council,
will be fixed by special agreement between the Council and the applicant. Said
cost shall be charged to the applicant pro rata as the percentage of his or her
land developed and so served.
   7.   Alleys. The following design standards for alleys shall be required of
all subdividers:
      A.   Alleys shall be prohibited in residential districts.
      B.   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts,
except that the Council may waive this requirement where other definite and
assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
      C.   Alleys shall have a right-of-way of not less than 30 feet and a
roadway width of not less than 20 feet.
      D.   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided,
but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe
vehicular movement.
      E.   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable,
shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as
determined by the Council.
   8.   Street Dedications and Reservations. The following provisions shall
apply to street dedications and reservations:
      A.   Street systems in new subdivisions shall be laid out so as to
eliminate or avoid new perimeter half streets. Where an existing half street is
adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the street shall be improved
and dedicated by the subdivider. The Council may authorize a new perimeter
street where the subdivider improves and dedicates the entire required street
right-of-way width within his or her own subdivision boundaries.
      B.   Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow street or when City
plans or zoning setback regulations indicate plans for realignment or widening
a road that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the
applicant shall be required to improve and dedicate at his expense such areas
for widening or realignment of such roads. Such frontage roads and streets
shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant at his or her own expense to
the full width as required by these subdivision regulations. Land reserved for
any street purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements
of the zoning regulations whether the land is to be dedicated to the City in
fee simple or an easement is granted to the City.
166.42 STORM SEWERS AND DRAINAGE
   The following requirements shall apply to the provision of storm sewers and
drainage:
   1.   General Requirements. The Commission shall not recommend for approval
any plat of a subdivision which does not make adequate provision for storm or
flood water run-off channels or basins. The storm water drainage system shall
be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where
required, shall be designed by methods as approved by the Council, and a copy
of design computations shall be submitted along with plans. Inlets shall be
provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any
intersection, or for a distance of more than 600 feet in the gutter. When
calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further
allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and basins shall be used to
intercept flow at that point. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown
for each and every lot and block. Storm sewers, where required, shall be
installed at the time of curb and gutter construction.
   2.   Nature of Storm Water Facilities. The applicant may be required by the
Council to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that
may exist either previously to or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage
facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in
perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed
in accordance with the construction standards and specifications.
      A.   Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall
install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable
distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of storm waters,
subject to the specifications of the Council. However, in subdivisions
containing lots less than 15,000 square feet in area and in business and
industrial districts, underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed
throughout the subdivisions and be conducted to an approved outfall.
      B.   If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually,
as determined by the Council, the subdivider shall make arrangement for future
storm water disposal by a public storm sewer system at the time the plat
receives final approval. Provision for such connection shall be incorporated by
inclusion in the performance bond required for the subdivision plat.
      C.   A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large
enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area,
whether inside or outside the subdivision. The Council shall determine the
necessary size of the facility, based on the provisions of the construction
standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed
development permitted by applicable zoning regulations.
      D.   The Council shall also study the effect of each subdivision on
existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision.
City drainage studies together with such other studies as shall be appropriate
shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the
additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload
an existing downstream drainage facility, the Council may withhold approval of
the subdivision until provision has been made for the recovery of the cost for
the improvement of said potential condition in such sum as the Council shall
determine. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be
provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility.
      E.   The Council may, when it deems it necessary for the health, safety
or welfare of the present and future population of the area and necessary to
the conservation of water, drainage and sanitary facilities, prohibit the
subdivision of any portion of the property which lies within the flood plain of
any stream or drainage course.
   3.   Dedication of Drainage Easements. The following shall apply to the
dedication of drainage easements.
      A.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of
such width and construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose.
Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open
channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume
of flow.
      B.   Drainage easements:
         (1)   Where topography or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within street rights-of-way,
perpetual unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for such drainage
facilities shall be provided across property outside the street lines and with
satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat.
Drainage easements shall be carried from the street to a natural watercourse or
to other drainage facilities.
         (2)   When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private
land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and
indicated on the plat.
         (3)   The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or
conservation easement of land on both sides of existing watercourses, to a
distance to be determined by the Council.
         (4)   Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or
overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for
dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage
ways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be computed in
determining the area requirement of any lot.
166.43 WATER FACILITIES
   Water facilities shall be provided as follows:
   1.   General Requirements. The following general requirements shall apply to
the provision of water facilities:
      A.   Where a public water main is accessible the subdivider shall install
adequate water facilities, including fire hydrants, subject to City
specifications. All water mains shall be at least six inches in diameter.
      B.   Water main extensions shall be approved by the City.
      C.   To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants and all
water supply improvements shall be shown on the preliminary plat and final
plat.
   2.   Individual Wells and Central Water Systems. The following requirements
shall apply to the provision of individual wells and central water systems:
      A.   In the discretion of the Council, if a public water system is not
available, individual wells may be used or a central water system provided in
such a manner that an adequate supply of potable water will be available to
every lot in the subdivision. Water samples shall be submitted to the
appropriate County or State agency for testing, and individual wells and
central water systems shall be approved by the appropriate County or State
health authorities. Orders of approval shall be submitted to the Council.
      B.   If the Council requires that a connection to a public water main be
eventually provided as a condition to approval of an individual well or central
water system, the applicant shall make arrangements for future water service at
the time the plat receives final approval. Performance or cash bonds may be
required to insure compliance.
   3.   Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions
except those coming under subsection 2 of this section. Fire hydrants shall be
located no more than 1,000 feet apart and within 500 feet of any structures and
shall be approved by the City.
166.44 SEWAGE FACILITIES
   Sewage facilities shall be provided as follows:
   1.   General Requirements. The applicant shall install sanitary sewer
facilities in a manner prescribed by the City construction standards and
specifications. All plans shall be designed in accordance with the rules,
regulations and standards of the City and the State Department of Natural
Resources or State Department of Health. Plans shall be approved by the above
agencies.
   2.   Construction of Sanitary Sewage Systems. Sanitary sewage systems shall
be constructed as follows:
      A.   Where a public sanitary sewage system is reasonably accessible, the
applicant shall connect with the same and provide sewers accessible to each lot
in the subdivision including stub-ins.
      B.   Where sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably accessible and will
not become available for a period in excess of 15 years, the applicant shall
install individual disposal systems or central sewage systems.
   3.   Individual Disposal System Requirements. If public sewer facilities are
not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas
shall conform to the requirements of applicable zoning regulations and these
regulations, as well as Cherokee County regulations. Percolation tests and test
holes shall be made as directed by the City and the results submitted to the
local board of health.
   4.   Water Supply Interconnections. There shall be no physical connection
between a public or private potable water supply system and a sewer which will
permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable supply.
Sewers shall be kept removed from water supply wells or other water supply
sources and structures.
166.45 SIDEWALKS
   The following requirements shall apply to the provision of sidewalks:
   1.   Location. Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated non-pavement
right-of-way of all streets.
   2.   Construction. Sidewalks shall be improved as required in subsection 2
of Section 166.41 of these regulations.
166.46 UTILITIES
   The following shall apply to the provision of utilities:
   1.   Location. The Council may require that all utility facilities,
including, but not limited to, gas, electric power, telephone and CATV cables,
be located underground through the subdivision. All utility facilities existing
and proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
Underground service connections to the street property line of each platted
lot, including stub-ins, shall be installed at the subdivider’s expense. At the
discretion of the Council, the requirement for service connections to each lot
may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be retained in single ownership
and intended to be developed for the same primary use.
   2.   Easements. Easements shall be provided as follows:
      A.   Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for
utilities. Such easements shall be at least 10 feet wide. Proper coordination
shall be established between the subdivider and the applicable utility
companies for the establishment of utility easements established in adjoining
properties.
      B.   Where topographical or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines, perpetual
unobstructed easements at least 10 feet in width shall be provided along side
lot lines with satisfactory access to the street or rear lot lines. Easements
shall be indicated on the plat.
166.47 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES
   Existing features which would add value to residential development or to the
City as a whole, such as trees, watercourses and falls, beaches, historic spots
and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the
subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision nor any change of
grade of the land effected until approval of the preliminary plat has been
granted. All trees on the plat required to be retained shall be preserved, and
all trees where required shall be protected against change of grade.
166.48 NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS
   The following provisions shall apply to nonresidential subdivisions:
   1.   General. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is used for
commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect
to such land shall make such provision as the Council may require. A
nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these
regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the Council, and
shall conform to the proposed land use and standards established in City plans
and regulations.
   2.   Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in these
regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the
applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the street,
parcel and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses
anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following
principles and standards shall be observed:
      A.   Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions
to the types of industrial development anticipated.
      B.   Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate
the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon.
      C.   Special requirements may be imposed by the City with respect to
street, curb, gutter and sidewalk design and construction.
      D.   Special requirements may be imposed by the City with respect to the
installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and storm water
drainage.
      E.   Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas
from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision,
including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or
potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped
buffer strip when necessary.
      F.   Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic,
shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or
potential residential areas.
166.49 SCHOOL AND PARK RESERVATIONS
   If land to be subdivided contains sites that are designated in City plans or
plans of other public bodies to be used for schools or parks, the developer
shall reserve such site for such use. If sites which have been reserved are not
acquired by the City or other public body within two years of the date of the
preliminary plat approval, then such sites may be subdivided by the developer.
The appropriate public body may release the reserved site sooner by certifying
to the Council that it does not intend to acquire such site within the two-year
period.
166.50 IMPROVEMENTS WITHIN UNINCORPORATED JURISDICTION.
   Improvements in the two mile unincorporated area under the jurisdiction of
these regulations shall be the same as required herein, provided they are not
less than that required by the applicable County subdivision regulations, and
provided further that all construction plans shall be approved by the County,
and completed public roads shall be accepted by the Board of Supervisors for
public maintenance.
166.51 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
   The following shall apply to the granting of variations and exceptions:
   1.   Hardships. Where the Council finds that extraordinary hardships or
particular difficulties regarding the physical development of land may result
from strict compliance with these regulations, it may make variations or
exceptions to the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the
public interest secured, provided that such variation or exception shall not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and
further provided, the Council shall not grant variations or exceptions to these
regulations unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to
it in each specific case that:
      A.   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located.
      B.   The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are
unique to the property for which the variation is sought, and are not
applicable, generally, to other property.
      C.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out.
      D.   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire
to make more money out of the property.
   2.   Conditions. In granting variations and exceptions the Council may
require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations.
   3.   Procedure for a Variance. A petition for any such variance shall be
submitted in writing by the developer at the time when the preliminary plat is
filed. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all
of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
166.52 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
   Any provisions of these regulations may be changed and amended from time to
time by the Council; provided, however, that such changes or amendments shall
not become effective until after a public hearing has been held, public notice
of which shall have been given as required by law. Such proposed amendments
shall first be submitted to the Commission for study and recommendation before
the hearing is held. The Commission shall forward its recommendations to the
Council within 30 days, after which the Council shall give notice of and hold a
public hearing on the proposed amendment.
166.53 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
   No plat or subdivision within the City or within two miles thereof shall be
filed or recorded with the County, nor shall any plat or subdivision have any
validity until it complies with the provision of these regulations, has been
approved by the Council as herein set forth, and further:
   1.   Issuance of Building Permits. No more than two building permits for
each separate tract existing at the time of the effective date of these
regulations shall be issued unless the tract has been platted in accordance
with these regulations; except that this provision shall not limit the number
of building permits that may be issued for accessory buildings as defined by
applicable land use regulations such as zoning and restricted residence
regulations or additions or improvements to a main or accessory building
already legally located upon said tract.
   2.   Sale or Lease Without Plat. Any person who shall dispose of or offer
for sale or lease any lots in the City or addition to the City, until the plat
thereof has been acknowledged and recorded as provided in these regulations,
shall forfeit and pay $50.00 for each lot and part of lot sold or disposed of,
leased or offered for sale.
 
