Cascade
City Code
of
Ordinances
2021
2025 S-4 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 04-25, passed 11-24-25
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 09-21
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF ORDINANCES.
Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Cascade, Iowa:
Section 1. Pursuant to published notice, a public hearing has been duly held
and the City Council hereby adopts the City of Cascade, Iowa Code of
Ordinances.
Section 2. An official copy of the City Code as adopted, including a
certification by the City Clerk as to its adoption and effective date is on
file at the office of the City Clerk.
Section 3. A copy of the code shall be kept available at the City Hall for
public inspection and copies will be made available for sale at cost.
Section 4. All general ordinances or parts thereof passed prior to August 23rd,
2021, not contained in the City of Cascade, Iowa Code of Ordinances are hereby
repealed except as hereafter provided, or special ordinances not named.
Section 5. The following ordinances are specifically saved from repeal:
   NO ORDINANCES ARE SAVED FROM REPEAL SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF
   CODE OF IOWA SECTION 380.8(1)(a)
Section 6. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon publication as
required by Iowa law.
Passed by the City Council of Cascade, Iowa on the 13th day of December, 2021
and approved
this 13th day of December, 2021.
                                                                  
                        Greg Staner, Mayor
Attest:
                                                
Danielle Hartke CMC, City Clerk
Certification: I hereby certify that the foregoing was published as Ordinance
Number        on
                                  , 2021.
                                                                    
                     Danielle Hartke CMC, City Clerk
TITLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-1-1   Definitions
1-1-2   Grammatical Interpretation
1-1-3   Prohibited Acts Include Causing, Permitting
1-1-4   Construction
1-1-5   Amendment
1-1-6   Severability
1-1-7   Catchlines, Titles, Headings and Notes
1-1-8   Amendments to Code, Effect of New Ordinances, Amendatory Language
1-1-9   Indemnity
1-1-1   DEFINITIONS.
The following words and phrases whenever used in the Ordinances of the City,
shall be construed as defined in this section unless, from the context, a
different meaning is intended or unless different meaning is specifically
defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:
   1.   “Building” means any man-made structure permanently affixed to the
ground.
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2011)
   1-A   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.
   1-B   “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which
a specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the
Building Conde and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
   1-C   “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Cascade, Iowa.
   2.   "City" means the City of Cascade, Iowa, or the area within the
territorial limits of the City, and such territory outside of the City over
which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or
statutory provision;
   3.   "Clerk" means Clerk-Treasurer.
   4.   "Computation of time" means the time within which an act is to be done.
It shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; and
if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded;
   5.   "Council" means the City Council of the City. All its members or all
Council persons mean the total number of Council persons provided by the City
charter under the general laws of the state;
   6.   "County" means Dubuque County or Jones County, Iowa;
   7.   “Delegation of Authority” means whenever a provision appears requiring
an officer of the City to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be
construed to authorize the officer to designate, delegate and authorize
subordinates to perform the required act or make the re1uired inspection unless
the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2010)
   8.   "Fiscal Year" means July 1 to June 30.
   9.   "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of
the State of Iowa, the Ordinances of the City; and when appropriate, any and
all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder;
   10.   "May" confers a power;
   11.   "Month" means a calendar month;
   12.   "Must" states a requirement;
   13.   "Oath" shall be construed to include an affirmative or declaration in
all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and
in such cases the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the
words "swear" and "sworn";
   13-A   “Measure” means on Ordinance, Amendment, Resolution, or Motion.
   14.   "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense
requires it;
   15.   "Ordinance" means a law of the City; however, an administrative
action, order or directive, may be in the form of a resolution;
   16.   "Owner" applied to a building or land includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or part of such building or land;
   17.   "Person" means natural person, any other legal entity, or the manager,
lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of them;
   18.   "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action
and evidences of debt;
   19.   "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after,
respectively;
   20.   "Property" includes real and personal property;
   21.   "Real property" includes any interest in land;
   22.   "Shall" imposes a duty;
   23.   "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb line and
the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians;
   24.   "State" means the State of Iowa;
   24-A   “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa.
   25.   "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys,
courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this City which have
been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public
property so designated in any law of this state;
   26.   "Tenant" and "occupant" applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others;
   27.   "Title of Office". Use of the title of any officer, employee, board or
commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the
City;
   28.   "Writing” and “Written" include printed, typewritten, or
electronically transmitted such as facsimile or electronic mail;
   29.   "Year" means a calendar year;
   30.   All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to
the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases
and such other as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the
law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and
appropriate meaning;
   31.   When an act is required by an Ordinance the same being such that it
may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed as to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent.
1-1-2   GRAMMATICAL INTERPRETATION.
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the Ordinances of the City;
   1.   Gender. Any gender includes the other gender;
   2.   Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular;
   3.   Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future
tenses and vice versa;
   4.   Use of Words and Phrases. Words and phrases not specifically defined
shall be construed according to the content and approved usage of the language.
1-1-3   PROHIBITED ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING, PERMITTING.
Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes
causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the
fact of such act or omission. A principal is responsible for the unauthorized
acts or omissions committed by an agent or employee which have been authorized
by the principal.
1-1-4   CONSTRUCTION.
The provisions of this Code are to be construed with a view to affect its
objects and to promote justice.
1-1-5   AMENDMENT.
All Ordinances of the City Council passed thereafter shall be in the form of an
addition or amendment to the Cascade Municipal Code of 2020 constituting this
Municipal Code, and shall include proper references to chapter and section to
maintain the orderly codification of the Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1-1-6   SEVERABILITY.
If any section, provision or part of the City Code or any subsequent ordinance
is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the
validity of the City Code as a whole or any section provision, or part thereof
not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
1-1-7   CATCHLINES, TITLES, HEADINGS AND NOTES.
The catchlines of the several sections of this City Code printed in boldface
type as well as the titles, headings, chapter heads, section and subsection
heads or titles, editor’s notes, cross-references and State law references,
unless set out in the body of the section itself, contained in this City Code,
do not constitute any part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate,
explain, supplement or clarify the contents of a section.
1-1-8   AMENDMENTS TO CITY CODE, EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES, AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   1.   All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in
any way affect this City Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this City Code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent
ordinances repeal any chapter, section, or subsection or any portion thereof,
such repealed portions may be excluded from this City Code by omission from
reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted
in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent
ordinances until such time as this City Code and subsequent ordinances numbered
or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances.   
   2.   Amendments to any of the provisions of this City Code may be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section or subsection
number of this City Code in substantially the following language: “That section
__________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Cascade, Iowa is hereby amended
to read as follows:…” The new provisions shall then be set out in full as
desired.
   3.   In the event a new section not heretofore existing in this City Code is
to be added, the following language may be used: “That the Code of ordinances,
City of Cascade, Iowa, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered
__________, which said section reads as follows: …” The new section shall then
be set out in full as desired.
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2010)
1-1-9   INDEMNITY.
The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by
making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or death
of any person or persons whomsoever, and all loss of or damage to property
whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising
from or related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the issuance of the
permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such
applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by
or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms
and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such
application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents and
employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing.
The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or
license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City
whether expressly recited therein or not.
CHAPTER 2
RIGHT OF ENTRY
1-2-1   Right of Entry
1-2-1   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any Ordinance, or whenever
there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists an Ordinance violation
in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the City, any
authorized official of the City, may, upon presentation of proper credentials,
enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and
to perform any duty imposed upon such official by Ordinance; provided that,
except in emergency situations, such official shall first give the owner and/or
occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, twenty-four hour
written notice of the authorized official's intention to inspect. In the event
the owner and/or occupant refuses entry, the official is empowered to seek
assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.
CHAPTER 3
PENALTY
1-3-1   General Penalty
1-3-2   Civil Penalty - Municipal Infraction
1-3-3   Scheduled Fines
1-3-1   GENERAL PENALTY.
The doing of any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful, an offense, or a
misdemeanor by the City Code or any Ordinance or Code herein adopted by
reference, or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by
this City Code or any Ordinance or Code or any Ordinance or Code herein adopted
by reference is, unless another penalty is specified, punishable in accordance
with Iowa Code Section 903.1(1)(a).
Code of Iowa, Sec. 903.1(1)(a)
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2008)
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2009)
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2010)
1-3-2   CIVIL PENALTY - MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22)
   1.   Definitions.
      a.   Municipal Infraction. Except those provisions specifically provided
under state law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious
misdemeanor or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Iowa
Code, the doing of any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful, an offense or
a misdemeanor by the Code of Ordinances City of Cascade, or any Ordinance or
Code herein adopted by reference, or omission or failure to perform any act or
duty required by the Code of Ordinances City of Cascade, or any Ordinance or
Code herein adopted by reference, is a "municipal infraction" and is punishable
by civil penalty as provided herein.
      Environmental Violation. A municipal infraction which is a violation of
Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa or of a standard established by the City in
consultation with the Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be
classified as an environmental violation. However, the provisions of this
section shall not be applicable until the City has offered to participate in
informal negotiations regarding the violation or to the following specific
violations:
   1.   A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. 403.8.
   2.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain by a person not engaged in the industrial
production of manufacturing of grain products or by a person engaged in such
industrial production or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September
15 to January 15.
      b.   Officer. The term "officer" shall mean any employee or official
authorized to enforce the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cascade.
      c.   Repeat offense. The term "repeat offense" shall mean a recurring
violation of the same section of the Code of Ordinances.
   2.   Violations, Penalties, and Alternative Relief.
      a.   A municipal infraction is punishable by a civil penalty as provided
in the following schedule, unless a specific schedule of civil penalties is
provided for specific offenses elsewhere in this Code.
Schedule of Civil Penalties
First offense: Written Warning
Second Offense: $125.00 plus court costs
Third and Each Repeat Offense: $250.00 plus court costs
(Ord 14-16 7-25-16)
      b.   Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist by the
violator constitutes a separate offense.
      c.   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not
preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same
action.
   3.   Civil Citations
      a.   Any officer authorized by the City to enforce the Code of Ordinances
may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction.
      b.   The citation may be served by personal service, or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or by publication as provided in the Iowa Rules
of Civil Procedure.
      c.   The original of the citation shall be sent to the Clerk of the
district court. If the infraction involves real property a copy of the citation
shall be filed with the County Treasurer.
      d.   The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has
been committed and shall contain the following information:
         (1)   The name and address of the defendant.
         (2)   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the
officer issuing the citation.
         (3)   The location and time of the infraction.
         (4)   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative
relief sought, or both.
         (5)   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
         (6)   The time and place of court appearance.
         (7)   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
         (8)   The legal description of the affected property, if applicable.
Special Civil Penalties
   A.   A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. 403.8, by an industrial user
shall be punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each day a violation exists or continues.
   B.   A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation shall
be punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each occurrence. However, an environmental violation shall not be subject
to such penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
      1.   The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup,
cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a
shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to
reduce or eliminate the violation.
      2.   The City is notified of the violation within twenty-four (24) hours
from the time that the violation begins.
      3.   The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight (8)
hours.
      4.   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in Section 364.22, Code of
Iowa, does not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court
in the same action. Such relief may include the imposition of a civil penalty
by entry of a personal judgment against the defendant, directing that the
payment of the civil penalty be suspended or deferred under conditions imposed
by the court, ordering the defendant to abate or cease the violation or
authorizing the City to abate or correct the violation, or ordering that the
City’s cost for abatement or correction of the violation be entered as a
personal judgment against the defendant or assessed against the property where
the violation occurred, or both. If a defendant willfully violates the terms of
an order imposed by the court, the failure is contempt.
      5.   This section does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a
criminal citation for violation of a City Code or regulation if criminal
penalties are also provided for the violation, nor does it preclude or limit
the authority of the City to enforce the provisions of the Code of Ordinances
by criminal sanctions or other lawful means. Each day that a violation occurs
or is permitted to exist by the defendant constitutes a separate offense. The
violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any regulation
promulgated thereunder shall also constitute a simple misdemeanor punishable by
a fine of $100.00.
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2017)
1-3-3   SCHEDULED FINES.
The scheduled fine for a violation of any provision of the City Code shall be
in accordance with State Code Chapter 805 unless another scheduled amount is
provided in the City Code or Iowa Code.
CHAPTER 4
PROCEDURE FOR HEARINGS BY THE CITY COUNCIL
1-4-1   Purpose and Intent
1-4-2   General
1-4-3   Form of Notice of Hearing
1-4-4   Subpoenas
1-4-5   Conduct of Hearing
1-4-6   Method and Form of Decision
1-4-1   PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   1.   It is the purpose of this article to establish an orderly, efficient,
and expeditious process for evidentiary hearings before the City Council.
   2.   The provisions of this article shall apply to a proceeding required by
constitution, statute or Ordinance to be determined by the City Council after
an opportunity for an evidentiary hearing.
1-4-2   GENERAL.
   1.   Record. A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape
recording or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be
appropriate by the City Council.
   2.   Reporting. The proceedings at the hearing may also be reported by a
court reporter at the expense of any party.
   3.   Continuances. The City Council may grant continuances for good cause
shown.
   4.   Oaths, Certification. The City Council or any member thereof has the
power to administer oaths and affirmations.
   5.   Reasonable dispatch. The City Council and its representatives shall
proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before it. Due regard
shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of any parties or their
representatives.
1-4-3   FORM OF NOTICE OF HEARING.
The notice to parties shall be substantially in the following form, but may
include other information:
"You are hereby notified that an evidentiary hearing will be held before the
_________________ City Council at _____________ on the ______ day of
____________, 20___, at the hour ____________, upon the notice and order served
upon you. You may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be,
represented by counsel. You may present any relevant evidence and will be given
full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against you. You may
request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of books, documents or other things by filing an affidavit therefor
with the City Clerk."
1-4-4   SUBPOENAS.
Filing of affidavit. The City Council may issue a subpoena for the attendance
of witnesses or the production of other evidence at a hearing upon the request
of a member of the City Council or upon the written demand of any party. The
issuance and service of such subpoena shall be obtained upon the filing of an
affidavit therefor which states the name and address of the proposed witness;
specifies the exact things sought to be produced and the materiality thereof in
detail to the issues involved; and states that the witness has the desired
things in the witness's possession or under the witness's control. A subpoena
need not be issued when the affidavit is defective in any particular.
1-4-5   CONDUCT OF HEARING.
   1.   Rules. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules
relating to evidence and witnesses.
   2.   Oral evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or
affirmation.
   3.   Hearsay evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of
supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in
itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in
civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
   4.   Admissibility of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if
it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely
upon in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any
common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such
evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in
this state.
   5.   Exclusion of evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall
be excluded.
   6.   Rights of parties. Each party shall have these rights, among others:
      a.   To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues
of the hearing;
      b.   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;
      c.   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing;
      d.   To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the
witness to testify;
      e.   To rebut the evidence against the party; and
      f.   To self-representation or to be represented by anyone of the party's
choice who is lawfully permitted to do so.
   7.   Official notice.
      a.   What may be noticed. In reaching a decision, official notice may be
taken, either before or after submission of the case for decision, of any fact
which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state or of official
records of the City or its departments and Ordinances of the City.
      b.   Parties to be notified. Parties present at the hearing shall be
informed of the matters to be noticed, and these matters shall be noted in the
record, referred to therein, or appended thereto.
      c.   Opportunity to refute. Parties present at the hearing shall be given
a reasonable opportunity, on request, to refute the officially noticed matters
by evidence or by written or oral presentation of authority, the manner of such
refutation to be determined by the City Council.
   8.   Inspection of the premises. The City Council may inspect any building
or premises involved in the appeal during the course of the hearing, provided
that:
      a.   Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the
inspection is made;
      b.   The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the
inspection; and
      c.   The City Council shall state for the record, upon completion of the
inspection, the material facts observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom.
Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by
the City Council.
1-4-6   METHOD AND FORM OF DECISION.
   1.   Hearings before the City Council where a contested case is heard before
the City Council, no member thereof who did not hear the evidence or
alternatively has not read or listened to the entire record of the proceedings
shall vote on or take part in the decision. The City Council may designate a
member or members to preside over the receipt of evidence. Such member or
members shall prepare findings of fact for the City Council.
   2.   Form of decision. The decision shall be in writing and shall contain
findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the requirements
to be complied with. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the parties
personally or sent to them by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt
requested.
   3.   Effective date of decision. The effective date of the decision shall be
stated therein.
TITLE II
POLICY AND ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
CITY CHARTER
2-1-1   Charter
2-1-2   Form of Government
2-1-3   Powers and Duties
2-1-4   Number and Term of City Council
2-1-5   Term of Mayor
2-1-6   Copies on File
2-1-1   CHARTER.
This chapter may be cited as the Charter of the City of Cascade, Iowa.
2-1-2   FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The form of government of the City of Cascade, Iowa, is the Mayor-Council form
of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2-1-3   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The City Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by state law and by the
Ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City of Cascade, Iowa.
2-1-4   NUMBER AND TERM OF CITY COUNCIL.
The City Council consists of five City Council members elected at large,
elected for terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2; Ord. 20-24, passed 9-9-24)
2-1-5   TERM OF MAYOR.
The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2-1-6   COPIES ON FILE.
The City Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the
official records of the City Clerk, shall immediately file a copy with the
Secretary of State of Iowa, and shall keep copies of the charter available at
the City Clerk's office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)
CHAPTER 2
APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS OF MUNICIPAL OFFICERS
2-2-1   Creation of Appointive Officers
2-2-2   Appointment of Officers
2-2-3   Terms of Appointive Officers
2-2-4   Vacancies in Offices
2-2-6   Surety   
2-2-7   Blanket Position Bond
2-2-8   Bonds Filed
2-2-9   Boards and Commissions
2-2-5   Bonds Required
2-2-1   CREATION OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS.
There are hereby created the following appointive officers: City Clerk
(Treasurer), City Administrator, Attorney, Superintendent of Public Works,
Police Chief, and Fire Chief.
2-2-2   APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.
The Mayor shall appoint a Mayor Pro Tempore and shall appoint and may dismiss
the Police Chief with the consent of a majority of the City Council.
All other officers shall be appointed or selected by the City Council unless
otherwise provided by law or Ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4(2))
2-2-3   TERMS OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS.
The terms of all appointive officers that are not otherwise fixed by law or
Ordinance shall be two (2) years.
2-2-4   VACANCIES IN OFFICES.
Vacancies in appointive office shall be filled in accordance with State law.
2-2-5   BONDS REQUIRED.
Each municipal officer required by law or Ordinance to be bonded (Mayor, Clerk,
Treasurer and such officers and employees as may be necessary and advisable)
shall, before entering upon the duties of the office, execute to the City a
good and sufficient bond, to be approved by the City Council, conditioned on
the faithful performance of the duties and the proper handling and accounting
for the money and property of the City in the official's charge unless the City
Council shall have provided for a blanket position surety bond.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
2-2-6   SURETY.
Any association or corporation which makes a business of insuring the fidelity
of others and which has authority to do such business within Iowa shall be
accepted as surety on any of the bonds.
2-2-7   BLANKET POSITION BOND.
The City Council shall provide for a blanket position bond to cover all
officers and employees of the City, but the City Council may provide by
resolution for a surety bond for any other officer or employee that the City
Council deems necessary. The City shall pay the premium on any official bond.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
2-2-8   BONDS FILED.
All bonds when duly executed shall be filed with the Clerk, except that the
Clerk's bond shall be filed with the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23)
2-2-9   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   1.   Membership and Sections. Membership and selections of members of boards
and commissions shall be as specified in this Chapter or the Code of Iowa. Any
committee, board, or commission so established shall cease to exist upon the
accomplishment of the special purpose for which it was created, or when
abolished by a majority vote of the City Council or as specified in the Code of
Iowa.
   2.   Residency Requirement: No person shall be appointed or reappointed to a
committee, board, or commission or ad hoc committee created by such committee,
board, or commission unless such person is, at the time of such appointment or
reappointment, a resident of the City, and any person so appointed or
reappointed shall maintain such residency during the term of the appointment or
reappointment. Any member of a committee, board, or commission or ad hoc
committee created by such committee, board, or commission who fails to maintain
such residency shall be deemed removed as of the date of such change of
residency, any provision in this Code to the contrary notwithstanding.
   3.   Removal of Members of Boards and Commissions: The City Council may
remove any member of any board or commission, which it has established.
   4.   Gender Balance: Boards and commissions shall be gender balanced in
accordance with Section 69.16A (Iowa Code).
CHAPTER 3
POWERS AND DUTIES OF MUNICIPAL OFFICERS
2-3-1   General Duties
2-3-2   Books and Records
2-3-3   Deposits of Municipal Funds
2-3-4   Transfer of Records and Property To Successor
2-3-5   Powers and Duties of the Mayor
2-3-6   Powers and Duties of the Clerk(Treasurer)
2-3-7   Powers and Duties of the Police Chief
2-3-8   Powers and Duties of the City Attorney
2-3-9   Powers and Duties of the City Administrator
2-3-10   Powers and Duties of the Superintendent of Public Works
2-3-11   Powers and Duties of the Fire Chief
2-3-1   GENERAL DUTIES.
Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and Ordinance, or as otherwise directed by the City Council
unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
2-3-2   BOOKS AND RECORDS.
All books and records required to be kept by law or Ordinance shall be open to
inspection by the public upon request, except records required to be
confidential by state or federal law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.1, 22.2, and 22.7)
2-3-3   DEPOSITS OF MUNICIPAL FUNDS.
Prior to the fifth day of each month, each office or department shall deposit
all funds collected on behalf of the municipality during the preceding month.
The officer responsible for the deposit of funds shall take such funds to the
City Clerk, together with receipts indicating the sources of the funds.
2-3-4   TRANSFER OF RECORDS AND PROPERTY TO SUCCESSOR.
Each officer shall transfer to the official's successor in office all books,
papers, records, documents and property, together with an invoice of the same,
in the official's custody and appertaining to the official's office.
2-3-5   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.
The duties of the Mayor shall be as follows:
   The Mayor is elected for a term of two (2) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
   1.   The Mayor shall act as the chief executive officer of the City and
presiding officer of the Council; except for the supervisory duties delegated
to the City Administrator; supervise all departments of the City; give
direction to department heads concerning the function of the departments; and
have the power to examine all functions of the municipal departments, their
records and to all for special reports from department heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Section 372.14(1))
(Ord. 01-16, Passed February 8, 2016)
   2.   The Mayor shall act as presiding officer at all regular and special
City Council meetings. The Mayor pro tem shall serve in this capacity in the
Mayor's absence.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14(1) and (3))
   3.   The Mayor may veto an Ordinance, amendment, or resolution within
fourteen days after passage. The Mayor shall explain the reasons for the veto
in a written message to the City Council at the time of the veto. Within thirty
days after the Mayor’s veto, the City Council may pass the measure again by a
vote to not less than two-thirds of all of the members of the City Council. If
the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment, or resolution and the City Council
repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes effective
immediately upon repassage, and an Ordinance or amendment becomes a law when
the Ordinance or a summary of the Ordinance is published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the Ordinance or amendment.
If the Mayor takes no action on an Ordinance, amendment, or resolution, a
resolution becomes effective fourteen days after the date of passage and an
Ordinance or amendment becomes a law when the ordinance or a summary of the
Ordinance is published, but not sooner than fourteen days after the date of
passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the Ordinance or
amendment.
(Code of Iowa. Sec. 380.6)
(Amended during 2008)
   4.   The Mayor shall represent the City in all negotiations properly entered
into in accordance with law or Ordinance. The Mayor shall not represent the
City where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law or
Ordinance.
   5.   The Mayor shall, whenever authorized by the City Council, sign all
contracts on behalf of the City.
   6.   The Mayor shall call special meetings of the City Council when the
Mayor deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
   7.   The Mayor shall make such oral or written reports to the City Council
at the first meeting of every month as referred. These reports shall concern
municipal affairs generally, the municipal departments, and recommendations
suitable for City Council action.
   8.   Immediately after taking office the Mayor shall designate one member of
the City Council as Mayor pro tempore. The Mayor pro tempore shall be vice-
president of the City Council. Except for the limitations otherwise provided
herein, the Mayor pro tempore shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of
absence or inability of the Mayor to perform the duties of the office. In the
exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor pro tempore shall not have power
to appoint, employ or discharge from employment officers or employees without
the approval of the City Council. The Mayor pro tempore shall have the right to
vote as a member of the City Council. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14(3))
   8-1   The Mayor shall appoint the following officials upon City Council
approval:
Police Chief, Library Board of Trustees, Utility Board of Trustees
   9.   The Mayor shall, upon order of the City Council, secure for the City
such specialized and professional services not already available to the City.
In executing the order of the City Council the Mayor shall conduct said duties
in accordance with the City Ordinance and the laws of the State of Iowa.
   10.   The Mayor shall sign all licenses and permits which have been granted
by the City Council, except those designated by law or Ordinance to be issued
by another municipal officer.
   11.   Upon authorization of the City Council, the Mayor shall revoke permits
or licenses granted by the City Council when their terms, the Ordinances of the
City, or the laws of the State of Iowa are violated by holders of said permits
or licenses.
   12.   The Mayor shall order to be removed, at public expense, any nuisance
for which no person can be found responsible and liable. This order shall be in
writing. The order to remove said nuisances shall be carried out by the Police
Chief.
   13.   Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the
police and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a
time of emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor
has all the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
   14.   The Mayor is not a member of the Council and may not vote as a member
of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec 372.4)
   15.   The Mayor, together with the City Administrator, shall have the
authority to make or authorize necessary expenditures on behalf of the city or
city departments up to $500.00.
2-3-6   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CLERK (TREASURER).
The duties of the Clerk shall be as follows:
   1.   The Clerk shall attend all regular and special City Council meetings
and prepare and publish a condensed statement of the proceedings thereof, to
include the total expenditure from each City fund, within fifteen (15) days of
the City Council meeting.  The statement shall further include a list of all
claims allowed, a summary of all receipts and the gross amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4) and (6))
   2.   The Clerk shall record each measure taken by the City Council, stating
where applicable whether the Mayor signed, vetoed, or took no action on the
measure and what action the City Council made upon the Mayor's veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7(1))
   3.   The Clerk shall cause to be published either the entire text or a
summary of all Ordinances and amendments enacted by the City. "Summary" shall
mean a narrative description of the terms and conditions of an Ordinance
setting forth the main points of the Ordinance in a manner calculated to inform
the public in a clear and understandable manner the meaning of the Ordinance
and which shall provide the public with sufficient notice to conform to the
desired conduct required by the Ordinance. The description shall include the
title of the Ordinance, an accurate and intelligible abstract or synopsis of
the essential elements of the Ordinance, a statement that the description is a
summary, the location and the normal business hours of the office where the
Ordinance may be inspected, when the Ordinance becomes effective, and the full
text of any provisions imposing fines, penalties, forfeitures, fees, or taxes.
Legal descriptions of property set forth in Ordinances shall be described in
full, provided that maps or charts may be substituted for legal descriptions
when they contain sufficient detail to clearly define the area with which the
Ordinance is concerned. The narrative description shall be written in a clear
and coherent manner and shall, to the extent possible, avoid the use of
technical or legal terms not generally familiar to the public. When necessary
to use technical or legal terms not generally familiar to the public, the
narrative description shall include definitions of those terms.
The Clerk shall authenticate all such measures except motions with said Clerk
signature, certifying the time and place of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7(1) and (2))
   4.   The Clerk shall maintain copies of all effective City Ordinances and
codes for public review.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7(4))
   5.   The Clerk shall publish notice of public hearings, elections and other
official actions as required by State and City law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3)
   6.   The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district,
building lines, or fire limits, and a plat showing each district, lines or
limits to the recorder of the county containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
   7.   The Clerk shall be the chief accounting officer of the City and be
responsible for the safe custody of all funds of the City in the manner
provided by law, and Council direction.
   8.   The Clerk shall keep separate accounts for every appropriation,
department, public improvement or undertaking, and for every public utility
owned or operated by the City. Each account shall be kept in the manner
required by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20)
   9.   Following City Council adoption for the budget, the Clerk shall certify
the necessary tax levy for the following year to the County Auditor and the
County Board of Supervisors.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16(5))
   10.   The Clerk shall report to the City Council at the first meeting of
each month the status of each municipal account as of the end of the previous
month.
   11.   The Clerk shall balance all funds with the bank statement at the end
of each month.
   12.   The Clerk shall prepare the annual public report, publish it, and send
a certified copy to the State Auditor and other State officers as required by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
   13.   The Clerk shall maintain all City records as required by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(3) and (5))
   14.   The Clerk shall have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of
all writings or documents in which the municipality is a party in interest
unless otherwise specifically directed by law or Ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   15.   The Clerk shall file and preserve all receipts, vouchers, and other
documents kept, or that may be required to be kept, necessary to prove the
validity of every transaction and the identity of every person having any
beneficial relation thereto.
   16.   The Clerk shall furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy
of any record, paper or public document under the Clerk control when it may be
necessary to such officer in the discharge of the Clerk duty. The Clerk shall
furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by
City Council resolution. The Clerk shall, under the direction of the Mayor or
other authorized officer, affix the seal of the corporation to those public
documents or instruments which by Ordinance are required to be attested by the
affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7(4), Sec. 22.2 and 22.7)
   17.   The Clerk shall attend all meetings of committees, boards and
commissions of the City. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record
of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   18.   The Clerk shall keep and file all communications and petitions
directed to the City Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall endorse
thereon the action of the City Council taken upon matters considered in such
communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   19.   The Clerk shall issue all licenses and permits approved by the City
Council, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which shall show a
date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number, name of
person to whom issued, term of license or permit, and purpose for which issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   20.   The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or City
Council to offices in the municipal government of their position and the time
at which they shall assume the duties of their office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   21.   The Clerk shall preserve a complete record of every City election,
regular or special and perform duties required by law or Ordinance of the City
Clerk in regard to elections.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
   22.   The Clerk shall draw all warrants/checks for the City upon the vote of
the City Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   23.   The Clerk shall show on every warrant/check the fund on which it is
drawn and the claim to be paid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   24.   The Clerk shall keep a warrant/check record in a form approved by the
City Council, showing the number, date, amount, payee's name, upon what fund
drawn, and for what claim each warrant/check is issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   25.   The Clerk shall bill and collect all charges, rents or fees due the
City for utility and other services, and give a receipt therefor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   26.   Annually, the Clerk shall prepare and submit to the City Council an
itemized budget of revenues and expenditures.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16)
   27.   The Clerk shall keep the record of each fund separate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4) and 384.85)
   28.   The Clerk shall keep an accurate record for all money or securities
received by the Clerk on behalf of the municipality and specify date, from
whom, and for what purposes received.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   29.   The Clerk shall prepare a receipt in duplicate for all funds received.
The Clerk shall give the original to the party delivering the funds, and retain
the duplicate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   30.   The Clerk shall keep a separate account of all money received by the
Clerk for special assessments.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   31.   The Clerk shall, immediately upon receipt of monies to be held in the
Clerk's custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in banks selected
by the City Council in amounts not exceeding monetary limits authorized by the
City Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
2-3-7   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE POLICE CHIEF.
The duties of the Police Chief shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   1.   The Police Chief shall wear upon the Police Chief's outer garment and
in plain view a badge engraved with “Police”, and such uniform as may be
specified by the City Council.
   2.   The Police Chief shall assist prosecutors in prosecuting any persons
for the violation of an Ordinance by gathering all the facts and circumstances
surrounding the case.
   3.   The Police Chief shall be sergeant-at-arms of the Council chamber when
requested by the City Council.
   4.   The Police Chief shall report to the City Council upon activities as
Police Chief when requested.
   5.   The Police Chief shall protect the rights of persons and property,
preserve order at all public gatherings, prevent and abate nuisances, and
protect persons against every manner of unlawful disorder and offense.
   6.   The Police Chief shall have charge of the City jail when such is
provided and of all persons held therein. The Police Chief shall execute all
orders of the court referring to the jail. The Police Chief shall feed and
shelter persons jailed in the usual manner and as required by law. When no City
jail is provided, the Police Chief shall make arrangements to convey any
persons requiring detention to the County jail as provided by law and
agreements with the County.
   7.   The Police Chief shall, whenever any person is bound over to the
district court, convey the prisoner to the County jail.
   8.   The Police Chief shall execute all lawful orders of any board or
commission established by the City Council.
   9.   The Police Chief shall be in command of all officers appointed for
police work and be responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all
vehicles and equipment for the department.
   10.   The Police Chief may appoint one or more assistant Police Chiefs, with
approval of the City Council, who may perform the Police Chief's duties and who
shall be members of the police force.
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2014)
   11.   The Police Chief shall make such rules, not in conflict with the
provisions of this Ordinance, as needed for the detailed operation of the
police department, subject to the approval of the City Council. Such rules
shall cover off-duty and on-duty conduct and activity of members, the wearing
and care of the uniform, the use and practice with side arms and other police
weapons, the use of police radio and other communications, attendance at
training meetings and such other matters as the Police Chief determines to be
necessary for the operation of the police department. The Police Chief shall
see that the discipline and conduct of the department conforms to rules of the
department. In the event of an emergency the Police Chief may make temporary
rules for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the City and its
citizens until due consideration by the City Council may be had.
   12.   The Police Chief shall, when requested, aid other municipal officers
in the execution of their official duties.
   13.   The Police Chief shall report all motor vehicle accidents the police
department investigates in the regular course of duty to the Iowa Department of
Public Safety as provided by law.
   14.   The Police Chief shall keep a record of all arrests made in the City
by police officers. The Police Chief shall record whether said arrest was made
under provisions of the laws of the State of Iowa or Ordinances of the City.
The record shall show the offense for which arrest was made, who made the
arrest, and the disposition made of the charge.
At least every year the Police Chief shall review and determine the current
status of all Iowa arrests reported, which are at least one year old with no
disposition data. Any Iowa arrest recorded within a computer data storage
system which has no disposition data after four years shall be removed unless
there is an outstanding arrest warrant or detainer on such charge.
2-3-8   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY ATTORNEY.
The duties of the City Attorney shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   1.   Upon request, the City Attorney shall attend regular meetings of the
City Council and attend those special meetings of the City Council at which the
City Attorney is required to be present.
   2.   The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts,
forms and other writings which may be required for the use of the City.
   3.   The City Attorney shall keep in proper files a record of all official
opinions and a docket or register of all actions prosecuted and defined by the
City Attorney accompanied by all proceedings relating to said actions.
   4.   The City Attorney shall, upon request, give an opinion in writing upon
all questions of law relating to municipal matters submitted by the City
Council, the Mayor, members of the City Council individually, municipal boards
or the head of any municipal department.
   5.   The City Attorney shall prepare those Ordinances when the City Council
may desire and direct to be prepared and report to the City Council upon all
Ordinances before their final passage by the City Council and publication.
   6.   The City Attorney shall act as Attorney for the City in all matters
affecting the City's interest and appear on behalf of the City before any
court, tribunal, commission or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or
defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or City
Council.
   7.   The City Attorney shall, however, if directed by the City Council,
appear to defend any municipal officer or employee in any cause of action
arising out of or in the course of the performance of the duties of his or her
office or employment.
   8.   The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds
and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the
prosecution of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound
upon the same.
   9.   The City Attorney shall make a written report to the City Council and
interested department heads of the defects in all contracts, documents,
authorized power of any City officer, and Ordinances submitted to said City
Attorney or coming under said City Attorney's notice.
   10.   The City Attorney shall, upon request, after due examination, offer a
written opinion on and recommend alterations pertaining to contracts involving
the City before they become binding upon the City or are published.
2-3-9   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
The general duties of the office shall be to coordinate the activities,
policies and procedures of the City government. The Administrator shall be
directly responsible to the Mayor and Council for the administration of
municipal affairs as directed by the Mayor or Council. The department heads of
the City shall report and coordinate with the Administrator. All departmental
activity requiring the attention of the Council shall be brought before the
Council by the Administrator, and all Council involvement in administration
initiated by the Council shall be coordinated through the Administrator. This
does not preclude department heads or City employees from bringing matters to
the attention of the Mayor or Council. Without limiting the foregoing, the
duties of the Administrator shall include the following:
   1.   To supervise enforcement of City laws and assure that resolutions,
ordinances, laws and Council directives and operational policies are enforced
and executed, or referred to the proper official for compliance.
   2.   To attend meetings of the Council unless excused by the Mayor.
   3.   To recommend to the Council measures necessary or expedient for good
government and welfare of the City.
   4.   To provide general supervision and direction for the administration of
the City government to expedite efficient administration of the City’s
business.
   5.   To supervise and coordinate the performance of contracts for work to be
done for the City, and all purchases of material and supplies, ensure that
material and supplies are received and are of the quality and specification
called for by the contract, and to consult with department heads with reference
to said contracts.
   6.   To cooperate with and advise present or future administrative agencies,
boards or commissions which are responsible to the Mayor and the Council.
   7.   To coordinate with the Clerk and communicate with and keep the Council
fully informed of the financial condition of City departments and of their
financial management, progress, budgets, background or historical information,
future needs, goals and objectives in language and format for public
consumption.
   8.   To introduce new and approved methods for the elimination of wasteful
practices following modern municipal procedures and law requirements.
   9.   To perform administrative duties designated by resolution of the
Council.
   10.   To advise the Council on participation in programs and policies with
another government political subdivision, including city, county, state or
federal entities and/or which may be affected by court decisions, liability or
other related matters and suggest and coordinate City grant proposals.
   11.   To participate in public relations and public information activities
and programs to keep the public informed through speeches, attendance at
meetings and social gatherings and to provide information to the media.
   12.   To issue building permits pursuant to Chapter 155 of this Code of
Ordinances.
   13.   To make for the Council periodic itemized financial reports in writing
concerning current and completed projects.```
   14.   To assemble the department heads’ proposed annual departmental
budgets, which proposals shall include projected revenues, proposed
expenditures and salary requests. Such information shall be submitted to the
Clerk no later than February 1 of each year in order that the Clerk may submit
the completed proposed budget to the Council no later than February 15 of each
year. The City Administrator shall coordinate the final budget preparation with
the Clerk.
   15.   To coordinate with the Clerk to cause accurate records of the City to
be kept.
   16.   To designate one or more City employees to discharge the duties of the
office of City Administrator when the Administrator is absent from his or her
position or when the position is vacant. Said designation shall be subject to
Council approval.
   17.   To issue written order for removal, at City expense, any nuisance for
which no person can be found responsible and liable.
   18.   To obtain for the City, upon order of the Council, such specialized
and professional services deemed necessary by the Council and not already
available to the City.
   19.   To supervise the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance and
management of all City property, capital improvements and undertakings of the
City.
   20    To serve as City liaison with local economic development groups.
   21.   To serve as Zoning Administration officer to administer and enforce
the City Zoning Ordinance.
   22. To perform such other duties as the Council may direct.
2-3-10   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
The duties of the Superintendent of public works shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4)
   1.   The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of all storm sewers
in the City in accordance with the regulations of the department of public
works pertaining to the installation of storm sewers.
   2.   The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of water service
pipes and their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations
pertaining to water services in the City in accordance with this chapter. This
chapter shall apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well
as to new ones. The Superintendent shall make such rules, not in conflict with
the provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation of
the water system, subject to the approval of the Council.
   3.   The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of wastewater
service pipes and their connection to the sewer main and enforce all
regulations pertaining to wastewater services in the City in accordance with
this chapter.
   4.   The Superintendent shall supervise and maintain the City’s water and
wastewater facilities and systems.
   3.   The Superintendent shall supervise maintenance and repair of sidewalks,
alleys, bridges, and streets and keep them in a reasonably safe condition for
travelers. The Superintendent shall immediately investigate all complaints of
the existence of dangerous or impassable conditions of any sidewalk, street,
alley, bridge, underpass or overpass, or other city property, and is charged
with the duty of correcting unsafe defects.
   4.   The Superintendent shall, whenever snow or ice imperil travel upon
streets and alleys, be in charge of removing said snow and ice from the streets
and alleys in the City and shall do whatever else is necessary and reasonable
to make travel upon streets and alleys of the City safe.
   5.   The Superintendent shall compile and maintain written records of the
purchases, accomplishments, disposition of equipment and manpower, an up-to-
date inventory, and activities contemplated by the street department.
   6.   The Superintendent shall perform all other duties of a public works
nature which are not specifically assigned to other municipal officials or
employees.
2-3-11   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE FIRE CHIEF.
The duties of the Fire Chief shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   1.   The Fire Chief shall be charged with the duty of maintaining the
efficiency, discipline and control of the fire department. The members of the
fire department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire
Chief.
   2.   The Fire Chief shall enforce all rules and regulations established by
the City Council for the conduct of the affairs of the fire department.
   3.   The Fire Chief shall exercise and have full control over the
disposition of all fire apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by
or belonging to the fire department.
   4.   The Fire Chief shall cause to be kept records of the fire department
personnel, operating cost and efficiency of each element of fire fighting
equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number of responses
to alarms, their cause and location, and an analysis of losses by value, type
and location of buildings.
   5.   The Fire Chief shall make monthly written reports on or before the
fifth day of each month to the Mayor and City Council concerning the general
status and efficiency of the fire department, the number of alarms answered
during the month previous, and additional information that may be requested by
the Mayor or the City Council. The Fire Chief shall compile an annual report
based upon the records maintained by the fire department and summarizing the
activities of the fire department for the year. This report shall be filed with
the Mayor. The annual report shall also contain recommendations for the
improvement of the department.
   6.   The Fire Chief shall enforce all Ordinances and, where enabled, state
laws regulating the following:
      a.   Fire prevention.
      b.   Maintenance and use of fire escapes.
      c.   The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
      d.   The means and adequacy of exits in case of fire from halls,
theatres, churches, hospitals, asylums, lodging houses, schools, factories and
all other buildings in which the public congregates for any purpose.
      e.   The installation and maintenance of private fire alarm systems and
fire extinguishing equipment.
   7.   The Fire Chief shall have the right of entry into any building or
premises within the Fire Chief's jurisdiction at a reasonable time and after
reasonable notice to the occupant or owner. The Fire Chief shall there conduct
such investigation or inspection that the Fire Chief considers necessary in
light of state law, regulations or Ordinance.
   8.   The Fire Chief shall make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
   9.   The Fire Chief shall, at the request of the State Fire Marshal, and as
provided by law, aid said Marshal in the performance of the Marshal's duties by
investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
CHAPTER 4
SALARIES OF MUNICIPAL OFFICERS
2-4-1   Council Member
2-4-2   Mayor
2-4-3   Mayor Pro Tem
2-4-4   Other Officers
2-4-1   COUNCIL MEMBER.
The salaries of each City Council member shall be $50.00 for each meeting of
the City Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(8))
(Ord 4-15, 3-09-15)
2-4-2   MAYOR.
Compensation for Mayor in the City of Cascade, Iowa, beginning January 1, 2016
shall be Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per meeting, in addition to the annual salary
of Twelve Hundred ($1200.00).
(Ord 04-15, 3-09-15)
2-4-3   MAYOR PRO TEM.
If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor's
absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen days or more, the
Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation determined by the
City Council, based upon the Mayor Pro Tem's performance of the mayor's duties
and upon the compensation of the mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(8)
2-4-4   OTHER OFFICERS.
The compensation of all other officers and employees shall be set by resolution
of City Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
CHAPTER 5
CITY FINANCE
2-5-1   Budget Preparation
2-5-2   Budget Amendment
2-5-3   Reserved
2-5-4   Accounts and Programs
2-5-5   Annual Report
2-5-6   Council Transfers
2-5-7   Reserved
2-5-8   Budget Officer
2-5-9   Expenditures
2-5-10   Authorizations to Expend
2-5-11   Accounting
2-5-12   Budget Accounts
2-5-13   Contingency Accounts
2-5-1   BUDGET PREPARATION.
The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with
the following:
   1.   Proposal Prepared. The finance officer is responsible
   For preparation of the Annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and
Council and adoption by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor
and Council.
   2.   Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions, and
   Other administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and
administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the finance officer
for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such form as
required by the Council.
   3.   Submission to Council. The finance officer shall submit the
   completed budget proposal to the Council each year at such time as directed
by the Council.
   4.   Resolution Establishing Maximum Property Tax Dollars.
The Council shall adopt a resolution establishing the total maximum property
tax dollars that may be certified for levy that includes taxes for City
government purposes under Code of Iowa Section 384.1, for the City’s trust and
agency fund under Code of Iowa Section 384.6, Subsection 1, for the City’s
emergency fund under Code of Iowa Section 384.12, Subsections 8, 10, 11, 12,
13, 17, and 21, but excluding additions approved at election under Code of Iowa
Section 384.12, Subsection 19.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.15A)
      A.   The Council shall set a time and place for a public hearing on the
resolution before the date of adoption of the resolution and shall publish
notice of the hearing not less than 10 nor more than 20 days prior the hearing
in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general circulation in
the City.
      B.   If the City has an internet site, the notice shall also be posted
and clearly identified on the City’s internet site for public viewing beginning
on the date of the newspaper publication or public posting, as applicable.
Additionally, if the City maintains a social media account on one or more
social media applications, the public hearing notice or an electronic link to
the public hearing shall be posted on each such account on the same day as the
publication notice. All of the following shall be included in the notice:
         1.   The sum of the current fiscal year’s actual property taxes
certified for levy under the levies specified in this subsection and the
current fiscal year’s combined property tax levy rate for such amount that is
applicable to taxable property in the City other than property used and
assessed for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
         2.   The effective tax rate calculated using the sum of the current
fiscal year’s actual property taxes certified for levy under the levies
specified in this subsection, applicable to taxable property in the City other
than property used and assessed for agricultural and horticultural purposes.
         3.   The sum of the proposed maximum property tax dollars that may be
certified for levy for the budget year under the levies specified in this
subsection and the proposed combined property tax levy rate for such amount
applicable to taxable property in the City other than property used and
assessed agricultural or horticultural purposes.
         4.   If the proposed maximum property tax dollars specified under
Subparagraph (3) exceed the current fiscal year’s actual property tax dollars
certified for levy specified in Subparagraph (1), a statement of the major
reasons for the increase.
   5.   Proof of publication shall be filed with and preserved by the County
Auditor. The Department of Management shall prescribe the form for the public
hearing notice for cities and the form for the resolution to be adopted by the
Council under Paragraph C of this subsection.
      C.   At the public hearing, the Council shall receive oral or written
objections from any resident or property owner of the City. After all
objections have been received and considered, the Council may decrease, but not
increase, the proposed maximum property tax dollar for inclusion in the
resolution and shall adopt the resolution and file the resolution with the
County Auditor as required under Code of Iowa Section 384.16, Subsection 3.
      D.   If the sum of the maximum property tax dollars for the budget year
specified in the resolution under the levies specified in the subsection
exceeds 102 percent or the sum of the current fiscal year’s actual property
taxes certified for levy under the levies specified in this subsection, the
Council shall be required to adopt the resolution by a two-thirds majority of
the membership of the Council.
      E.   If the City has an internet site, in addition to filing the
resolution with the Auditor under Code of Iowa Section 384.16, Subsection 3,
the adopted resolution shall be posted and clearly identified on the City’s
internet site for public viewing within 10 days of approval by the City
Council. The posted resolution for a budget year shall continue to be
accessible for public viewing on the internet site along with resolutions
posted for all subsequent budget years.
   6.   Council review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may
make any adjustment it deems appropriate in the budget before accepting such
proposal for publication, hearing and final adoption.
   7.   Notice of Hearing. Following, and not until adoption of the resolution
required under Subsection 4 of this section, the Council shall set a time and
place for public hearing on the budget to be held before March 31 and shall
publish notice of the hearing not less than 10 nor more than 20 days before the
hearing. A summary of the proposed budget and a description of the procedure
for protesting the City budget under Section 384.19 of the Code of Iowa, in the
form prescribed by the Director of the Department of Management, shall be
included in the notice under this subsection 4 of this section must be filed
with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
   8.   Copies of Budget on File. Not less than 20 days before the date that
the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than 10 days
before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number
of copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of the taxpayers and
organizations, and have them available for distribution at the offices of the
Mayor and Clerk and the City Library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16 [2])
   9.   Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt,
by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall
certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor
and the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than,
but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget submitted at the
final hearing or the applicable amount specified in the resolution adopted
under Subsection 4 of this section. Two copies each of the detailed budget as
adopted and of the tax certificate must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
2-5-2   BUDGET AMENDMENT.
The City budget as finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes
effective July first and constitutes the City appropriation for each program
and purpose specified therein until amended. The City budget for the current
fiscal year may be amended for any of the following purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
   1.   To permit the appropriation and expenditures of unexpended,
unencumbered cash balances on hand at the end of the preceding fiscal year
which had not been anticipated in the budget.
   2.   To permit the appropriation and expenditure of amounts anticipated to
be available from sources other than property taxation, and which had not been
anticipated in the budget.
   3.   To permit transfers from the debt service fund, the capital
improvements reserve fund, the emergency fund, or other funds established by
State law, to any other City fund, unless specifically prohibited by State law.
   4.   To permit transfers between programs within the general fund.
The budget amendment shall be prepared and adopted in the same manner as the
original budget, and is subject to protest as provided in Section 2-5-3 of this
chapter, except that the City Finance Committee may by rule provide those
amendments of certain types or up to certain amounts may be made without public
hearing and without being subject to protest.
2-5-3   RESERVED
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2014)
2-5-4   ACCOUNTS AND PROGRAMS.
The City shall keep separate accounts corresponding to the programs and items
in its adopted or amended budget, as recommended by the State City Finance
Committee.
The City shall keep accounts which show an accurate and detailed statement of
all public funds collected, received, or expended for any City purpose, by any
City officer, employee, or other person, and which show the receipt, use, and
disposition of all City property. Public monies may not be expended or
encumbered except under an annual or continuing appropriation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20)
2-5-5   ANNUAL REPORT.
Not later than December first of each year the City shall publish an annual
report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year of all collections
and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all expenditures, the current
public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of the City for the current
fiscal year. A copy of this report shall be furnished to the Auditor of State.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
2-5-6   COUNCIL TRANSFERS.
When the City Clerk determines that one or more appropriation accounts need
added authorizations to meet required expenditures therein the City Clerk shall
inform the City Council or if the City Council upon its own investigation so
determines, and another account within the same programs has an appropriation
in excess of foreseeable needs, or, in the case of a clear emergency or
unforeseeable need, the contingency account has an unexpended appropriation
which alone or with the other accounts can provide the needed appropriations,
the City Council shall set forth by resolution the reductions and increases in
the appropriations and the reason for such transfers. Upon the passage of the
resolution and approval by the Mayor, as provided by law for resolutions, the
City Clerk shall cause the transfers to be set out in full in the minutes and
be included in the published proceedings of the City Council. Thereupon the
Clerk, and where applicable, the City Treasurer, shall cause the appropriation
to be revised upon the appropriation expenditure ledgers of the City, but in no
case shall the total of the appropriation of a program be increased except for
transfers from the contingency account nor shall the total appropriation for
all purposes be increased except by a budget amendment made after notice and
hearing as required by law for such amendments.
(IAC, Sec. 545.2.4(384,388))
2-5-7   RESERVED
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2014)
2-5-8   BUDGET OFFICER.
The City Clerk shall be the City budget officer and is responsible for
preparing the budget data in cooperation with the City Council or Mayor. The
City Clerk shall be responsible for carrying out the authorizations and plans
in the budget as set forth in the budget, subject to City Council control and
the limitations set out in this Ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
2-5-9   EXPENDITURES.
No expenditure shall be authorized by any City officer or employee except as
herein provided. All purchases of services, supplies and equipment shall be
made only after issuance of a purchase order and no invoice shall be accepted
unless authorized by such an order. Purchases not exceeding ten dollars
($10.00) (or an amount determined by City Council) may be made by those
officials authorized by the City Council but only on issuance of a spot
purchase order in writing signed by the authorized officer. A copy of such spot
purchase order must be delivered to the Clerk within twenty-four (24) hours,
weekends, and holidays excepted. All other purchases shall be valid only if a
purchase order has been given in writing and signed by the Clerk. Purchases
from petty cash shall be excepted.
2-5-10   AUTHORIZATIONS TO EXPEND.
All purchase orders other than those excepted herein shall be authorized by the
City budget officer after determining whether the purchase, if a major item,
has been authorized by the budget or other City Council approval. The Clerk
shall then determine whether a purchase order may be issued by checking the
availability of an appropriation sufficient to pay for such a purchase. A
purchase order may be issued only if there is an appropriation sufficient for
the purchase and for other anticipated or budgeted purposes. If no adequate
appropriation is available for the expenditure contemplated the Clerk shall not
issue a purchase order until a budget amendment to transfer of appropriation is
made in accordance with power delegated by City Council and within the limits
set by law and the City Council. The Clerk shall draw a warrant/check only upon
an invoice received, or progress billing for a public improvement, supported by
a purchase order and a signed receipt or other certification indicating the
material has been delivered of the quality and in the quantities indicated or
the services have been performed satisfactorily to the extent invoiced.
2-5-11   ACCOUNTING.
The Clerk shall set up and maintain books of original entry to provide a
chronological record of cash received and disbursed through all receipts given
and warrants written, which receipts and warrants shall be prenumbered, in
accordance with modern, accepted methods, and the requirement of the state. The
Clerk shall keep a general ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary
accounts and recording unappropriated surpluses. Warrants/checks shall be
signed by the City Clerk (and __________________#).
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20)
2-5-12   BUDGET ACCOUNTS.
The Clerk shall set up such individual accounts to record receipts by source
and expenditures by program and purpose as will provide adequate information
and control for budgetary purposes as planned and approved by the City Council.
Each individual account shall be maintained within its proper fund as required
by City Council order or State law and shall be so kept that receipts can be
immediately and directly compared with specific estimates and expenditures can
be related to the appropriation which authorized it. No expenditure shall be
posted except to the appropriation for the function and purpose for which the
expense was incurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20)
2-5-13   CONTINGENCY ACCOUNTS.
Whenever the City Council shall have budgeted for a contingency account the
Clerk shall set up in the accounting records but the Clerk shall not charge any
claim to a contingency account. Said contingency accounts may be drawn upon
only by City Council resolution directing a transfer to a specific purpose
account within its fund and then only upon compelling evidence of an unexpected
and unforeseeable need or emergency.
All administrative transfers shall be reported in writing at the next regular
meeting of the City Council after being made and the facts set out in the
minutes for the information of the Mayor and City Council.
CHAPTER 6
RESERVED
CHAPTER 7
CITY COUNCIL
2-7-1   Powers and Duties
2-7-3 Meetings
2-7-2   Exercise of Power
2-7-4   Appointments
2-7-1   POWER AND DUTIES.
The powers and duties of the City Council include, but are not limited to the
following:
   1.   General. All powers of the City are vested in the City Council except
as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2(1))
   2.   Wards. By ordinance, the City Council may divide the City into wards
based upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards or
create new wards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(7))
   3.   Fiscal Authority. The City Council shall apportion and appropriate all
funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order
payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street
improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement or repairs which
may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2(1), 384.16 & 384.38(1))
   4.   Public Improvements. The City Council shall make all orders for the
doing of work, or the making or construction of any improvements, bridges or
buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2(1))
   5.   Contracts. The City Council shall make or authorize the making of all
contracts, and no contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless
either made by ordinance or resolution adopted by the City Council, or reduced
to writing and approved by the City Council, or expressly authorized by
ordinance or resolution adopted by the City Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2(1) & 384.95 through 384.102)
   6.   Employees. The City Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number,
duties, term of office and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise
provided for by the State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
   7.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the City
Council shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, City Council members,
and other elected City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor
does not become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and
the City Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of
any elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of a
regular City election. A change in the compensation of City Council members
becomes effective for all City Council members at the beginning of the term of
the City Council members elected at the election next following the change in
compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(8))
2-7-2   EXERCISE OF POWER.
The City Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3(1))
   1.   Approved Action by the City Council. Passage of an ordinance,
amendment, or resolution requires an affirmative vote of not less than a
majority of the City Council members. A motion to spend public funds in excess
of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) on any one project, or a motion to
accept public improvements and facilities upon their completion also requires
an affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the City Council members.
Each Council member's vote on an ordinance, amendment or resolution must be
recorded.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2008)
   2.   Overriding Mayor's Veto. Within thirty (30) days after the Mayor's
veto, the City Council may repass the ordinance or resolution by a vote of not
less than two-thirds of the City Council members, and the ordinance or
resolution becomes effective upon repassage and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(2))
   3.   Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the City Council, other
than motions, become effective in one of the following ways:
      a.   If the Mayor signs the measure, a resolution becomes effective
immediately upon signing and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when
published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the measure.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(1))
      b.   If the Mayor vetoes a measure and the City Council repasses the
measure after the Mayor's veto, a resolution becomes effective immediately upon
repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when published unless a
subsequent effective date is provided with the measure.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(2))
      c.   If the Mayor takes no action on the measure, a resolution becomes
effective fourteen (14) days after the date of passage and an ordinance or
amendment becomes law when published, but not sooner than fourteen (14) days
after the day of passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within
the measure.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(3))
2-7-3   MEETINGS.
Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the City Council and other
provisions regarding the conduct of City Council meetings are contained in
Section 2-9-3 of this Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to
City Council meetings are the following:
   1.   Regular Meetings. The regular meetings of the Council are on the second
and fourth Mondays of each month at six o’clock (6:00) p.m. in the Council
Chambers at City Hall. If such day falls on a legal holiday or Christmas Eve,
the meeting is held on such different day or time as determined by the Council.
(Ord. 49-14, Passed July 28, 2014)
(Ord. 06-15, Passed April 27, 2015)
(Ord. 05-16, Passed February 8, 2016)
   2.   Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor
or upon the written request of a majority of the members of the City Council
submitted to the City Clerk. Notice of a special meeting shall specify the
date, time, place and subject of the meeting and such notice shall be given
personally or left at the usual place of residence of each member of the City
Council. A record of the service of notice shall be maintained by the City
Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(5))
   3.   Quorum. A majority of all City Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(1))
   4.   Rules of Procedure. The City Council shall determine its own rules and
maintain records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(5))
   5.   Compelling Attendance. Any three (3) members of the City Council can
compel the attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned or duly
called meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend
at once.   
2-7-4   APPOINTMENTS.
The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers,
duties, compensation, and term of office:
   City Clerk, City Attorney, City Administrator, Planning and Zoning
Commission, Parks and Recreation Board, Cable Regulatory Commission, Water
Superintendent, Sewer Superintendent, Zoning Board of Adjustment, Health
Officer.
CHAPTER 8
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-8-1   Planning and Zoning Commission
2-8-2   Term of Office
2-8-3   Meetings
2-8-4   Vacancies
2-8-5   Compensation
2-8-6   Powers and Duties
2-8-1   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
There shall be a City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to
as the Commission, consisting of seven (7) members. Members shall be bona fide
residents of the City, over the age of eighteen (18) years, and appointed by
the Council. Commission members shall be qualified by knowledge or experience
to act in matters pertaining to the development of a City plan, shall not be an
employee of the City, and shall not hold any elective office in the City
government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6, 414.23 & 392.1)
2-8-2   TERM OF OFFICE.
The term of office of the members of the Commission is three (3) years. The
terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2-8-3   MEETINGS.
The Board shall meet at regular intervals deemed by the Board to permit the
timely and appropriate handling of the work of the Board and all such meetings
shall be publicly posted and published as required by Iowa Code Section 21.4.
(Ord. 17-23, Passed 12-11-23)
2-8-4   VACANCIES.
If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or otherwise, a
successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as
the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2-8-5   COMPENSATION.
Members of the Commission shall receive such compensation as established by
resolution of the Council. Commission members not wanting to receive said
compensation shall submit a written statement to the City Clerk stating the
desire not to be compensated.
2-8-6   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Commission has and exercises the following powers and duties:
   1.   Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its
first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as
Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during
the Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   2.   Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   3.   Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the
Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts,
disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   4.   Appointment of Assistants. Subject to the limitations contained in this
chapter as to the expenditure of funds, the Commission may appoint such
assistants as it may deem necessary and prescribe and define their respective
duties and fix and regulate the compensation to be paid to the several persons
employed by it.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   5.   Comprehensive Plan. The Commission shall have full power and authority
to make or cause to be made such surveys, studies, maps, plans, or charts of
the whole or any portion of the City or of any land outside thereof which, in
the opinion of the Commission, bear relation to the comprehensive plan and
shall bring its studies and recommendations to the attention of the Council and
may also publish such studies and recommendations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.3)
   6.   Recommendations of Improvements. No statuary, memorial or work of art
in a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct, street fixtures,
public structure or appurtenances, shall be located or erected, or site
therefor obtained, nor shall any permit be issued by any department of the City
for the erection or location thereof until and unless the design and proposed
location of any such improvement shall have been submitted to the Commission
and its recommendations thereon obtained, except such requirements and
recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement
when the Commission after thirty (30) days’ written notice requesting such
recommendations, shall have failed to file same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   7.   Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of
subdivision or re-subdivisions of land embraced in the City or adjacent
thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions
of the same intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be
submitted to the Commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   8.   Review and Comment of Street and Park Improvements. No plan for any
street, park, parkway, boulevard, traffic-way, river front, or other public
improvement affecting the City plan shall be finally approved by the City or
the character or location thereof determined, unless such proposal shall first
have been submitted to the Commission and the Commission shall have had thirty
(30) days within which to file its recommendations thereon.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   9.   Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and
duties in preparing the City zoning regulations, and may from time to time
recommend to the Council amendments, supplements, changes or modification, all
as provided by Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
   10.   Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete and
exclusive authority to expend for and on behalf of the City all sums of money
appropriated to it, and to use and expend all gifts, donations or payments
whatsoever which are received by the City for City planning and zoning
purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   11.   Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power
to contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as
approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 9
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
2-9-1   Board Created
2-9-2   Organization
2-9-3   Meetings
2-9-4   Duties
2-9-5   Reports
2-9-6   Rules
2-9-7   Penalties
2-9-1   BOARD CREATED.
A Parks and Recreation Board is hereby created to advise the Council on needed
facilities to provide open space such as parks, playgrounds, and community
facilities for other forms of recreation. It shall also plan and oversee City
programs, and encourage other programs, for the leisure time of the City’s
residents of all ages.
2-9-2   ORGANIZATION.
The Board shall consist of five (5) members, all residents of the City,
appointed by the Council for overlapping five-year terms. The Board shall
choose its Chairperson and Vice Chairperson every two (2) years. Members shall
receive such compensation as established by resolution of the Council.
Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
2-9-3   MEETINGS.
The Board shall meet not less than once per month, at a regular time to be set
by the Board, the agenda for which shall be publicly posted and published as
required by Iowa Code Section 21.4.
(Ord. 18-23, Passed 12-11-23)
2-9-4   DUTIES.
In addition to its duty to make a plan for recreation and for the facilities
for recreation, and to update and revise these plans as required, the Board
shall have authority over the properties and personnel devoted to parks and
recreation, subject to the limitation of expenditures for salaries and
supplies, contracts, and capital outlays set forth in the annual budget
provided by the Council for parks and recreation operations. The Board shall
also be responsible for overseeing recreation programs in Cascade. The Board
shall cooperate with the Mayor in the allotment of time of City employees for
parks and recreation purposes. The Chairperson shall order supplies by the
procedures established by the Council for all departments of the City, and
payments will be made by check written by the Clerk for invoices submitted and
approved by the Board.
2-9-5   REPORTS TO COUNCIL.
The Board shall make written reports to the Council of its activities from time
to time as it deems advisable or upon Council request. Its revenues and
expenditures shall be reported monthly by the Clerk in the manner of other
departmental expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to each member of the
Board and in the Clerk’s report to the Council.
2-9-6   RULES.
The Board shall have the power to make rules and regulations for the use of
parks and other recreational facilities or for the conduct of recreation
programs, subject to the approval of the rules by the Council. Such rules shall
be either posted on the facility or otherwise publicized in a manner to provide
adequate notice to the using public.
2-9-7   PENALTIES.
Violation of a Board rule which have been approved by the Council and adopted
by ordinance may be cause for denial of use of a facility or participation in a
program, but such denial which extends more than one day may be appealed to the
Board or to the Council for a hearing. The violation may be prosecuted as a
misdemeanor if a serious offense.
CHAPTER 10
UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
2-10-1   Purpose
2-10-2   Board Established
2-10-3   Appointment of Trustees
2-10-4   Meetings
2-10-5   Compensation
2-10-6   Vacancies
2-10-7   Powers and Duties of the Board
2-10-8   Control of Funds
2-10-9   Accounting
2-10-10   Discriminatory Rates Illegal
2-10-11   Discontinuance of Board
2-10-1   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the operation of the municipally
owned electric and gas utilities by a board of trustees.
2-10-2   BOARD ESTABLISHED.
Pursuant to an election held March 25, 1940, the management and control of the
municipally owned electric utility were placed in the hands of a board of
trustees, and pursuant to an election held May 27, 1966, the Board of Trustees
of the Electric Utility and the Board of Trustees of the Gas Utility were
consolidated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2)
2-10-3   APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEES.
The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Council, three (3)
persons to serve as trustees for staggered six (6) year terms. No public
officer or salaried employee of the City may serve on a utility board. All
Trustees shall be bona fide residents of the City and over the age of eighteen
(18) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
2-10-4   MEETINGS.
The Board shall meet not less than once per month, at a regular time to be set
by the Board, the agenda for which shall be publicly posted and published as
required by Iowa Code Section 21.4.
(Ord. 19-23, Passed 12-11-23)
2-10-5   COMPENSATION.
The Council shall by resolution set the compensation of Board members. Board
members not wanting to receive said compensation shall submit a written
statement to the City Clerk stating the desire not to be compensated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
2-10-6   VACANCIES.
An appointment to fill a vacancy on the Board of Trustees shall be made in the
same manner as an original appointment except that such appointment shall be
for the balance of the unexpired term. (Code of Iowa, Sec 388.3)
2-10-7   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
The Board of Trustees may exercise all powers of the City in relation to the
City utility, City utilities, or combined utility system it administers, with
the following exceptions:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4)
   1.   Taxes, Ordinances and Bonds. The Board may not certify taxes to be
levied, pass ordinances or amendments, or issue general obligation or special
assessment bonds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[1])
   2.   Property. Title to all property must be in the name of the City but the
board has full control of such property subject to limitations imposed by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[2])
   3.   Reports to Council. The Board shall make a detailed annual report to
the Council including a complete financial statement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[3])
   4.   Proceedings Published. Immediately following a regular or special
meeting, the Board Secretary shall prepare and cause to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City a condensed statement of
proceedings including a list of all claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[4])
2-10-8   CONTROL OF FUNDS.
The Board shall control tax revenues allocated to it as well as all moneys
derived from operations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)
2-10-9   ACCOUNTING.
Utility moneys must be held in a separate utility fund, with a separate account
or accounts for each utility or combined utility system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)
2-10-10   DISCRIMINATORY RATES ILLEGAL.
A utility may not provide use or service at a discriminatory rate, except to
the City or its agencies, as provided in Section 384.91, Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.6)
2-10-11   DISCONTINUANCE OF BOARD.
A proposal, on motion of the Council or upon receipt of a valid petition, to
discontinue a utility board is subject to the approval of the voters of the
City, except that a board may be discontinued by resolution of the Council when
the City utility, City utilities, or combined utility system it administers is
disposed of or leased for a period of over five (5) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2)
CHAPTER 11
CABLE REGULATORY COMMISSION
2-11-1   Purpose
2-11-2   Commission Established
2-11-3   Term of Office and Compensation
2-11-4   Officers and Meetings
2-11-5   Powers and Duties
2-11-1   PURPOSE.
The Council desires to assure full compliance with its cable franchise, that
the franchise be interpreted and applied to the benefit of the City and its
residents, that quality and updated services be delivered throughout the City,
and that the public interest be protected in all matters relating to the cable
services delivery system.
2-11-2   COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
The Council hereby establishes a commission to be known as the Cable Regulatory
Commission. The Commission shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the
Council. In its appointments the Council shall endeavor to develop a commission
versed and competent in telecommunication administration, finances and
regulation. The Council shall appoint only bona fide residents of the City over
the age of eighteen (18) years and shall attempt to give preference to
applicants who possess professional or experiential backgrounds in law,
finances, administration, public relations or telecommunication technologies.
The City Administrator, city employees and anyone who is an owner, shareholder,
employee or agent of the City’s cable franchise holder or any prospective
franchise holder are ineligible to serve as a member of the Commission.
2-11-3   TERM OF OFFICE AND COMPENSATION.
The term of each member shall be three (3) years with terms expiring each June,
except those of the initial appointees, one of whom shall have a one-year term
and two appointees shall have two-year terms. If a vacancy occurs before the
expiration of a term, the appointment shall be for the unexpired portion of
that term. If the Council fails to make an appointment upon the expiration of a
term, the incumbent shall continue to serve until an appointment is made. If
any member fails to attend at least two-thirds (2/3) of the regularly scheduled
Commission meetings in a twelve-month period, the Commission may request the
Council to declare that member’s seat vacant. Attendance of all members shall
be entered in the minutes. Members shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council. Members not wanting to receive said
compensation shall submit a written statement to the City Clerk stating the
desire not to be compensated.
2-11-4   OFFICERS AND MEETINGS.
   1.   In odd-numbered years, the members shall elect a presiding officer from
among themselves, and an official secretary. The City Administrator shall be
advisor to the Commission and City staff shall perform secretarial and
administrative duties for the Commission as requested by the Commission.
   2.   The members shall meet on the third Wednesday of each month at 5:30 PM.
in the Cascade City Hall Council Chambers. The public meetings shall be video
recorded for broadcast on the Cascade Local Access Channel. A quorum of three
(3) members shall be required for members to conduct their business. All
meetings and proceedings of the Commission shall conform with applicable open
meeting requirements.
   3.   The presiding officer of the Commission may call a special meeting of
the Commission at his or her sole discretion. Such special meeting shall comply
with applicable open meeting requirements.
   4.   The Commission shall file with the Council a copy of the minutes of
each regular and special meeting within ten (10) days after such meeting.
2-11-5   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Commission has the following powers and duties:
   1.   To keep abreast of developments in cable technologies, services and
programming;
   2.   To become competent in cable regulation, finances and standards of
operation;
   3.   To act through the City Administrator as the local regulatory agent of
the cable franchise;
   4.   To develop policies for the day-to-day regulation and administration of
the cable franchise;
   5.   To encourage cordial relations between cable subscribers and the local
cable manager and his or her staff;
   6.   To develop policies for handling and resolving subscriber complaints
which could not be resolved satisfactorily by the cable manager;
   7.   To monitor the operation of the cable system;
   8.   To advise the Council regarding rates and possible revocation
procedures;
   9.   To advise the Council on any matter relating to the cable franchise or
system;
   10.   To consult with the City Administrator and the local cable manager on
the best updating of the cable system, services and programming, and to advise
the Council on expending the updating funds;
   11.   To advise the City Administrator in all matters relating to the
regulation of the cable system including the cable budget;
   12.   To evaluate its own proceedings and actions and all cable related
activities;
   13.   To submit an annual report to the Council regarding:
      A.   The state of cable regulation;
      B.   The state of cable services and technologies; and
      C.   Any recommendations it may have for the future of cable in the City;
   14.   To negotiate the terms and conditions of the cable television
franchise agreements, said agreements subject to final Council approval. All
administrative, personnel, accounting, budgetary and procurement policies of
the City shall govern the Commission in all of its operations.
CHAPTER 12
CITY ELECTIONS
2-12-1   Purpose
2-12-2   Nominating Method to be Used
2-12-3   Nominations by Petition
2-12-4   Adding Name by Petition
2-12-5   Preparation of Petition
2-12-6   Filing, Presumption, Withdrawals, Objections
2-12-7   Persons Elected
2-12-8   Reserved
2-12-1   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to designate the method by which candidates for
elective municipal offices in the City shall be nominated and elected.
2-12-2   NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.
All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the
provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
2-12-3   NOMINATIONS BY PETITION.
Nominations for elective municipal offices of the City may be made by
nomination paper or papers signed by not less than ten eligible electors,
residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
2-12-4   ADDING NAME BY PETITION.
The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than by
petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)
2-12-5   PREPARATION OF PETITION.
Each eligible elector shall add to the signature the elector's residence
address, and date of signing. The person whose nomination is proposed by the
petition may not sign it. Before filing said petition, there shall be endorsed
thereon or attached thereto an affidavit executed by the candidate, which
affidavit shall contain:
   1.   Name and Residence. The name and residence (including street and
number, if any) of said nominee, and the office to which nominated.
   2.   Name on Ballot. A request that the name of the nominee be printed upon
the official ballot for the election.
   3.   Eligibility. A statement that the nominee is eligible to be a candidate
for the office and if elected will qualify as such officer.
   4.   Organization Statement. A statement, in the form required by Iowa law,
concerning the organization of the candidate's committee.
Such petition when so verified shall be known as a nomination paper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.5)
2-12-6   FILING, PRESUMPTION, WITHDRAWALS, OBJECTIONS.
The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of validity
thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the effect of
such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency of such
petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed by the
appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.
2-12-7   PERSONS ELECTED.
The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office on the
ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.
2-12-8   RESERVED.
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2014)
TITLE III
COMMUNITY PROTECTION
CHAPTER 1
OFFENSES
3-1-1   Violations of Chapter
3-1-2   Public Peace
3-1-3   Public Morals
3-1-4   Streets
3-1-5   Public Safety and Health
3-1-6   Public Property
3-1-1   VIOLATIONS OF CHAPTER.
Commission of any of the acts named in the following sections by any person
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
3-1-2   PUBLIC PEACE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following:
   1.   Engage in fighting or violent behavior or invite or defy another person
to fight, provided that participants in athletic contests may engage in such
conduct which is reasonably related to that sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4(1))
   2.   Make unusually loud or excessive noise which results in the disturbance
of the peace and the public quiet of a neighborhood.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4(2))
   3.   Willfully permit upon any premises owned, occupied, possessed or
controlled by such person any unusually loud or excessive noise in such a
manner calculated to provoke a breach of the peace of others, or the public
quiet of the neighborhood.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4(2))
   4.   Direct abusive language or make any threatening gesture which the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction
by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4(3))
   5.   Without lawful authority or order of authority, disturb any lawful
assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the meeting or
assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4(4))
   6.   Without authority, obstruct any street, sidewalk, highway or other
public way.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4(7))
   7.   Without authority, solicit contributions, distribute literature, or
otherwise peddle or sell goods and services within the traveled portion of any
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(a))
3-1-3   PUBLIC MORALS.
Indecent exposure. It shall be unlawful for any person to expose such person's
genitals, pubes, female nipples, or buttocks to another or to urinate or
defecate in public or in view of the public.
3-1-4   STREETS.
   1.   Removal of safeguards or danger signals. No person shall willfully
remove, tear down, destroy, deface, or carry away from any highway, street,
alley, avenue or bridge any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article or
things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon for
the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said
highway, street, alley, avenue or bridge without the consent of the person in
control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.5)
   2.   Obstructing or defacing streets. No person shall obstruct, deface, or
injure any public road in any manner by breaking up, plowing or digging within
the boundary lines thereof, without permission from the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
   3.   Removal of Snow, Ice and Accumulations. Snow, ice and accumulations
shall be removed from sidewalks within 24-hours of the last accumulation. If a
property owner does not remove snow, ice or accumulations within a reasonable
time, the City may do so and assess the costs against the property owner for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(b and e))
(Ord. 30-16, Passed December 12, 2016
   4.   Removal of hydrant caps, sewer caps or manhole covers. No person shall
remove or carry away hydrant caps, sewer caps or manhole covers without the
consent of the person in control thereof.
3-1-5   PUBLIC SAFETY AND HEALTH.
   1.   Expectorating. No person shall expectorate on the ground or in any
structure within the City limits.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
   2.   Putting debris on streets and sidewalks. No person shall throw or
deposit on any street or sidewalk any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire,
cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris, or any other
substance, which the person knows or has reason to know may injure any person,
animal or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2014)
   3.   Carrying a concealed weapon. It shall be unlawful for any person to
carry under such person's clothes or concealed about their person or to be
found in possession of any slingshot, knuckles of metal or other material, air
gun or any other weapon other than a knife, unless licensed by the Iowa
Department of Public Safety or having in possession a valid permit from the
County Sheriff.
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2014)
   4.   False alarms. No person shall give or cause to be given any false alarm
of a fire, nor set fire to any combustible material, or cry or sound an alarm
or by any other means without cause.
   5.   Stench bombs. No person shall throw, drop, pour, explode, deposit,
release, discharge or expose any stench bomb or tear bomb, or any liquid,
gaseous or solid substance or matter of any kind that is injurious to persons
or property, or that is nauseous, sickening, irritating or offensive to any of
the senses in, on or about a theater, restaurant, car, structure, place of
business, or amusement, or any place of public assemblage, or attempt to do any
of these acts, or prepare or possess such devices or materials with intent to
do any of these acts. This provision shall not apply to duly constituted
police, military authorities, or peace officers in the discharge of their
duties, or to licensed physicians, nurses, pharmacists and other similar
persons licensed under the laws of this State; nor to any established place of
business or home having tear gas installed as a protection against burglary,
robbery or holdup, nor to any bank or other messenger carrying funds or other
valuables.
   6.   Discharging firearms and fireworks.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
      a.   No person, firm, or corporation shall discharge or fire any cannon,
gun, rifle, shotgun, revolver, paintball gun, bomb, pistol, air gun, crossbow,
bow and arrow, or other firearms or set off or burn firecrackers, torpedoes,
sky rockets, roman candles, or other fireworks of like construction or any
fireworks containing any explosive or inflammable compound, or other device
containing any explosive. This section does not apply to law enforcement
officers acting in the course of their duties.
      b.   The City Council may upon application in writing, grant a permit for
the display and use of fireworks by any organization or groups of individuals
when such fireworks display will be handled by a competent operator.
      c.   The City Council may, upon application in writing, grant a permit
for the operation of a firing range in which the discharge of firearms for
training, recreational or competitive events would be allowed upon showing that
the range would be under the direction of a competent organization, group or
individual.
      d.   In the interest of public health and safety and at such times as
approved by the Chief of Police, the police or their designee may use firearms
to control rodent or animal problems when it is evident that conventional
control methods have not resolved the problem.
      e.   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the use of blank
cartridges for a show or the theatre, or for signal purposes in athletic sports
or by railroads, or trucks, for signal purposes, or by a recognized military
organization and provided further that nothing in this section shall apply to
any substance or composition prepared and used for medicinal or fumigation
purposes.
      f.   Throwing and Shooting. It is unlawful for a person to throw, launch
or propel stones, bricks or missiles of any kind or to shoot arrows, rubber
guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB guns or other dangerous instruments or toys on
or into any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground or
public building, without written consent of the Cascade City Council.
   7.   Possession of Fireworks.
      a.   Definition. The term "fireworks" includes any explosive composition,
or combination of explosives, substances or articles prepared for the purpose
of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion or detonation
and includes blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman
Candles or other fireworks of like construction and fireworks containing any
explosive or flammable compound, or other device containing any explosive
substance. The term "fireworks" does not include gold star-producing sparklers
on wires that contain no magnesium or chlorate or perchlorate, flitter
sparklers in paper tubes that do not exceed 1/8 inch in diameter, toy snakes
that contain no mercury, or caps used in cap pistols.
      b.   Exemption. The use of blank cartridges for a show or the theater, or
for signal purposes in athletic events, or by railroads or trucks for signal
purposes, or by recognized military organizations is exempt from this
Subsection.
      c.   Prohibition. No person shall possess fireworks except as provided in
this Chapter.
(Editor’s Note: Please see Title III, Chapter 17, Fireworks, for Ordinance 4-
17, regarding the sale of fireworks).
   8.   Abandoned refrigerators. No person shall place, or allow to be placed,
any discarded, abandoned, unattended or unused refrigerator, ice box or similar
container equipped with an air-tight door or lid, snap lock, or other locking
device which cannot be released from the inside, in a location accessible to
children, outside any building, dwelling, or within an unoccupied or abandoned
building or dwelling, or other structure, under such person's control without
first removing the door, lid, snap lock, or other locking device from said
icebox, refrigerator or similar container. This provision applies equally to
the owner of any such refrigerator, icebox or similar container, and to the
owner or occupant of the premises where the hazard is permitted to remain.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
   9.   Impersonating an officer. No person shall falsely represent them self
or falsely assume to be any law enforcement officer, judge or magistrate. It
shall be unlawful to wear or adopt the uniform or insignia of any law
enforcement officer on any street or public place.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.2)
   10.   Harassment of City Employees.
      a.   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully prevent, resist or
obstruct or attempt to prevent, resist or obstruct any City employee from the
performance of any official duty.
      b.   It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate by any means, any
threat of bodily or property harm to any City employee or to any member of the
employee’s family during the course of, or as a result of, the performance of
any official duty by said City employee.
   11.   Antenna and radio wires. No person shall allow, locate or maintain any
antenna wires, antenna supports, radio wires or television wires to exist over
any street, alley, highway, sidewalk or public property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2))
   12.   Barbed wire. No person shall install, allow to be installed or use
barbed wire without the consent of the City Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
   13.   Playing in streets. No person shall coast, sled or play games on
streets or highways except in areas blocked off by the Chief of Police for such
purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
   14.   Littering Prohibited.
      a.   As used in this Code, “discard” means to place, cause to be placed,
throw, deposit or drop, and “litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse,
waste material and yard waste.
      b.   No person shall discard any litter within the City of Cascade,
except as provided and approved by the City of Cascade, by collecting and
discarding such litter in approved areas or approved receptacles.
      c   It is unlawful for any person to deposit or place any garbage,
rubbish, trash, refuse, waste material or yard waste in any street, alley,
lane, public place, private property, or body of water within the City.
      d.   It is unlawful to place garbage, refuse or yard waste on the private
property of another, or into another garbage, refuse or yard waste containers
for the purpose of being hauled away.   
      e.   It is unlawful to permit garbage, yard waste or refuse to remain for
more than ten (10) days on private property that is under one’s ownership,
possession or control. Yard waste may be retained more than ten (10) days if
composting is being completed.
      f.   Notwithstanding the above provisions, garbage, refuse or yard waste
may be placed on the untraveled portions of streets, alleys, lanes, public
places or on private property to be hauled away, provided the garbage, refuse
or yard waste is kept in place in the manner prescribed in this Code.
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2017)
   15.   Drug Paraphernalia.
      1.   Definitions. The term “drug paraphernalia” means all equipment,
products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or
designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act.
Includes, but is not limited to:
         a.   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planning,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
         b.   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;
         c.   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
         d.   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances;
         e.   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
         f.   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannite,
dextrose or lactose used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting
controlled substances;
         g.   Separating gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed
for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana;
         h.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devises used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
         i.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
         j.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
         k.   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use or designed for use in parenterally injected controlled substances into the
human body;
         l.   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
            (i)   Metal, wooden acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls,
            (ii)   Water pipes,
            (iii)   Carburetion tubes and devices
            (iv)   Smoking and carburetion masks
            (v)   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials,
such as marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held
in the hand,
            (vi)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials,
            (vii)   Chamber pipes,
            (viii)   Carburetor pipes,
            (ix)   Electric pipes,
            (x)   Air-driven pipes,
            (xi)   Chillums,
            (xii)   Bongs,
            (xiii)   Ice pipes or chillers
      A.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
      B.   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or anyone in control of the
object under any State or Federal law relating to any controlled substance;
      C.   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act;
      D.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
      E.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
      F.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom the owner knows,
or should reasonably know intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of
the Uniform Controlled Substances Act; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone
in control of the object as to direct violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act should not prevent a finding that the object is intended for
use, or as designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
      G.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
      H.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
      I.   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      J.    The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
      K.   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community such as a
licensed distributor of dealer of tobacco products;
      L.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprises;
      M.   The existing and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community;
      N.   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   3.   Prohibited Acts
      A.   Possession of Drug Paraphernalia. No person shall use or possess
with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, package, repackage, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
the Uniform Controlled Substances Act.
      B.   Manufacture or Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia. No person shall
deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver
drug paraphernalia, knowing or under circumstances where on reasonably should
know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze,
package, repackage, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
the Uniform Controlled Substance Act.
      C.   Advertisement of Drug Paraphernalia. No person shall place or accept
for placement in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication, any
advertisement, knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know
that the purpose of the advertisement in whole or in part is to promote the
sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
3-1-6   PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   1.   Defacing public grounds. No person shall cut, break or deface any tree
or shrub in a public park or on any avenue thereto by willfully defacing,
cutting, breaking or injuring, except by the authority of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2))
   2.   Injuring new pavement. No person shall injure new pavement in any
street, alley or sidewalk by willfully driving, walking or making marks on such
pavement.
(Code of Iowa, 364.12(2))
   3.   Destroying park equipment. No person shall destroy or injure any
property or equipment in public swimming pools, playgrounds or parks by
willfully defacing, breaking, damaging, mutilating or cutting.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2))
   4.   Injury to public library books or property. No person shall willfully
or recklessly tear, deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part,
any newspaper, periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other
property belonging to any public library or reading room.
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2014)
   5.   Defacing or destroying proclamations or notices. No person shall
intentionally deface, obliterate, tear down or destroy in whole or in part any
transcript or extract from or of any law of the United States or of this State,
or any proclamation, advertisement or notification, set up at any place within
the City by authority of law or by order of any court, during the time for
which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
   6.   Injury to gravestones or property in cemetery. No person shall
willfully or recklessly destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any tomb,
vault, monument, gravestone or other structure placed in any public or private
cemetery, or any fences, railing or other work for the protection,
ornamentation of said cemetery, or of any tomb, vault, monument or gravestone,
or other structure aforesaid, on any cemetery lot within such cemetery, or
willfully and maliciously destroy, cut, break or injure any tree, shrub, plant
or lawn within the limits of said cemetery, or drive outside of said avenues
and roads, and over the grass or graves of said cemetery.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2014)
   7.   Injury to fire apparatus. No person shall willfully destroy or injure
any engines, hose carriage, hose, hook and ladder carriage, or other things
used and kept for extinguishment of fires.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
   8.   Injury to city ambulance or paramedic apparatus. No person shall
willfully destroy or injure any ambulance or paramedic unit, equipment or other
things used to administer medical care.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
   9.   Obstructing or defacing roads. No person shall obstruct, deface or
injure any public road by breaking up, plowing or digging within the boundary
lines thereof, except by written authorization of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
   10.   Injury to roads, railways, and other utilities. No person shall
injure, remove or destroy any electric railway or apparatus belonging thereto,
or any bridge, rail or plank road; or place or cause to be placed, any
obstruction on any electric railway, or on any such bridge, rail or plank road;
or willfully obstruct or injure any public road or highway; or cut, burn, or in
any way break down, injure or destroy any post or pole used in connection with
any system of electric lighting, electric railway, or telephone or telegraph
system; or break down and destroy or injure and deface any electric light,
telegraph or telephone instrument; or in any way cut, break or injure the wires
of any apparatus belonging thereto; or willfully without proper authorization
tap, cut, injure, break, disconnect, connect, make any connection with, or
destroy any of the wires, mains, pipes, conduits, meters or other apparatus
belonging to, or attached to, the power plant or distributing system of any
electric light plant, electric motor, gas plant or water plant; or aid or abet
any other person in so doing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2014)
   11.   Tapping into Utility Transmission Cables. No person shall connect to
any transmission cable without first obtaining permission from the owner of the
cable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.8)
   12.   Obstructing ditches and breaking levees. No person shall divert,
obstruct, impede, or fill up, without legal authority, any ditch, drain, or
watercourse, or break down any levee established, constructed, or maintained
under any provision of law.
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
3-2-1   Definitions
3-2-2   Nuisances Prohibited
3-2-3   Other Conditions Regulated
3-2-4   Notice to Abate Nuisance or Condition
3-2-5   Contents of Notice to Abate
3-2-6   Method of Service
3-2-7   Request for Hearing and Appeal
3-2-8   Abatement in Emergency
3-2-9   Abatement by Municipality
3-2-10   Collection of Cost of Abatement
3-2-11   Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement
3-2-12   Condemnation of Nuisance
3-2-1   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this Ordinance, the following terms are defined:
   1.   NUISANCES DECLARED. The term "nuisance" means whatever is injurious to
health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the senses or an obstacle to the
free use of property, so as essentially to unreasonably interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property. Nuisances shall include, but not be
limited to, those activities and items hereinafter set forth in this section
below:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2017)
      a.   The erecting, continuing, or using any building or other place for
the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture, which by occasioning
noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other annoyances,
becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property of
individuals or the public.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2(1))
      b.   The causing or suffering any offal, filth, or noisome substance to
accumulate or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2(2))
      c.   The obstructing or impeding without legal authority the passage of
any navigable river, harbor, or collection of water.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2(3))
      d.   The polluting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of any
river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural
course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2(4))
      e.   The obstructing or encumbering by fences, buildings, or otherwise
the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places, or
burying grounds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2(5))
   (This is not an exclusive or exhaustive list of possible nuisances.)
      f.   Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution and
lewdness, gambling houses, or houses resorted to for the use of controlled
substances or houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the
peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2(6))
      g.   Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether erected and
constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and impair the
view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or
alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use
thereof, especially near intersecting streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2(7))
      h.   Cotton-bearing cottonwood trees and all other cotton-bearing poplar
trees in the City.
      i.   Any object or structure hereafter erected within 1,000 feet of the
limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or landing place,
which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation, including take-off and
landing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2(8))
      j.   The depositing or storing of inflammable junk, such as old rags,
rope, cordage, rubber, bones, and paper, by any person, including a dealer in
such articles, unless it be in a building of fire resistant construction.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2(9))
      k.   The emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2(10))
      l.   Weeds, brush. Any condition relating to weeds which is described as
a nuisance in the Cascade Municipal Code of Ordinances or under state law.
Dense growth of all weeds, grasses, vines, brush, or other vegetation including
grass over 8" in height in the City so as to constitute a health, safety, or
fire hazard including any City owned property between the abutting property
line and the street right-of-way. Any condition related to weeds described or
defined as a nuisance under the Code of Iowa or the City Municipal Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2(11))
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2017)
(Ord 7-18, July 9, 2018; Ord. 13-24, passed 6-24-2024)
      m.   Trees infected with Dutch elm disease.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2(12))
      n.   Effluent from septic tank or drain field running or ponding on the
ground in the open.
      o.   Any article or substance placed upon a street, alley, sidewalk,
public ground, or in any ditch, waterway, or gutter so as to obstruct the
drainage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
      p.   Accumulations of rubbish or trash tending to harbor vermin, rodents,
and rank growth of weeds or other vegetation and plants, which is conducive to
hazard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
      q.   Causing or suffering any refuse, garbage, obnoxious substances,
hazardous wastes, junk or salvage materials to be collected or to remain in any
place to the prejudice to others; causing or suffering any refuse, garbage,
obnoxious substances, hazardous wastes, junk or salvage materials or other
offensive or disagreeable substances to be thrown, left or deposited in or upon
any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, park, public square, public enclosure,
lot, vacant or occupied, or upon any pond or pool of water; except for compost
piles established and maintained with written permission from the County Public
Health Department and junk or salvage materials property stored in accordance
with the Cascade Municipal Code;
      r.   Diseased or damaged trees or shrubs. Any dead, diseased or damaged
trees or shrubs, which may harbor insects or diseased pests or diseases
injurious to other trees or shrubs or any healthy tree which is in such a state
of deterioration that any part of such tree may fall and damage property or
cause injury to persons.
      s.   Any ditch, drain or water course which is now or hereafter may be
constructed so as to prevent surface water and overflow water from adjacent
lands entering or draining into and through the same; any storm water detention
basis not maintained in an appropriate manner so as to allow its proper
function.
      t.   Stagnant water standing on any property, any property, container or
material kept in such condition that water can accumulate and stagnate.
      u.   Conditions which are conducive to the harborage or breeding of
vermin.
      v.   Infestations of vermin such as rats, mice, skunks, snakes,
starlings, pigeons, bees, wasps, cockroaches or flies.
      w.   Facilities for the storage or processing of sewage, such as privies,
vaults, sewers, private drains, septic tanks, cesspools and drainage fields,
which have failed or do not function property or which are overflowing, leaking
or emanating odors; septic tanks, cisterns and cesspools which are abandoned or
no longer in use unless they are empty and cleaned with clean fill; an evolved
cesspools or septic tank which does not comply with the County Department of
Health regulation.
      x.   Unoccupied buildings or unoccupied portions of buildings which are
unsecured.
      y.   Dangerous buildings or structures.
      z.   Abandoned buildings.
      aa.    Any hazardous thing or condition on property which may contribute
to injury of any person present on the property; hazards include, but are not
limited to, open holes, open wells, open foundation, dangerous trees or limbs,
abandoned and unsecured refrigerators or trapping devices.
      bb.   The storage, parking, leaving or permitting the storage, parking or
leaving of any inoperable or obsolete vehicle upon private property within the
City unless exempted herein. This section shall not apply to any vehicle
enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in
connection with a legal junk yard or automobile or truck-oriented use operated
in the appropriate zone and in compliance with the Cascade Municipal Code of
Ordinances.
      cc.    All junk yard or salvage operations except those permitted by
ordinance and operating in full compliance with the Cascade Municipal Code of
Ordinances.
      dd.   The open burning of trash, refuse, garbage, junk or salvage
materials, yard waste, leaves and tree trimmings shall be prohibited within the
City limits, provided, however, the City Council may designate up to three
weekends each year to allow City residents to burn leaves and tree trimmings in
accordance with the City’s Open Burning Policy. Outdoor cooking or burning of
wood is permitted if performed in a container constructed of steel, brick or
masonry and the fire is no larger than two feet in diameter. Additional open
burning may be permitted upon written request, only with the special permission
of the City Council provided the burning is in compliance with Open Burning
Policy guidelines established by the City in consultation with the Fire
Department.
      ee.   Any accumulations of ice, water and snow on public sidewalks, or
the failure to remove said accumulations within 48 hours after the creation of
such accumulations exist, shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated
pursuant to the provisions specified in the Cascade Municipal Code of
Ordinances.
      ff.   The parking of motor vehicles on private property without the
consent of the property owner or responsible party.
      gg.    Any nuisance described as such or declared by Chapter 657 of the
Code of Iowa.
      hh.   The sounding of any horn or other signaling device on any vehicle
on any street, public or private place within the City, except as a danger
warning, which makes a loud or harsh sound to the disturbance or annoyance of
any person and can be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet.
      ii.   The use of amplified sound creating a disturbance as outlined in
Title III Chapter 18 “Noise.” (Ord. 17-24, passed 8-12-24)
      jj.   Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing at any time or
place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in the
vicinity.
      kk.   The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration, repair or
construction of any building or other property between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m., except in the case of an emergency of a public health and safety
nature, with the approval of the City.
      ll.   No person shall obstruct, deface, destroy or injure any public
right-of-way in any manner by breaking up, plowing or digging within the right-
of-way without City permission.
      mm.   No person shall throw or deposit on any public or private property
any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish,
litter or any other debris or like substance which may injure or damage any
person, animal or vehicle or which may annoy, injure or become dangerous to the
health, comfort or property of individuals or the public.
      nn.   No person shall allow any plants to grow uncultivated and out of
context with the surrounding plant life when such plant has a seed head formed
or forming and with a height of 8 inches or more, nor shall any person allow
their grass to grow unattended with a consistent height above 8 inches.
      oo.   Causing or suffering any refuse, garbage, obnoxious substances,
hazardous wastes, junk or salvage materials to be collected or to remain in any
place that prejudices others.
      pp.   Causing or suffering any refuse, garbage, obnoxious substances,
hazardous wastes, junk or salvage materials or other offensive or disagreeable
substances to be thrown, left or deposited in or upon any street, alley,
avenue, sidewalk, park, public square, public enclosure, lot, vacant or
occupied.
      qq.   The storage of any appliances, scrap metal, indoor furniture,
broken furniture, used building material, unstacked wood, broken toys, broken
bicycles and tricycles, bathroom fixtures and similar objects visible from the
public right-of-way or adjoining property.
      rr.   Pools and ponds containing stagnant water.
      ss.   Pipes, lumber, drywall, flooring, roofing shingles and other
building material left on the property visible from the public right-of-way or
adjoining property for a period of time exceeding 72 hours.
      tt.   Rusty, deteriorated, dilapidated or unusable play equipment visible
from any adjoining property.
      uu.   Dilapidated dwelling units exhibiting peeling paint, untreated
wood, broken gutters, broken windows, dry rot, missing banisters, railings and
spindles, broken doors and the like creating an eyesore and offending members
of the public.
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2017)
      vv.   Any building or portion thereof with respect to which any of the
following conditions exist, individually or in combination:
         (1)   Infestation of insects, vermin, or rodents.
         (2)   General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
         (3)   Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal
facilities as determined by the Mayor or other authorized municipal officer.
         (4)   Accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter,
debris, garbage, offal, filth, stagnant water, or combustible materials and
similar materials; conditions constituting fire, health, or safety hazards; or
lack of adequate light, air, or heating or sanitary facilities (including
running water and operable plumbing), thereby rendering such building unfit for
human habitation, occupancy, and use.
         (5)   Roofing materials that are not sound, tight, or have defects
that permit water infiltration. Roof drainage that is inadequate to prevent
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the building.
Roof drains, gutters, and downspouts that are obstructed, in poor repair, or
with improper anchorage.
         (6)   Exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to foundation
walls, roofing materials, doors, windows, door and window frames, cornices,
porches, siding, and trim that exhibit rot, holes, breaks, cracks, or loose or
missing material. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, not
protected from the elements and decay paint or other protective covering or
treatment, or exhibiting peeling, flaking, or chipped paint. Siding and masonry
joints, as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of
windows, doors, and skylights that are not weather resistant or watertight.
         (7)   Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and similar appurtenances
in poor condition or repair.
         (8)   Broken exterior doors and broken windows.
         (9)   Likelihood of any portion or member or appurtenance of such
building failing or become detached or dislodged or partially or completely
collapsing.
         (10)   Standing water in basements, cellars, or crawl spaces.
         (11)   Inoccupancy for a period of more than six months so as to
constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance, a harborage
for vagrants, and/or hazard to the public.
      ww.   Any violation of
Title VII, Chapter 17 concerning garage sales wherein a visual nuisance is
created by said violation.
(Ord. 01-23, passed 1-9-23; Ord. 10-23, passed 9-25-23)
   2.   The term "property owner" means the contract purchaser if there is one
of record, otherwise the record holder of legal title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
3-2-2   NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public
or private, may be abated in the manner provided in this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
3-2-3   OTHER CONDITIONS REGULATED.
The following actions are required and may also be abated in the manner
provided in this Ordinance:
   1.   The removal of diseased trees or dead wood, but not diseased trees and
dead wood outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines upon the
public street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(b))
   2.   The removal, repair, or dismantling of dangerous buildings or
structures.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(c))
   3.   The numbering of buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(d))
   4.   The connection to public drainage systems from abutting property when
necessary for public health or safety.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(e))
   5.   The connection to public sewer systems from abutting property, and the
installation of sanitary toilet facilities and removal of other toilet
facilities on such property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(f))
   6.   The cutting or destruction of weeds or other growth which constitutes a
health, safety, or fire hazard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(g))
   7.   The maintenance, by the property owner, of all property outside the lot
and property lines and inside the curb lines upon public streets, including
maintaining a fifteen (15) foot clearance above the street from trees extending
over the streets, except as provided in Section 3-2-3(1).
3-2-4   NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE OR CONDITION.
Whenever the Mayor or other authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance
or other prohibited condition exists, the Mayor or officer may notify the
property owner as shown by the records of the County Auditor to abate the
nuisance within a reasonable time after notice. Notice and opportunity to abate
the nuisance is not required prior to bringing legal action.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2017)
3-2-5   CONTENTS OF NOTICE TO ABATE.
The notice to abate shall contain:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
   1.   A description of what constitutes the nuisance or other condition.
   2.   The location of the nuisance or condition.
   3.   A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the nuisance or
condition.
   4.   A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement.
   5.   A statement that if the nuisance or condition is not abated as directed
and no request for hearing is made within the time prescribed, the City will
abate it and assess the costs against such person.
3-2-6   METHOD OF SERVICE.
The notice may be sent by regular mail to the property owner as shown by the
records of the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2014)
3-2-7   REQUEST FOR HEARING AND APPEAL.
Any person ordered to abate a nuisance or condition may have a hearing with the
officer ordering the abatement as to whether a nuisance or prohibited condition
exists. A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the
officer/employee ordering the abatement within seven (7) working days of the
receipt of the notice or the right to a hearing shall be waived. If an appeal
is not filed as set forth herein, it will be conclusively presumed that a
nuisance or prohibited condition exists and it must be abated as ordered.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a written
decision as to whether a nuisance or prohibited condition exists. If the
officer finds that a nuisance or prohibited condition exists, the officer must
order it abated within an additional time which must be reasonable under the
circumstances. The property owner may appeal this decision by filing written
notice with the City Clerk within five (5) calendar days of the decision. This
appeal shall be heard before the City Council at a time and place fixed by the
Council. The findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance or
prohibited condition is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a
time reasonable under the circumstances.
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2017)
3-2-8   ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY.
If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing
maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may perform any action that
may be required under this chapter without prior notice, and assess the costs
as provided herein, after notice to the property owner under the applicable
provision of Sections 3-2-4 and 3-2-5 and hearing as provided in Section 3-2-7.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
3-2-9   ABATEMENT BY MUNICIPALITY.
If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to
abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping
an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall
be filed with the City Clerk, who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the
municipality.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
3-2-10   COLLECTION OF COST OF ABATEMENT.
The Clerk shall mail a statement of the total expense incurred to the property
owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown
by the statement has not been paid within one month, the City Clerk shall
certify the costs to the County Treasurer and they shall then be collected
with, and in the same manner, as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
3-2-11   INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT.
If the amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds $100, the
City may permit the assessment to be paid in up to ten annual installments, to
be paid in the same manner and at the same rate of interest charged delinquent
real estate taxes by the County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
3-2-12   CONDEMNATION OF NUISANCE.
The City may condemn a residential, commercial or industrial building found to
be abandoned and a public nuisance and take title to the property for the
public purpose of disposing of the property under Chapter 657A by conveying the
property to a private individual for rehabilitation or for demolition and
construction of housing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12A)
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2017)
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC CODE
3-3-1   Short Title
3-3-2   Definitions
3-3-3   Traffic Accident Reports
3-3-4   Police Department to Submit Annual Reports
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
3-3-5   Authority of Police and Fire Department Officials
3-3-6   Required Obedience to Provisions of this Chapter and State Law
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
3-3-7   Authority to Install Traffic-Control Devices
3-3-8   Chief of Police to Designate Crosswalks, Establish, and Mark Traffic
Lanes
3-3-9   Play Streets
SPEED REGULATIONS
3-3-10   Changing State Speed Limits in Certain Zones
TURNING MOVEMENTS
3-3-11   Turning Markers, Buttons and Signs
3-3-12   Authority to Place Restricted Turn Signs
3-3-13   Obedience to No-Turn Signs
3-3-14   "U" Turns
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
3-3-15   Authority to Designate One-Way Streets and Alleys
3-3-16   One-Way Streets and Alleys
3-3-17   Authority to Restrict Direction of Movement on Streets During Certain
Periods
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
3-3-18   Through Highways
3-3-19   Authority to Erect Stop Signs
3-3-20   Stops at Intersecting Through Highways and Other Intersections
3-3-21   Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
3-3-22   School Stops
3-3-22.1   Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk
3-3-22.2   Yield to Pedestrians
PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES
3-3-23   Pedestrian Crossing
3-3-24   Pedestrians on Left
3-3-24.1   Hitchhiking
METHOD OF PARKING
3-3-25   Standing or Parking Close To Curb
3-3-26   Standing or Parking on the Left-Hand Side of One-Way Streets
3-3-27   Signs or Markings Indicating Angle Parking
3-3-28   Obedience to Angle Parking Signs or Markings
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES
3-3-29   Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places
3-3-30   Authority to Paint Curbs and Erect Signs Prohibiting Standing or
Parking
3-3-31   Authority to Impound Vehicles
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
3-3-32   Parking Signs Required
3-3-33   Parking During Snow Emergency
3-3-34   All-Night Parking Prohibited
3-3-35   Truck Parking Limited
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
3-3-36   Vehicles Not to be Driven on Sidewalks
3-3-37   Clinging to Vehicles
3-3-38   Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited
3-3-39   Driving Through Funeral or Other Procession
3-3-40   Drivers in a Procession
3-3-41   Funeral Processions to be Identified
3-3-42   Load Restrictions Upon Vehicles Using Certain Streets
3-3-43   Truck Routes
3-3-44   Vehicular Noise
3-3-45   Engine and Compression Brakes
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
3-3-46   Definitions
3-3-47   Traffic Code Applies to Persons Riding Bicycles
3-3-48   Riding on Bicycles
3-3-49   Riding on Roadways and Bicycle Paths
3-3-50   Speed
3-3-51   Emerging from Alley or Driveway
3-3-52   Carrying Articles
3-3-53   Parking
3-3-54   Riding on Sidewalks
3-3-55   Lamps and Other Equipment on Bicycles
3-3-56   Towing and Improper Riding
3-3-57   Special Penalty
SNOWMOBILES
3-3-61   Snowmobile Definitions
3-3-62   Permitted Areas of Operation
3-3-63   Regulations
3-3-64   Equipment Required
3-3-65   Unattended Vehicles
3-3-66   Restriction of Operation
3-3-66A   Negligence
3-3-66B   Accident Report
3-3-67   Traffic Regulation
OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
3-3-68   Purpose
3-3-69   Definitions
3-3-70   General Regulations
3-3-71   Places of Operation
3-3-72   Negligence
3-3-73   Accident Reports
3-3-74   Equipment
3-3-75   Unlawful Operation
3-3-76   Parking
3-3-77   ATVs and UTVs Registered
GOLF CARTS
3-3-80   Purpose
3-3-81   Definitions
3-3-82   General Regulations
3-3-83   Places of Operation
3-3-84   Hours of Operation
3-3-85   Equipment
3-3-86   Unlawful Operation
3-3-87   Speed
3-3-88   Parking
3-3-89   Golf Carts Registered
3-3-90   Suspension of Permit
3-3-91   Penalty
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES
3-3-92   Notice of Fine Placed on Illegally Parked Vehicle
3-3-93   Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking
3-3-94   Local Parking Fines
3-3-95   Failure to Pay Parking Citations
3-3-1   SHORT TITLE.
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Traffic Code".
3-3-2   DEFINITIONS.
Where words and phrases used in this chapter are defined in Chapter 321 of the
Code of Iowa, such definitions shall apply to this Ordinance.
   1.   "Park and parking" means the stopping or standing of a vehicle, except
for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
   2.   "Stand or standing" means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, except for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
   3.   "Stop", when required means complete cessation of movement.
   4.   "Stop or stopping", when prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
   5.   "Business districts" means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway when fifty percent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of
three hundred feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
Specifically:
First Avenue from Johnson Street (Highway 136) to Pierce Street S.W.
   5a. “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway for a distance of two hundred feet in either direction from a school
house.
   6.   "Residential districts" means all areas of the City not included in
business districts.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
   7.   “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
3-3-3   TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of this City
shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of
Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the Chief of Police.
All such reports shall be for the confidential use of the police department and
shall be subject to the provisions of Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
The City shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
3-3-4   POLICE DEPARTMENT TO SUBMIT ANNUAL REPORTS.
The Police Chief shall prepare annually a traffic report which shall be filed
with the Mayor. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in
this City concerning the number of traffic accidents, the number of persons
killed or injured, the number and nature of violations, and other pertinent
traffic data including the plans and recommendations for future traffic safety
activities.
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
3-3-5   AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
Provisions of this chapter and the Iowa law relating to motor vehicles and law
of the road shall be enforced by the officers of the police department. The
officers of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic
by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of a
fire or other emergency, officers of the police department may direct traffic
as conditions require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
Officers of the fire department may direct or assist the police in directing
traffic threat or in the immediate vicinity.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
   1.   Peace Officer’s Authority. Any peace officer is authorized to stop any
vehicle to require exhibition of the driver’s motor vehicle license, to serve a
summons or memorandum of traffic violation, to inspect the condition of the
vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with reference to size, weight, cargo, bills of
lading or other manifest of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to
inspect the registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel
order, or permit of such vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
3-3-6   REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER AND STATE LAW.
Any person who shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order
of a police officer or direction of a fire department officer during a fire, or
who fails to abide by the provisions of this chapter and the applicable
provisions of the following Iowa statutes relating to motor vehicles and the
law of the road is in violation of this chapter. These sections of the Code are
adopted by reference:
   1.   321.17      Operating non-registered vehicle.
   2.   321.20B   Failure to prove security against liability.
   3.   321.32      Registration card, carried and exhibited.
   4.   321.34      Registration violation.
   5.   321.37      Failure to display registration plate.
   6.   321.38      Failure to maintain registration plate.
   7.   321.45      Failure to transfer title.
   8.   321.98      Operation without registration.
   9.   321.99      Improper use of registration.
   10.   321. 174   Failure to have valid a license or permit while operating a
motor vehicle.
   11.   321.174A   Operation of motor vehicle with expired license.
   12.   321.180   Violations of instruction permit limitations.
   13.   321.180B   Violation of graduated driver’s license
   14.   321.193   Violation of conditions of restricted license.
   15.   321.194   Violation of conditions of minor’s school license.
   16.   321.216   Unlawful use of license.
   17.   321.216B   Misuse of license of ID card to acquire alcohol
   18.   321.216C   Misuse of license or ID card to acquire tobacco
   19.   321.218   Driving without a valid license (as to simple misdemeanor
offenses only).
   20.   321.219   Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
   21.   321.220   Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
   22.   321.229   Failure to comply with lawful order of peace officer.
   23.   321.231   Failure of driver of emergency vehicle to exercise caution
while on emergency run (stop signs and signals).
   24.   321.232   Radar jamming devices.
   25.   321.234   Failure to observe seating requirements.
   26.   321.234A   ATV Violation
   27.   321.236   (Parking) Violation of local ordinance (not a state
offense).
   28.   321.247   Unlawful golf cart operation
   29.   321.256   Failure to obey traffic control device.
   30.   321.257   Failure to obey or yield to pedestrian or to official
traffic control signal.
   31.   321.260   Unlawful possession of, or interference with traffic control
device.
   32.   321.264   Striking unattended vehicle.
   33.   321.265   Striking fixtures upon a highway.
   34.   321.275   Motorcycle and motorized bicycles violations.
   35.   321.277   Reckless driving.
   36.   321.277A   Careless Driving
   37.   321.278   Drag racing prohibited.
   38.   321.284   Open Container driver >21.
   39.   321.284A   Open Container passenger >21.
   40.   321.285   Speed restrictions.
   41.   321.286   Truck speed limits (highway).
   42.   321.287   Bus speed limits (highway).
   43.   321.288   Failure to maintain control.
   44.   321.294   Failure to maintain minimum speed when directed by officer.
   45.   321.295   Excessive speed on bridge.
   46.   321.297   Driving on wrong side of two-way highway.
   47.   321.298   Failure to yield half of roadway upon meeting vehicle.
   48.   321.299   Passing on wrong side.
   49.   321.302   Improper overtaking on the right
   50.   321.303   Unsafe passing.
   51.   321.304   Unlawful passing.
   52.   321.305   Violating one-way traffic designation.
   53.   321.306   Improper use of lanes.
   54.   321.307   Following too closely.
   55.   321.308   Following too closely (trucks and towing vehicles).
   56.   321.309   Failure to use approved drawbar.
   57.   321.310   Unlawful towing of four-wheeled trailer.
   58.   321.311   Turning from improper lane.
   59.   321.312   Making U-turn on curve or hill.
   60.   321.313   Unsafe starting of a stopped vehicle.
   61.   321.314   Unsafe turn or failure to give signal.
   62.   321.315   Failure to give continuous turn signal.
   63.   321.316   Failure to signal stop or rapid deceleration.
   64.   321.317   Signal light requirements; see equipment violation.
   65.   321.318   Incorrect hand signal.
   66.   321.319   Failure to yield to vehicle on right.
   67.   321.320   Failure to yield upon left turn.
   68.   321.321   Failure to yield upon entering through highway.
   69.   321.322   Failure to obey stop or yield sign.
   70.   321.323   Unsafe backing on highway.
   71.   321.324   Failure to yield to emergency vehicle.
   72.   321.325   Pedestrian disobeying traffic control signal.
   73.   321.326   Pedestrian walking on wrong side of highway.
   74.   321.327   Pedestrian right-of-way.
   75.   321.328   Pedestrian failing to use crosswalk.
   76.   321.329   Vehicle failing to yield to pedestrian.
   77.   321.331   Soliciting ride from within roadway.
   78.   321.332   Unlawful use of white cane.
   79.   321.333   Failure to yield to blind person.
   80.   321.340   Driving in or through safety zone.
   81.   321.353   Unsafe entry into sidewalk or roadway.
   82.   321.354   Stopping on traveled part of highway.
   83.   321.358   Stopping, standing, or parking where prohibited.
   84.   321.360   Prohibited parking in front of certain buildings.
   85.   321.361   Parking too far from curb/angular parking.
   86.   321.362   Parking without stopping engine and setting brake.
   87.   321.363   Driving with obstructed view or control.
   88.   321.365   Coasting upon downgrade.
   89.   321.366   Improper use of median, curb, or controlled access facility.
   90.   321.367   Failure to maintain distance fire-fighting vehicle.
   91.   321.368   Crossing unprotected fire hose.
   92.   321.369   Putting debris on highway/roadway.
   93.   321.370   Removing injurious material.
   94.   321.371   Clearing up wrecks.
   95.   321.372   School bus provisions.
   96.   321.375   Unlawful passing of school bus
   97.   321.377   Excessive speed of school bus.
   98.   321.381   Driving or towing unsafe vehicle.
   99.   321.382   Operating underpowered vehicle.
   100.   321.383   Failure to display reflective device on slow-moving
vehicles.
   101.   321.384   Failure to use headlamps when required.
   102.   321.385   Insufficient number of headlamps.
   103.   321.386   Insufficient number of headlamps-motorcycles and motorized
bicycles.
   104.   321.387   Improper rear lamp.
   105.   321.388   Improper registration plate lamp.
   106.   321.389   Improper rear reflector.
   107.   321.390   Reflector requirements.
   108.   321.391   Improper type of reflector.
   109.   321.392   Improper clearance lighting on truck or trailer.
   110.   321.393   Lighting device color and mounting.
   111.   321.394   No lamp or flag on rear-projecting load.
   112.   321.395   Parking on certain roadways without parking lights.
   113.   321.397   Improper light on bicycle.
   114.   321.398   Improper light on other vehicle.
   115.   321.402   Improper use of spotlight.
   116.   321.403   Improper use of auxiliary driving lights.
   117.   321.404   Improper brake light.
   118.   321.408   Back-up lamps.
   119.   321.409   Improperly adjusted headlamps.
   120.   321.415   Failure to dim.
   121.   321.419   Improper headlighting when night driving.
   122.   321.420   Excessive number of driving lights.
   123.   321.422   Lights of improper color-front or rear.
   124.   321.423   Special light/signal provision.
   125.   321.423   (2) Unauthorized use of emergency vehicle lighting
equipment
   126.   321.423   (6) Failure to use flashing signal on slow moving vehicle
   127.   321.430   Defective braking equipment.
   128.   321.431   Brake performance ability.
   129.   321.432   Defective audible warning device.
   130.   321.433   Unauthorized use of emergency audible warning devices on
motor vehicle.
   131.   321.434   Use of siren or whistle on bicycle.
   132.   321.436   Defective or unauthorized muffler system.
   133.   321.437   Mirrors.
   134.   321.438   (1) Windshield & window – obstructed vision
   135.   321.438   (2) Dark window/windshield
   136.   321.438   (3) Windshield and window requirements
   137.   321.439   Defective windshield wiper.
   138.   321.440   Defective tires.
   139.   321.441   Unauthorized use of metal tire or track.
   140.   321.442   Unauthorized use of metal projection on wheels.
   141.   321.444   Failure to use safety glass.
   142.   321.445   Failure to maintain or use safety belts.
   143.   321.446   Failure to secure child.
   144.   321.449   Special regulations.
   145.   321.450   Hazardous materials.
   146.   321.454   Width and length violations.
   147.   321.455   Excessive side projection of load – passenger vehicle.
   148.   321.456   Excessive height.
   149.   321.457   Excessive length.
   150.   321.458   Excessive projection from front of vehicle.
   151.   321.459   Excessive weight – dual axels (each over 2000 lb. over).
   152.   321.460   Spilling loads on highways.
   153.   321.461   Excessive tow-bar length.
   154.   321.462   Failure to use required towing equipment.
   155.   321.463   Maximum gross weight.
   156.   321.466   Gross weight in excess of registered gross weight (for each
2000 lb. over).
(Ord. 3-17, Passed March 27, 2017)
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
3-3-7   AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
The Chief of Police shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic-control
devices when and as required under this chapter or other Ordinances of this
City to make effective their provisions, and may so cause to be placed and
maintained such additional, emergency, or temporary traffic-control devices for
the duration of an emergency or temporary condition as traffic conditions may
require, to regulate traffic under the traffic Ordinances of this City or under
State law or to guide or warn traffic.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all traffic-control devices
maintained by the department.
All traffic-control devices shall comply with current standards established by
the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways at the
time the control device is placed or erected.
Official traffic controls. Every driver shall observe and comply with the
directions provided by official traffic control signals at the following
intersections:
   1.   Intersection of First Avenue and Johnson Street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255 and 321.256)
3-3-8   CHIEF OF POLICE TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS, ESTABLISH, AND MARK TRAFFIC
LANES.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized:
   1.   To designate and maintain by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, due to traffic
conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or
roadway, and at such other places as traffic conditions require.
   2.   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as traffic
conditions require, consistent with the traffic Code of this City. Where
traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any
vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of a lane
except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful
turning movement.
3-3-9   PLAY STREETS.
The Chief of Police has the authority to declare any street or part thereof a
play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating
and helping to protect the same.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as
a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon the street or any portion
thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are
within the closed area, and then the driver shall exercise the greatest care in
driving upon the street or portion thereof.
SPEED REGULATIONS
3-3-10   CHANGING STATE SPEED LIMITS IN CERTAIN ZONES.
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation that the speed permitted by State law upon the following streets
or portions thereof is greater or less than is necessary for the safe operation
of vehicles thereon, and it is declared that the maximum speed limit upon these
streets or portions thereof described shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
   1.   Special 25 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles
per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts
thereof.
      a.   On First Avenue East from Johnson Street (Highway 136) to Taylor
Street;
      b.   On Second Avenue from Monroe Street to Fox Street;
      c.   On First Avenue West from Johnson Street (Highway 136) to McKinley
Street.
      d.   On Johnson Street (Highway 136) from First Avenue to the north City
limits.
      e.   On Industrial Street SE from 1st Avenue East to 2nd Avenue SE.
      f.   On 1st Avenue East from Johnson Street (Highway 136) to Van Buren
Street NE.
      g.   On 1st Avenue West from Johnson Street (Highway 136) to Garfield
Street NW.
(Ord. 25-16, Passed November 28, 2016)
   2.   Special 30 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      a.   On Johnson Street (Highway 136) from First Avenue to the south edge
of the community park.
   3.   Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of thirty-five (35) miles
per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts
thereof.
      a.   On First Avenue East from Taylor Street to Madison Street;
      b.   On First Avenue West from Johnson Street (Highway 136) to the west
city limits;
      c.   On McKinley Street SW from First Avenue to the south city limits;
      d.   On south bound lane of Tyler Street NE from the Tyler Street Box
Culvert to the north city limits at the intersection of the Highway 151 right-
of-way.
      e.   On Fox Street SE from 1st Avenue East to 2nd Avenue SE.
      f. On First Avenue East from Van Buren St NE to Jack Oak Dr. SE.
      g. On First Avenue West from Garfield Street NW to McKinley St.
(Ord. 26-16, Passed November 28, 2016)
      h.   On First Avenue East from Madison Street to First Avenue’s dead end
at the East City limits.
(Ord. 27-16, Passed November 28, 2016)
   4.   Special 40 Mph Speed Zones. A speed in excess of forty (40) miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      a.   On Industrial Park Road from 1st Avenue East, north 1,600 feet.
      b.   On Monroe Street NE from 1st Avenue East to Monroe Street’s dead end
at the Highway 151 right-of-way.
   5.   Special 45 Mph Speed Zones. A speed in excess of forty-five (45) miles
per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts
thereof.
      a.   On Second Avenue SE from Fox Street SE to the east City limits.
      b.   On Johnson Street SW from 4th Avenue SW to the Cascade Family
Medical Center, 805 Johnson Street SW.
      c.   On the west bound lane of 2nd Avenue SE from Jack Oak Drive SE to
Fox Street SE.
   6.   Special 55 Mph Speed Zones. A speed in excess of fifty-five (55) miles
per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts
thereof.
      a.   On Johnson Street SW from the Cascade Family Medical Center to the
south City limits.
   7.   Speed Regulations in Defined Districts and Areas.
      a.   Business District: A speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour
in the business district, unless specifically designated otherwise in this
chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285 [1])
      b.   Residence or School District: A speed in excess of twenty-five (25)
miles per hour in any school or residence district, unless specifically
designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285 [2])
      c.   Suburban District: A speed in excess of forty-five (45) miles per
hour in any suburban district, unless specifically designated otherwise in this
chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285 [4])
      d.   Cemeteries and Parking Lots: A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles
per hour in any public cemetery or parking lot, unless specifically designated
otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
TURNING MOVEMENTS
3-3-11   TURNING MARKERS, BUTTONS AND SIGNS.
The Chief of Police may cause markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or
adjacent to intersections, and thereby require and direct, as traffic
conditions require, that a different course from that specified by the State
law be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers,
buttons, or signs are so placed no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at
an intersection other than as directed and required by the markers, buttons, or
signs, including right-hand turns at intersections with automatic traffic
signals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
3-3-12   AUTHORITY TO PLACE RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.
The Chief of Police is authorized to determine those intersections, as traffic
conditions require, at which the drivers of vehicles shall not make a right or
left turn. The making of turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any
day, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on signs.
3-3-13   OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn is
permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such
signs.
3-3-14   "U" TURNS.
It shall be unlawful for a driver to make a "U" turn except at an intersection.
"U" turns are prohibited at intersections within the business district and at
intersections where there are automatic traffic signals.
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
3-3-15   AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
Whenever any traffic Code of this City designates any one-way street or alley
the Chief of Police shall cause to be placed and maintained signs giving notice
thereof and the regulation shall not be effective unless the signs are in
place. Signs indicating the direction of traffic movement shall be placed at
every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is
prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in
violation of markings, signs, barriers or other devices placed in accordance
with this section.
3-3-16   ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
Upon the following streets and alleys vehicular traffic shall move only in the
indicated direction:
   1.   Lincoln Street is northbound only from First Avenue to the alley
between First Avenue W. and Second Avenue N.W.
   2.   Lincoln Street is southbound only from First Avenue W. to Second Avenue
S.W.
   3.   Alley south of First Avenue is eastbound only from Lincoln Street to
Buchanan Street.
   4.   Buchanan Street is southbound only from First Avenue W. to Second
Avenue S.W.
   5.   Fillmore Street is southbound only from First Avenue E. to Second
Avenue S.E..
   6.   Second Avenue S.E. is eastbound only from Fillmore Street to Taylor
Street.
   7.   Polk Street S.E. is southbound only from First Avenue S.E. to Second
Avenue S.E.
3-3-17   AUTHORITY TO RESTRICT DIRECTION OF MOVEMENT ON STREETS DURING CERTAIN
PERIODS.
The Chief of Police is authorized to determine and recommend to the Council
certain streets, or specified lanes thereon, upon which vehicular traffic shall
proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during
another period of the day and shall, upon authority given by Ordinance, place
and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers, or other devices to give
notice thereof. The Chief of Police may erect signs temporarily designating
lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the
center line of the roadway.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of
markings, signs, barriers, or other devices placed in accordance with this
section.
The following streets may have variable laning or direction of traffic at
different times of day as marked by authorized signs under the provisions of
this section:
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
3-3-18   THROUGH HIGHWAYS.
Streets or portions of streets described below are declared to be through
highways:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345 and 321.350)
   1.   First Avenue (Highway 151) from the east City limits to the west City
limits;
   2.   Johnson Street (Highway 136) from the north City limits to the south
City limits.
3-3-19   AUTHORITY TO ERECT STOP SIGNS.
Whenever any Ordinance of this City designates and describes a through highway
it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to cause to be placed and
maintained a stop sign on each and every street intersecting through highway
except as modified in the case of intersecting through highways.
3-3-20   STOPS AT INTERSECTING THROUGH HIGHWAYS AND OTHER INTERSECTIONS.
At the intersections of through highways and at intersections upon streets
other than through highways, where, because of heavy cross-traffic or other
traffic conditions, particular hazard exists, the Chief of Police is hereby
authorized to determine whether vehicles shall stop or yield at one or more
entrances to the intersection and shall present recommendations to the Council,
and, upon approval of the Council, shall erect an appropriate sign at every
place where a stop or yield is required.
3-3-21   STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.
Notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
3-3-22   SCHOOL STOPS.
When a vehicle approaches an authorized school stop, the driver shall bring the
vehicle to a full stop at a point ten feet from the approach side of the
crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign, and thereafter proceed in a
careful and prudent manner until the driver shall have passed such school site.
3-3-22.1   STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk
area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do
so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right of way to any
vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
3-3-22.2   YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS.
Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping to yield to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or withing any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES
3-3-23   PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.
Pedestrians crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles on the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
3-3-24   PEDESTRIANS ON LEFT.
Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk
along and upon an adjacent roadway. Where sidewalks are not provided
pedestrians at all times when walking on or along a roadway, shall walk on the
left side of the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
3-3-24.1   HITCHHIKING.
No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
METHOD OF PARKING
3-3-25   STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and
with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches of the curb or
edge of the roadway except as provided in the case of angle parking and
vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
3-3-26   STANDING OR PARKING ON THE LEFT-HAND SIDE OF ONE-WAY STREETS.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way
street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction
of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within
eighteen inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as provided in the
case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
3-3-27   SIGNS OR MARKINGS INDICATING ANGLE PARKING.
The Chief of Police, as traffic conditions require, shall determine upon what
streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign the streets or
portions thereof indicating the method of angle parking. The determination
shall be subject to approval by Council resolution.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
3-3-28   OBEDIENCE TO ANGLE PARKING SIGNS OR MARKINGS.
Upon those streets or portions of streets that have been signed or marked for
angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an angle
to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated
by the signs and markings.
STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES
3-3-29   STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358)
   1.   On a sidewalk.
   2.   In front of a public or private driveway.
   3.   Within an intersection.
   4.   Within five (5) feet of either side of the point on the curb nearest to
a fire hydrant.
   5.   On a crosswalk. Within (30) thirty feet on either side.
   6.   Within ten (10) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of the roadway.
   7.   Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance when properly sign posted. Only
emergency personnel and authorized vehicles on fire station property.
   8.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
   9.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of street.
   10.   Opposite the entrance to a garage or driveway in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than twenty (20) feet of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
   11.   Upon any street or in any alley in any part of the City in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet
of the width of the roadway of such street or alley for the free movement of
vehicular traffic, except when necessary, in obedience to traffic regulations
or traffic signs, or signals of a police officer.
   12.   At any place where official signs or curb markings prohibit stopping,
standing or parking.
   13.   Within ten (10) feet of the crosswalk at all intersections within the
City.
   14.   In an alley under any fire escape at any time.
   15.   On the following specified streets or alleys:
      a.   Second Avenue S.W., on both sides from its intersection with
Buchanan Street to a point fifteen (15) feet both east and west of such
intersection;
      b.   Buchanan Street, on both sides from its intersection with Second
Avenue S.W. to a point fifteen (15) feet south of such intersection;
      c.   Alley between Buchanan Street and Pierce Street, on the south side;
      d.   First Avenue (Highway 151), on both sides from Cleveland Street to
Johnson Street (Highway 136);
      e.   Johnson Street (Highway 136), on both sides from First Avenue W.
(Highway 151) to the south corporate line;
      f.   Madison Street S.E., on the east side, from First Avenue East
(Highway 151) to Second Avenue S.E., Monday through Friday between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.;
      g.   Second Avenue N.W. on the south side, from Johnson Street (Highway
136) to Lincoln Street N.W.;
      h.   Nixon Street N.E. on both sides from the point it dead ends,
southerly for a distance of 50-feet;
      i.   North side of Fourth Avenue N.W. from its beginning at the Cascade
High School to its intersection with Johnson Street N.W. (Highway 136).
      j.   Sixth Avenue NW, on its north side, from Johnson Street NW to Cork
Drive NW.
      k.   Third Avenue SW, on its north side, from Johnson Street SW to Grant
Street SW.
      l.   Garfield Street SW, a 45 foot section on its east side, beginning at
a point 90 feet north of the Garfield Street SW and 4th Avenue SW right-of-way
line and ending 130 feet north of the Garfield Street SW and 4th Avenue SW
right-of-way line on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
      m.   Second Avenue SE on both sides from Monroe Street SE to Madison St
SE, on the north side from Madison Street SE to Adams Street SE, and the sought
side from Adams Street SE to Fox Street SE.
      n.   Third Avenue SW, on the north side of the street, from Hayes Street
SW, east 40 feet.
      o.   Hayes Street SW, on the west side of the street, from 3rd Avenue SW,
south 40 feet.
      p.   On the west side of Harrison Street SE from 1st Avenue East to 4th
Avenue SE and on the North side of 2nd Avenue SE from Harrison Street SE to
Monroe Street NE during the hours of 7:30 AM and 3:30 PM while school is in
session.    
      p.1   On the west side of Tyler Street SE from 2nd Ave SE to 3rd Ave SE
during the hours of 7:30AM and 3:30PM while school is in session.
(Ord. 10-18, Passed December 10, 2018)
      q.   4th Avenue NW on both sides, beginning at Johnson Street NW and
ending at a distance of 50’ east of the R.O.W. line from Johnson St NW.
(Ord. 44-13, Passed November 25, 2013)
      r.   Ten Minute Parking Zone. No person shall park a vehicle for more
than ten (10) minutes in the following 10 minute parking zone(s): In front of
the Cascade Public Library, 301 1st Avenue West between the hours of 9:00 AM
and 10:00 PM seven days per week.
      s.   Parking Limited to Two Hours. It is unlawful to park any vehicle for
a continuous period of more than two (2) hours between 7:00am and 5:00pm on any
day except Sunday and holidays upon the following street: First Avenue from
Pierce Street to Johnson Street (Highway 136).
      t.   The West side of Tyler Street NE from 1st Ave East to a point 162
feet North from the 1st Avenue Right of Way line.
(Ord. 02-24, Passed January 8, 2024)
      u.   The East side of Tyler Street NE from 1st Ave East to a point 21
feet North from the 1st Avenue Right of Way line.
(Ord. 02-24, Passed January 8, 2024)
      v.   The East side of Lincoln Street NW from 1st Avenue West to the south
side of the first alley north of this intersection. (Only December 1 to April
1)
(Ord. 02-24, Passed January 8, 2024)
3-3-30   AUTHORITY TO PAINT CURBS AND ERECT SIGNS PROHIBITING STANDING OR
PARKING.
When, because of restricted visibility or when standing or parked vehicles
constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when other traffic conditions
require, the Chief of Police may cause curbs to be painted with a yellow or
orange color and erect "no parking" or "standing" signs. It shall be unlawful
for the operator of any vehicle to stand or park a vehicle in an area so
painted or sign-posted. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than after
having first secured the permission of the Chief of Police, to paint any
curbing, sidewalk or street with yellow or orange colored paint or to erect "no
parking" signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(10))
3-3-31   AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.
Members of the police department are authorized to remove, or cause to be
removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, or highway to the nearest
garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the
police department, or otherwise maintained by the City, under the following
circumstances:
   1.   When a vehicle is upon a roadway and is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody or removal.
   2.   When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and constitutes a
definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
   3.   When any vehicle is left parked upon a street, alley or public property
for a continuous period of forty-eight hours or more. A diligent effort shall
first be made to locate the owner. If the owner is found, the owner shall be
given the opportunity to remove the vehicle.
   4.   When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on parking during
a snow emergency as proclaimed by the Mayor.
In addition to the penalties hereinafter provided, the owner or driver of any
vehicle impounded for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing charges and storage.
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
3-3-32   PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED.
Whenever by this or any other chapter of this City Code any parking time limit
is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets or portions of
streets it shall be the duty of the Police Chief to erect appropriate signs
giving notice thereof and the regulations shall not be effective unless signs
are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. When signs are
erected giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the restrictions stated
on such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236)
3-3-33    PARKING DURING SNOW EMERGENCY.
No person shall park, abandon, or leave unattended any vehicle on any public
street, alley, or City-owned off-street parking area during any snow emergency
proclaimed by the Mayor or City Administrator unless the snow has been removed
or plowed from said street, alley or parking area and the snow has ceased to
fall. Vehicles parked on the street or alley during a snow emergency are
subject to tow or a citation pursuant to Cascade Code
3-3-94 at the owners' expense. The City will first attempt to make contact with
the owner, if the owner can be determined. A snow emergency parking ban shall
continue during its proclamation timeframe.
The ban shall be of uniform application and the Chief of Police is directed to
publicize the requirements widely, using all available news media prior to the
start time of each event. When predictions or occurrences indicate the need,
the Mayor or City Administrator shall proclaim a snow emergency and the Police
Chief shall inform the news media to publicize the proclamation and the parking
rules under the emergency. Such emergency may be extended or shortened when
conditions warrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236)
(Ord. 21-23, Passed 12-11-23)
3-3-34   ALL-NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED.
No person, except physicians or other persons on emergency calls, shall park a
vehicle on any street marked to prohibit all night parking and giving notice
thereof, for a period of time longer than thirty minutes between the hours of 2
a.m. and 5 a.m. of any day.
3-3-35   TRUCK PARKING LIMITED.
Trucks licensed for five tons or more shall not be parked at the following
locations on the streets named:
   1.   Business District. No person shall park a truck weighing five (5) tons
or more, loaded or empty, on First Avenue from Fillmore Street to Johnson
Street.
   2.   Residential Districts. No motor truck, semi-trailer, trailer, special
mobile equipment, truck or van with a one ton or heavier chassis shall be
parked or permitted to stand in front of any residential property or lots.
However, such parking or standing is permitted on a temporary basis for loading
or unloading of said vehicle or, if a service vehicle, while services are being
performed at such residence or for the City.
   3.   Noise. No such vehicle shall be left standing or parked upon any
street, alley, public parking lot, or drive of any service station between the
hours of eleven o’clock (11:00) p.m. and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. with the
engine, auxiliary engine, air compressor, refrigerating equipment or other
device in operation giving off audible sounds excepting only the drive of a
service station when actually being serviced, and then in no event for more
than thirty (30) minutes.
   4.   Livestock. No such vehicle containing livestock shall be parked on any
street, alley or highway for a period of time of more than thirty (30) minutes.
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
3-3-36   VEHICLES NOT TO BE DRIVEN ON SIDEWALKS.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area.
3-3-37   CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of this City unless all
passengers of the vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person shall ride on the running board of a motor
vehicle or in any other place not customarily used for carrying passengers. No
person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle
shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
3-3-38   PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
No person shall park a vehicle upon the roadway for the principal purpose of:
   1.   Displaying such vehicle for sale.
   2.   Displaying advertising.
   3.   Selling merchandise from the vehicle except in a duly established
market place or when so authorized or licensed under the Ordinances of this
City.
   4.   Storage or as junk or dead storage for more than forty-eight hours.
   5.   Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such
vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
3-3-39   DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION.
No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles
are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall
not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control
signals or police officers.
3-3-40   DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-
hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as
closely as is practical and safe.
3-3-41   FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED.
A funeral procession composed of vehicles shall be identified as such by the
display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying
insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the
police department.
3-3-42   LOAD RESTRICTIONS UPON VEHICLES USING CERTAIN STREETS.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
vehicle licensed in excess of the amounts specified on the signs at any time
upon any of the following streets within the City and none other:
Second Avenue SE from Monroe Street to Washington Street SE (10 ton limit)
(Ord 11-19, Passed 9-23-19)
3-3-43   TRUCK ROUTES.
   1.   Every motor vehicle licensed weighing ten (10) tons or more, having no
fixed terminal within the City or making no scheduled or definite stops within
the City for the purpose of loading or unloading, shall travel over or upon the
following streets within the City and none other:
      a.   Fox Street S.E., from First Ave S.E. to Second Avenue S.E.;
      b.   Second Avenue S.E., from Fox Street S.E., to the East City limits.
(Ord 12-19, Sept 23, 2019)
   3.   The owner, or any other person, employing or otherwise directing the
driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly permit the operation of
such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to this section.
   4.   Restricted Street. Second Avenue S.E. from Monroe Street to Washington
Street is hereby designated as a restricted street and such street shall be
restricted to automobiles and pickup trucks. Any other vehicle is prohibited
except for local pickup and delivery on said street.
3-3-44   VEHICULAR NOISE.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause any
disturbing, excessive or offensive noise which results in discomfort or
annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity by means of radio,
compact disk player, stereo, speakers, cassette tape player or similar sound
device in a motor vehicle.
   2.   The operation of any radio, compact disk player, stereo, speakers,
cassette tape player or similar sound device in such a manner so as to be
audible at a distance of two hundred (200') from the motor vehicle shall
constitute evidence of a prima facie violation of this section.
3-3-45   ENGINE AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or
cause to be used or operated within the corporate city limits of Cascade, Iowa,
any engine brake, compression brake or mechanical exhaust device designed to
aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle that results in excessive,
loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle, unless such use is
necessary to avoid imminent danger.
   2.   Signs stating “ENGINE BRAKE ORDINANCE ENFORCED” shall be installed at
locations at the entry points to the City of Cascade and at any other areas
deemed appropriate throughout the City of Cascade.
   3.   Emergency vehicles shall be exempt from the provisions of this
ordinance.
(Ord. 10-15, Passed November 23, 2015)
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
3-3-46   DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Bicycles” shall mean either of the following:
      a.   A device having two wheels and having at least one saddle or seat
for the use of a rider which is propelled by human power.
      b.   A device having two or more wheels with fully operable peddles and
an electric motor less than seven hundred fifty watts (one horsepower), whose
maximum speed on a paved level surface, when powered solely by such a motor
while ridden, is less than twenty miles per hour.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2008)
3-3-47   TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to drivers of vehicles by
the laws of this State regarding rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by
the traffic Ordinances of this City applicable to drivers of vehicles, except
as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Whenever
a person dismounts from a bicycle such person shall be subject to all
regulations applicable to pedestrians.
3-3-48   RIDING ON BICYCLES.
A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and
regular seat.
No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for
which it is designed and equipped.
3-3-49   RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the
right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing
a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast
except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway,
bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
3-3-50   SPEED.
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under existing conditions.
3-3-51   EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
The operators of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall,
upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway,
yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or
sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to
all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
3-3-52   CARRYING ARTICLES.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which
prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars.
3-3-53   PARKING.
Bicycles shall be parked upon the roadway of a street against the curb, or upon
the sidewalk in a rack to support bicycles, or against a building, or at the
curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian
traffic.
3-3-54   RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
No person shall ride a bicycle on a sidewalk within a business district.
When signs are erected on a sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of
bicycles on the sidewalk or roadway, no person shall disobey such signs.
Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person shall yield
the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give a timely audible signal
before overtaking and passing a pedestrian.
3-3-55   LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front that emits a white light visible from a distance of at least 300 feet to
the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type that is visible from
all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red
light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear may be used in addition
to the red ref lector.
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to
make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
3-3-56   TOWING AND IMPROPER RIDING.
   1.   Towing. It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or
to tow any other vehicle upon the streets of the City.
   2.   Improper Riding. No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or
reckless manner such as zigzagging, stunting, speeding or otherwise so as to
disregard the safety of the operator or others.
3-3-57   SPECIAL PENALTY.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the
scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty provided for violations of
the Code of Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle to be impounded by the City
for not less than five (5) days for the first offense, ten (10) days for a
second offense and thirty (30) days for a third offense.
(Ordinance 52-04, 2-9-04)
SNOWMOBILES
3-3-61   SNOWMOBILE DEFINITIONS.
   1.   "Snowmobile" means a self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow
or ice in a natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners.
   2.   "Operate" means to control the operation of a snowmobile.
   3.   "Operator" means a person who operates or is in actual control of a
snowmobile.
3-3-62   PERMITTED AREAS OF OPERATION.
Snowmobiles will be allowed to operate in the City as follows:
The route established herein shall be the only permitted snowmobile route and
the snowmobiles shall be operated within the roadways of said public streets
and shall also be subject to the following regulations.
   1.   Streets. Snowmobiles may be operated only upon streets which have not
been plowed during the snow season and on such other streets as may be
designated by resolution of the council.
   2.   Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only
under emergencies.
3-3-63   REGULATIONS.
No person shall operate a snowmobile within the city unless the person is at
least eighteen (18) years of age, possesses a valid driver’s license and
possesses a City of Cascade permit for the operation of a snowmobile within the
city in accordance of this chapter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile under the following
circumstances:
   1.   On private property of another without the express permission to do so
by the owner or occupant of said property.
   2.   On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, or any city owned
property without express permission to do so by the proper public authority.
   3.   In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to
disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
   4.   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the
safety of any person or property of any other person.
   5.   Without having such snowmobile registered as provided for by Iowa
Statute except that this provision shall not apply to the operation of a
snowmobile on the private property of the owner by the owner or a member of his
immediate family.
   6.   Within the right-of-way of any public street or alley within the City.
   7.   No person shall operate a snowmobile in the City from twelve o’ clock
(12) a.m. to eight o’clock (8:00) a.m., except for the emergency situations.
   8.   No snowmobile shall carry more passengers than which the snowmobile is
designed.
   9.   No cargo, materials, supplies, or other items may be transported on the
snowmobile without being properly restrained.
   10.   No snowmobile shall be operated on any city street at a speed in
excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour.
3-3-64   EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
All snowmobiles operated within the City shall have the following equipment:
   1.   Mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of
operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for operating the
vehicle and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, by-pass or similar device on
said vehicle.
   2.   Adequate brakes in good operating condition and at least one headlight
and one taillight in good operating condition.
   3.   A safety or so-called "dead-man" throttle in operating condition; a
safety or "dead-man" throttle is defined as a device which when pressure is
removed from the accelerator or throttle causes the motor to be disengaged from
the driving track.
A violation is a simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled fine under Iowa
Code Section 805.8B.
3-3-65   UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
It is unlawful for the owner or operator to leave or allow a snowmobile to be
or remain unattended on public property while the motor is running or the key
left in the ignition.
3-3-66   RESTRICTION OF OPERATION.
The City Council may, by resolution, prohibit the operation of snowmobiles
within the right-of-way of the public roads, streets or alley or other City
property within the City when the public safety and welfare so requires.
3-3-66A   NEGLIGENCE.
The owner and operator of a snowmobile is liable for any injury or damage
occasioned by the negligent operation of the snowmobile.
3-3-66B    ACCIDENT REPORTS.
Whenever a snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury or death
to anyone or property damage amounting to one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) or more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator
shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer as required under Iowa Code
Sections 321G.10 and 321.266.
3-3-67   TRAFFIC REGULATION.
Each person operating a snowmobile shall strictly observe all traffic signs and
signals and all other traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto, and
shall obey the orders and directions of any police officer of the City
authorized to direct or regulate traffic.
(ORD 11-17, 9-11-17)
OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
3-3-68   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to permit the operation of all-terrain vehicles
(“ATVs”) and off-road utility vehicles/utility terrain vehicles (“UTVs”) on
certain streets in the City. This chapter applies whenever an ATV or UTV is
operated on any street or alley of the City of Cascade, Iowa.
3-3-69   DEFINITIONS.
   1.   “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” is defined as a motorized vehicle with
not less than three and not more than six nonhighway tires that is limited in
engine displacement to less than one thousand (1,000) cubic centimeters and in
total dry weight to less than one thousand two hundred pounds (1,200) and that
has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars
for steering control. “All-terrain vehicle” includes off-road motorcycles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1[1])
   2.   “Off-road utility vehicle” or “utility terrain vehicle” or “UTV” is
defined as a motorized vehicle with not less than four and not more than eight
nonhighway tires or rubberized tracks that has a seat that is of bucket or
bench design, not intended to be straddled by the operator, and a steering
wheel or control levers for control. “Off-road utility vehicle” includes the
following vehicles:
      a.   “Off-road utility vehicle—type 1” is defined as an off-road utility
vehicle with a total dry weight of one thousand two hundred (1,200) pounds or
less and a width of fifty inches or less;
      b.   “Off-road utility vehicle—type 2” is defined as an off-road utility
vehicle, other than off-road utility vehicle—type 1, with a total dry weight of
two thousand (2,000) pounds or less, and a width of sixty-five (65) inches or
less;
      c.   “Off-road utility vehicle—type 3” is defined as an off-road utility
vehicle with a total dry weight of more than two thousand (2,000) pounds or a
width of more than sixty-five (65) inches, or both.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1[17])
3-3-70   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   1.   No person shall operate an ATV or UTV within the City in violation of
the provisions of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or rules established by the
Natural Resource Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing
their registration, numbering, equipment, and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321I)
   2.   No person shall operate an ATV or UTV within the City unless the person
is at least eighteen (18) years of age, possesses a valid driver’s license.
3-3-71   PLACES OF OPERATION.
The operators of ATVs and UTVs shall comply with the following restrictions as
to where ATVs and UTVs may be operated within the City:
   1.   Streets. ATVs and UTVs may be operated on all City streets unless
prohibited by this Section. ATVs and UTVs may stop at service stations or
convenience stores along any permitted street.
(Ord. 03-22, passed 9-12-22)
3-3-72   NEGLIGENCE.
The owner and operator of an ATV or UTV are liable for any injury or damage
occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or UTV.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.19)
3-3-73   ACCIDENT REPORTS.
Whenever an ATV or UTV is involved in an accident resulting in injury or death
to anyone or property damage amounting to one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) or more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator
shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer as required under Iowa Code
Sections 321I.11 and 321.266.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.11)
3-3-74   EQUIPMENT.
ATVs and UTVs operated upon City streets shall be equipped with at least the
following:
   1.   Adequate brakes;
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.13)
   2.   Headlights;
   3.   Taillights;
   4.   Rear mirrors; or
   5.   Side mirrors;
   6.   Safety belts (UTVs only); and
   7.   Muffler system limiting engine noise to not more than eighty-six (86)
decibels.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.12)
A violation of subsections 3 and 9 is a simple misdemeanor punishable as a
scheduled fine under Iowa Code Section 805.8B.
3-3-75   UNLAWFUL OPERATION.
   1.   No ATVs or UTVs shall be operated or parked upon City sidewalks,
trails, City parks, or other City land.
   2.   No ATVs or UTVs shall be operated on private property without the
express consent of the owner.
   3.   No ATV or UTV shall be operated while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, narcotics, or habit-forming drugs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1c])
   4.   No person shall operate an ATV or UTV in a careless, reckless, or
negligent manner endangering the person or property of another or causing
injury or damage to the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1b]
   5.   No ATV or UTV shall be operated in violation of the traffic laws of the
City of Cascade and the State of Iowa.
   6.   No ATV or UTV shall carry more passengers than which the ATV or UTV is
designed.
   7.   No person shall ride in a UTV unless seated in a designated seat and
secured with a safety belt.
   8.   No seat shall be used by more than one person at a time.
   9.   No cargo, materials, supplies, or other items may be transported on the
ATV or UTV without being properly restrained.
   10.   No owner shall permit a person under the age of eighteen (18) to
operate an ATV or UTV.
   11.   No ATV or UTV shall be operated without a lighted headlight and
taillight from sunset to sunrise and at such other times when conditions
provide insufficient lighting to render clearly discernible persons and
vehicles at a distance of five hundred (500) feet ahead.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1d])
   12.   No person shall leave an ATV unattended on public property while the
motor is running or the keys are in the ignition switch.
   13.   No person shall operate an ATV or UTV on any trail unless the trail is
designated as open for operation of that vehicle.
   14.   An ATV shall only have one person riding, which shall be the operator.
   15.   Proof of insurance must be maintained during operation.
3-3-76   PARKING.
ATVs and UTVs may be parked in City parking lots or on any City street where
vehicle parking is permitted, except no ATV or UTV may be parked on any primary
road extension or the downtown district between Pierce Street SW and Highway
136.
3-3-77   REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
No person shall operate an ATV or UTV on any public street or alley, for any
purpose, unless the vehicle is registered with the Department of Natural
Resources.
   1.   Proof of Ownership. The owner of each ATV/UTV shall be required to
provide proof of ownership including Iowa Department of Natural Resources
registration and proof of liability insurance with appropriate minimum
standards as required by Iowa Code 321.20B and 321A.21.
   2.   Current Registration. ATV/UTV vehicles registered in Iowa are required
to display their current Iowa Department of Natural Resources registration
decal.
(Ord. 18-19, Passed 11-25-19)
GOLF CARTS
3-3-80   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to permit the operation of golf carts on certain
streets in the City, as authorized by Section 321.247 of the Code of Iowa, as
amended. This chapter applies whenever a golf cart is operated on any street or
alley of the City of Cascade, Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.247)
3-3-81   DEFINITIONS.
“Golf Cart” is defined as a four-wheeled recreational vehicle generally used
for transportation of person(s) in the sport of golf that is either electric
powered or gas powered with an engine displacement of less than 351 cubic
centimeters, and a total dry weight of less than 800 pounds.
3-3-82   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
No person shall operate a golf cart within the City unless the person is at
least eighteen (18) years of age, possesses a valid driver’s license, and
possesses a City of Cascade permit for the operation of a golf cart within the
City in accordance with this Chapter. A violation of this section is a simple
misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code Section 805.8A.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.247)
3-3-83   PLACES OF OPERATION.
The operators of golf carts shall comply with the following restrictions as to
where golf carts may be operated within the City:
   1.   Streets. Golf carts may be operated on all City streets unless
prohibited by this Section. Golf carts may be operated on that part of 1st
Avenue not designated a primary road extension.
   2.   Prohibited Streets. Golf carts shall not be operated upon any City
street which is a primary road extension through the City. However, golf carts
may cross such a primary road extension. Primary road extensions shall include
all of Highway 136. Primary road extensions shall include all of 1st Avenue
(Business 151) except that portion of 1st Avenue located from Buchanan Street
through Taylor Street and except that portion of 1st Avenue located from
Washington Street through Jack Oak Drive. A violation of this section is a
simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code Section
805.8A.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.247[1a])
   3.   EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITED STREETS. The City of Cascade, a political
subdivision can legally operate on prohibited streets for the purpose of
construction or maintenance per State Code 321.234A. The City shall legally
operate on 1st Ave business district to water the planters from spring through
fall by city employees or an organization under the City of Cascade.
3-3-84   HOURS OF OPERATION.
Golf carts may be operated on City streets only between sunrise and sunset,
except in inclement weather. A violation of this section is a simple
misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code Section 805.8A.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.247)
3-3-85   EQUIPMENT.
Golf carts operated upon City streets shall be equipped with at least the
following:
   1.   A slow moving vehicle sign;
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.247[1b])
   2.   A bicycle safety flag, the top of which shall be a minimum of five (5)
feet from ground level;
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.247[1b])
   3.   Adequate brakes;
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.247[1b])
   4.   Rear mirrors; or
   5.   Side mirrors;
   6.   Safety belts.
A violation of this section is a simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled
violation under Iowa Code Section 805.8A.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.247)
3-3-86   UNLAWFUL OPERATION.
   1.   No golf carts shall be operated or parked upon City sidewalks, trails,
City parks, or other City land.
   2.   No golf cart shall be operated on private property without the express
consent of the owner.
   3.   No golf cart shall be operated while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, narcotics, or habit-forming drugs.
   4.   No person shall operate a golf cart in a careless, reckless, or
negligent manner endangering the person or property of another or causing
injury or damage to the same.
   5.   No golf cart shall be operated in violation of the traffic laws of the
City of Cascade and the State of Iowa.
   6.   No golf cart shall carry more passengers than which the golf cart is
designed.
   7.   No person shall ride in a golf cart unless seated in a designated seat
and secured with a safety belt.
   8.   No seat shall be used by more than one person at a time.
   9.   No cargo, materials, supplies, or other items may be transported in the
golf cart without being properly restrained.
   10.   No owner shall permit a person under the age of eighteen (18) to
operate a golf cart.
   11.   No person shall leave a golf cart unattended on public property while
the motor is running or the keys are in the ignition switch.
   12.   Proof of insurance must be maintained during operation.
3-3-87   SPEED.
No golf carts shall be operated on any City street at a speed in excess of
twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
3-3-88   PARKING.
Golf carts may be parked in City parking lots or on any City street where
vehicle parking is permitted, except no golf cart may be parked on any primary
road extension.
3-3-89   GOLF CARTS REGISTERED.
No person shall operate a golf cart on any public street or alley, for any
purpose, unless the operator possesses a City of Cascade permit to operate a
golf cart on City streets, issued by the City Clerk.
   1.   Golf cart owners may apply for a permit from the City Clerk on forms
provided by the City.
   2.   The Clerk shall not issue a permit until the owner has provided the
following:
      a.   Evidence that the owner is at least 18 years of age and possesses a
valid driver’s license.
      b.   Proof that the owner has liability insurance covering operation of
golf carts on City streets in the minimum amount required for operation of
motor vehicles.
      c.   The Police Department has inspected the golf cart to verify it meets
the requirements of this Chapter.
      d.   Payment of the permit fee.
   3.   The permit sticker shall be displayed visibly and prominently on the
left rear.
   4.   The permit shall be effective from January 1 in even-numbered years
through December 31 of odd-numbered years.
   5.   The permit fee shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). However, if the permit
is obtained during an odd-numbered year, the fee shall be reduced to ten
dollars ($10.00).
   6.   A copy of the Golf Cart Code will be handed out to everyone who applies
for a permit.
   7.   If permitted owner of golf cart purchases a new unit during a 2-year
permit period, owner shall comply with the following guidelines:
      1.   The Police Department has inspected the new golf cart to verify it
meets the requirements of this chapter.
      2.   Proof that the owner has liability insurance covering the new golf
cart on city streets.
      3.   Evidence that the owner is at least 18 years of age and possesses a
valid driver license.
      4.   Payment of twenty dollars ($20.00) registration fee.
3-3-90   SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
The permit may be suspended or revoked by the City Clerk, Police Chief and City
Administrator without refund upon evidence that the permit holder has violated
any section of this Chapter. Upon three (3) convictions within a two (2) year
period of a violation of this Chapter or violations of the Iowa Code or Cascade
Code of Ordinances while operating a golf cart, the permit shall be suspended
for a period of two (2) years.
3-3-91   PENALTY.
Unless another penalty is stated, a violation of this Chapter shall be a
municipal infraction subject to the following penalties:
   1.   For a first offense, a fine of one hundred twenty-five dollars
($125.00).
   2.   For a second and each subsequent offense within a two (2) year period,
a fine of at least two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), but not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
(Ord. 17-19, Passed 11-25-19)
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE
3-3-92   NOTICE OF FINE PLACED ON ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in
violation of any of the restrictions imposed by any Ordinance of this City or
State law, the officer finding such vehicle shall prepare a notice of parking
fine giving the registration number, and other identifying information to such
vehicle in a conspicuous place and directing the driver of the vehicle to
appear within thirty days, or to pay the local scheduled fine.
3-3-93   PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
In any prosecution charging a violation of any parking Ordinance or State law
governing the standing, stopping, or parking of a vehicle, proof that the
particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any
such Ordinance or law, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was at the time of such parking violation the registered owner of
such vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the registered owner
of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point
where, and for the time during which such violation occurred.
3-3-94   LOCAL PARKING FINES.
Scheduled fines as follows are established, payable by mail or in person at the
City Clerk's office within thirty days of the violation, for the following
parking violations:
  Penalty After 30 Days
                                                         Penalty After 30 Days
1. Overtime parking                               $20.00  $40.00
2. Prohibited parking                             $20.00  $40.00
3. No parking zone                                $20.00  $40.00
4. Blocking alley                                 $20.00  $40.00
5. Illegal parking                                $20.00  $40.00
6. Street cleaning                                $20.00  $40.00
7. Snow removal ban                               $20.00  $40.00
8. Persons with disabilities parking              $100.00 $200.00
9. Snow Emergency First Violation in a 12 month   $150.00  
period
10. Snow Emergency Second Violation in a 12 month $200.00  
period
11. Snow Emergency Third and Subsequent           $250.00  
Violations in a 12 month period
 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4(2))
(Ord. 23-23, Passed 12-11-23)
3-3-95   FAILURE TO PAY PARKING CITATIONS.
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing, or parking under the
parking Ordinances of this City or of State law fails to make payment of the
scheduled fine as specified on a parking citation affixed to such motor vehicle
within the thirty (30) days, the City shall send the owner of the motor vehicle
to which the parking citation was affixed a letter informing the owner of the
violation and warning that in the event the penalty is not paid within five
days from date of mailing, a court citation will be issued requiring a court
appearance and subjecting the violator to court costs.
CHAPTER 4
RESERVED
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PROTECTION
3-5-1   Establishment and Purpose
3-5-2   Organization
3-5-3   Residency Requirement
3-5-4   Approved by Council
3-5-5   Training
3-5-6   Compensation
3-5-7   Election of Officers
3-5-8   Fire Chief: Duties
3-5-9   Obedience to Fire Chief
3-5-10   Constitution
3-5-11   Accidental Injury Insurance
3-5-12   Liability Insurance
3-5-13   Calls Outside City
3-5-14   Mutual Aid
3-5-15   Authority to Cite Violations
3-5-16   Emergency Ambulance Service
3-5-1   ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
A volunteer fire department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish
fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire
prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there
is no other established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
3-5-2   ORGANIZATION.
The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers and personnel
as may be authorized by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
3-5-3   RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.
No person shall be recruited, selected or appointed as a member of the Fire
Department unless such person is a citizen of the United States and a resident
of the greater Cascade, Iowa, area. Such area is defined as that area within
ten (10) miles of the City.
3-5-4   APPROVED BY COUNCIL.
No person having otherwise qualified shall be appointed to the department until
such appointment is submitted to and approved by a majority of the Council
members.
3-5-5   TRAINING.
All members of the department shall attend and actively participate in regular
or special training drills or programs as directed by the Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
3-5-6   COMPENSATION.
Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
3-5-7   ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
The department shall elect a Fire Chief and such other officers as its
constitution and bylaws may provide, but the election of Fire Chief shall be
subject to the approval of the Council. In case of absence of the Fire Chief,
the officer next in rank shall be in charge and have and exercise all the
powers of Fire Chief.
3-5-8   FIRE CHIEF: DUTIES.
The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or
ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention
and the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
   2.   Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits and
development of fire emergency plans.
   3.   Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation
as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation,
investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other
hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the
reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   4.   Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from
approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel
or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the fire
department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   5.   Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect
ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-
of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to
prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the fire
department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete,
or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
   6.   Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline and control of the fire department. The members of the fire
department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
   7.   Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all
fire apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or belonging to the
fire department
   8.   Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage
in excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) has occurred as a result
of a fire, or if arson is suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division
immediately. For all fires causing an estimated damage of fifty dollars
($50.00) or more or emergency responses by the Fire Department, file a report
with the Fire Marshal’s Division within ten (10) days following the end of the
month. The report shall indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the
name of the owners and occupants of the property at the time of the fire, the
value of the property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin of the
fire as determined by investigation, and other facts, statistics, and
circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)
   9.   Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any
building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of
making such investigation or inspection which under law or ordinance may be
necessary to be made and is reasonably necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
   10.   Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
   11.   Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal,
and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by
investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.4)
   12.   Records. Cause to be kept records of the fire department personnel,
firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number
of responses to alarms, their cause and location, and an analysis of losses by
value, type and location of buildings.
   13.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report
of the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as
may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
3-5-9   OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Chief.
3-5-10   CONSTITUTION.
The department shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they deem calculated to
accomplish the object contemplated, and such constitution and bylaws and any
change or amendment to such constitution and bylaws before being effective,
must be approved by the Council.
3-5-11   ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE.
The Council shall contract to insure the City against liability for worker’s
compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization,
nursing, and medical attention for volunteer fire fighters injured in the
performance of their duties as fire fighters whether within or outside the
corporate limits of the City. All volunteer fire fighters shall be covered by
the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)
3-5-12   LIABILITY INSURANCE.
The Council shall contract to insure against liability of the City or members
of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out of and
resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the
corporate limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 & 517A.1)
3-5-13   CALLS OUTSIDE CITY.
The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the
City limits if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists and that
such action will not endanger persons and property within the City limits.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
3-5-14   MUTUAL AID.
Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department may enter into
mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments. Copies
of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
3-5-15   AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS.
Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa
may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa, for
violations of state and/or local fire safety regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
3-5-16   EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE.
The department is authorized to provide emergency ambulance or rescue services
and the accidental injury and liability insurance provided for herein shall
include such operation.
CHAPTER 6
CURFEW FOR MINORS
3-6-1   Preamble
3-6-2   Findings and Purpose
3-6-3   Definitions
3-6-4   Offenses
3-6-5   Defenses
3-6-6   Enforcement
3-6-1   PREAMBLE.
The City of Cascade recognizes that all citizens including minors have certain
inalienable rights and that among them are the rights of liberty and the
pursuit of happiness. Further, all citizens including minors have the right to
freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, and of
association. This section should be interpreted to avoid any construction that
would result in the appearance of interference with the free exercise of
religious worship and political association and this Ordinance shall not be
construed to mean that the City intends to interfere with a minor's freedom of
association for political, economic, religious, or cultural matters or
association for purposes such as marches, demonstrations, picketing, or prayer
vigils which are otherwise lawful and peaceful assemblies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
3-6-2   FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
The City of Cascade has an obligation to provide for the protection of minors
from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of parental control
over and responsibility for children, for the protection of the general public,
and for the reduction of the incidence of juvenile criminal activities.
3-6-3   DEFINITIONS.
In this chapter:
   1.   Curfew hours means 10:00PM until 5:30AM Sunday thru Thursday and 11:
00PM thru 5:30AM Friday and Saturday.
   2.   Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.
   3.   Establishment means any privately-owned place of business operated for
a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place
of amusement or entertainment.
   4.   Guardian means:
      a.   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      b.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   5.   Minor means any person under age 17 years of age.
   6.   Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term
includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.
   7.   Parent means a person who is:
      a.   A biological parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another
person; or
      b.   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of a minor.
   8.   Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group
of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
   9.   Remain means to:
      a.   Linger or stay; or
      b.   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer
or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
   10.   Serious Bodily Injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or
protracted loss of impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
3-6-4   OFFENSES.
   1.   A minor commits an offense if the minor remains in any public place or
on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours.
   2.   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if they knowingly
permit, or by insufficient control allow, the minor to remain in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew
hours.
   3.   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if they knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
3-6-5   DEFENSES.
   1.   It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that the minor was:
      a.   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
      b.   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      c.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      d.   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      e.   Involved in an emergency;
      f.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor's presence;
      g.   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Cascade, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home without any detour or stop, an official
school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the City of Cascade, a civic organization, or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
      h.   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      i.   Married or had been married.
   2.   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection 3-6-4(3) that the
owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police
department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours and refused to leave.
3-6-6   ENFORCEMENT.
   1.   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police
officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the
public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under
this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
Section 3-6-5 is present.
   2.   A minor who is in violation of this Ordinance shall be reunited with
the minor's parent or guardian or custodian or other adult taking the place of
the parent or shall be taken home by the police officers of the City of
Cascade.
WARNING. The first time a minor is detained by law enforcement for violation of
this section, the minor shall be delivered to the person having legal custody
of said minor. The minor and legal custodian shall be informed of the
provisions in this section. Any subsequent violation shall be subject to a
penalty.
CHAPTER 7
REGULATING PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
3-7-1   Definitions
3-7-2   Exemptions
3-7-3   Permits
3-7-4   Requirements
3-7-5   Hours of Solicitation
3-7-6   Consumer Protection Law
3-7-7   Bond Required
3-7-8   Obstruction of Pedestrian or Vehicular Traffic
3-7-9   Display of Permit
3-7-10   Permit Not Transferable
3-7-11   Revocation of Permit
3-7-1   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
   1.   A "peddler" is any person carrying or transporting goods or merchandise
who sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise
from house-to-house or upon the public street.
   2.   A "solicitor" is any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from
house-to-house or upon public streets orders for commercial goods, wares,
subscriptions, publications, periodicals, merchandise, or services to be
delivered or fulfilled at a future date.
For the purposes of this chapter, "solicitor" does not include a person who
contacts another person at such person's residence without prior invitation to
enlist support for or against, or solicit funds for patriotic, philanthropic,
charitable, political, or religious purposes, whether or not there is an
incidental purpose involving the sale of some goods or service.
   3.   A "transient merchant" includes every merchant, whether an individual
person, a firm, corporation, partnership, or association, who brings or causes
to be brought within the municipality any goods, wares, or merchandise of any
kind, nature, or description, with the intention of temporarily or
intermittently selling or offering to sell at retail such goods, wares, or
merchandise. Temporary association with a local merchant, dealer, trader, or
auctioneer, for conducting such transient business in connection with, as part
of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer, does
not exempt any such person, firm, or corporation from being considered a
transient merchant.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to apply to persons
selling at wholesale to merchants, nor to persons running a huckster wagon, or
selling or distributing livestock feeds, fresh meats, fish, fruit, or
vegetables, nor to persons selling their own work or production either by
themselves or their employees.
3-7-2   EXEMPTIONS.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to nonprofit civic, charitable,
religious, or educational groups engaged in retail sale for the purposes of
fund raising; route delivery persons who incidentally solicit additional
business or special sales; persons customarily calling on businesses or
institutes for the purpose of selling products for resale or institutional use.
3-7-3   PERMITS.
Before any person or organization engages in any of the practices defined
herein, they must comply with all applicable Ordinances, and must also obtain
from the City Clerk a permit in accordance with the provisions of sections 3-7-
4 and 3-7-5. An application fee of $100.00 for each day of licensure shall be
paid at the time of filing application to cover the cost of investigation and
issuance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 9C.2)
3-7-4   REQUIREMENTS.
Any applicant engaged in any activity described in 3-7-1 of this chapter must
file with the City Clerk an application in writing that gives the following
information:
   1.   Name and social security number.
   2.   Permanent and local addresses and, in case of transient merchants, the
local address from which proposed sales will be made.
   3.   A brief description of the nature of the sales method.
   4.   Name and address of the firm for or on whose behalf the orders are
solicited, or the supplier of the goods offered for sale.
   5.   Length of time for which the permit is desired.
   6.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, and if so, the date, the nature of the offense, and the name of the
court imposing the penalty.
   7.   Motor vehicle make, model, year, color, and registration number, if a
vehicle is to be used in the proposed solicitation.
3-7-5   HOURS OF SOLICITATION.
No person may conduct those activities described in Section 3-7-1 except
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on each day, and no solicitation
shall be done on Sundays or legal holidays.
3-7-6   CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW.
All solicitors and peddlers shall be informed of, agree to comply with, and
comply with the State law, Section 555A.3, Code of Iowa, requiring a notice of
cancellation to be given in duplicate, properly filled out, to each buyer to
whom such person sells a product or service and, comply with the other
requirements of the law.
3-7-7   BOND REQUIRED.
Before a permit under this chapter is issued, each person subject to this
Ordinance shall provide to the Clerk, evidence that the applicant has filed a
bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of
Iowa.
3-7-8   OBSTRUCTION OF PEDESTRIAN OR VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.
No person, while engaged in any of the practices described in Section 3-7-1,
shall block or obstruct the path of any pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or
block or obstruct any way of ingress or egress to roads, buildings, or other
enclosures or conveyances, including, but not limited to, vehicles, elevators,
and escalators.
3-7-9   DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
Each solicitor or peddler shall at all times while doing business in the City
keep in his or her possession the permit provided for in Section 3-7-3 of this
Chapter, and shall, upon the request of prospective customers, exhibit the
permit as evidence that he or she has complied with all requirements of this
Chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly the permit in his or
her place of business.
3-7-10   PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE.
Permits issued under the provisions of this Chapter are not transferable in any
situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the application.
3-7-11   REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
The City Council after notice and hearing, may revoke any permit issued under
this Ordinance where the permitee in the application for the permit or in the
course of conducting his or her business has made fraudulent or incorrect
statements or has violate this Ordinance or has otherwise conducted business in
an unlawful manner.
NOTICE. The Clerk shall send a notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local
address, not less than 10 days before the date set for a hearing on the
possible revocation of a license. Such notice shall contain particulars of the
complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or state statutes
allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for hearing on the matter.
HEARING. The clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any
complaints shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in the
complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative fail to
appear without good cause, the clerk may proceed to a determination of the
complaint.
RECORD AND DETERMINATION. The clerk shall make and record finding of fact and
conclusions of law and shall revoke a license only when upon review of the
entire record the clerk finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial
violation of this chapter or state law.
APPEAL. If the clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the clerk shall
make a part of the record the reasons therefor. The licensee or applicant,
shall have a right to a hearing before council at its next regular meeting.
Council may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the clerk by a majority
vote of council members present. The clerk shall carry out the decision of
council.
EFFECT OF REVOCATION. Revocation of any permit shall bar the licensee from
being eligible for any permit under this chapter for a period of 1year from the
date of the revocation.
CHAPTER 8
CIGARETTE/TOBACCO/NICOTINE/VAPOR PERMITS
3-8-1   Definitions
3-8-2   Permit Required
3-8-3   Application
3-8-4   Fees
3-8-5   Issue/Expiration
3-8-6   Refunds
3-8-7   Under Legal Age
3-8-8   Suspension/Revocation
3-8-1   Definitions.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined.
   1.   Cigarette means any roll for smoking made whole or in part of tobacco
or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective
of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated or mixed
with any other ingredient where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper
or any other material. However, this definition is not to be construed to
include cigars.
   2.   Place of business means any place where cigarettes are sold, stored or
kept for the purpose of sale of consumption by a retailer.
   3.   Retailer means every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale
for consumption or possess for the purpose of sale for consumption cigarettes,
irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales.
   4.   Tobacco products mean cigars, little cigars, cheroots, stogies,
periques, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking
tobacco, snuff, snuff flour, cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine cut and
other chewing tobaccos, shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and
sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such
manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise or for
both chewing and smoking but does not mean cigarettes.
   5.   Nicotine means a colorless, oily, water-soluble, highly toxic, liquid
alkaloid, C10H14N2, found in tobacco and valued as an insecticide.
   6.   Vapor means a visible exhalation, as fog, mist, steam, smoke, or
noxious gas, diffused through or suspended in the air.
3-8-2   Permit Required.
It is unlawful for any person other than a holder of a retail permit to sell
cigarettes, tobacco, nicotine or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall
distribute, sell or solicit the sale of such products within the city without a
valid permit for each place of business. The permit shall be displayed publicly
in the place of business so that it is visible to the public. No permit shall
be issued to a minor.
3-8-3   Application.
A completed application on forms provided by the State Department of Revenue
shall be filed with the city clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed no less
than five (5) days prior to the last regular meeting of the council in June. If
a renewal application is not timely filed and a special council meeting is
called to act upon the application, the costs of such special meeting shall be
paid by the applicant.
3-8-4   Fees.
The fee for a retail cigarette/tobacco/nicotine/vapor permit shall be as
follows:
 
July, August, September     $75.00
October, November, December $56.25
January, February, March    $37.50
April, May, June            $18.75
 
3-8-5   Issuance and Expiration.
Upon proper application and payment of the fee a permit shall be issued. Each
permit issued shall describe the place of business for which it is issued and
shall be non-assignable. Permits expire June 30 of each year.
3-8-6   Refunds.
A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the
city, except during April, May or June in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 of the Code of Iowa.
3-8-7   Persons Under Legal Age.
No person shall sell, give or otherwise supply any cigarette/tobacco/nicotine/
vapor products to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. The
provision of this section includes prohibiting a minor from purchasing such
products from a vending machine.
A person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall not smoke, use, possess,
purchase or attempt to purchase cigarette/tobacco/nicotine/vapor products.
3-8-8   Permit Suspension and Revocation.
If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the provisions of this chapter
they will be subject to the Iowa Department of Revenue Tobacco Enforcement
penalties and fines.
CHAPTER 9
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-9-1   Purpose
3-9-2   Required Obedience to Provisions of this Chapter and State Law
3-9-3   Action by Council
3-9-4   Transfers
3-9-1   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for administration of licenses and
permits and for local regulations and procedures for the conduct of the sale
and consumption of beer, wine, and liquor, for the protection of the safety,
health, and general welfare of this community.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
3-9-2   REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER AND STATE LAW.
The following sections of the Iowa Code are hereby adopted by reference:
   1.   123.2 and 123.3 General Prohibition and Definitions
   2.   123.18 Favors From Licensee or Permittee
   3.   123.22 State Monopoly
   4.   123.28 Open Alcoholic Beverage Containers
   5.   123.30 Liquor Control Licenses - Classes
   6.   123.31 Application Contents
   7.   123.33 Records
   8.   123.34 Expiration - License or Permit
   9.   123.35 Simplified Renewal Procedure
   10.   123.36 Liquor Fees - Sunday Sales
   11.   123.38 Nature of Permit or License - Surrender - Transfer
   12.   123.39 Suspension or Revocation of License or Permit - Civil Penalty
   13.   123.40 Effect of Revocation
   14.   123.44 Gifts of Liquors Prohibited
   15.   123.46 Consumption in Public Places - Intoxication - Right to Chemical
Test - Notifications - Exoneration
   16.   123.47 Persons Under Legal Age - Penalty
   17.   123.49 Miscellaneous Prohibitions
   18.   123.50 Criminal and Civil Penalties
   19.   123.51 Advertisements for Alcoholic Liquor, Wine or Beer
   20.   123.52 Prohibited Sale
   21.   123.90 Penalties Generally
   22.   123.95 Premises Must Be Licensed - Exception as to Conventions and
Social Gatherings
   23.   123.122 through 123.145 Beer Provisions (Division II)
   24.   123.150 Sunday Sales Before New Year's Day
   25.   123.171 through 123.182 Wine Provisions (Division V)
   26.   321.284 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles - Drivers     
   27.   321.284A Open Containers in Motor Vehicles - Passengers
3-9-3   ACTION BY COUNCIL.
The City Council shall approve or disapprove the application. Action taken by
the City Council shall be endorsed on the application. The application, fee,
penal bond, and certificate of dram shop liability insurance (if applicable)
shall be forwarded to the Iowa Alcoholic Beverages Division for further action
as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32(2))
3-9-4   TRANSFERS.
The City Council may, in its discretion, authorize a licensee or permittee to
transfer the license or permit from one location to another within the City,
provided that the premises to which the transfer is to be made would have been
eligible for a license or permit in the first instance and the transfer will
not result in the violation of any law or Ordinance. An applicant for a
transfer shall file with the application for transfer proof of dram shop
liability insurance and penal bond covering the premises to which the license
is to be transferred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.38)
CHAPTER 10
JUNK AND ABANDONED (JUNK) VEHICLES
3-10-1   Purpose
3-10-2   Definitions
3-10-3   Removal of Abandoned Vehicles and Junk
3-10-4   Notification of Owners and Lienholders
3-10-5   Impoundment Fees and Bonds
3-10-6   Hearing Procedures
3-10-7   Auction or Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
3-10-8   Junk Vehicles and Junk Declared a Nuisance
3-10-9   Notice to Abate
3-10-10   Abatement by Municipality
3-10-11   Collection of Cost of Abatement
3-10-12   Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles
3-10-13   Proceeds from Sales
3-10-14   Duties of Demolisher
3-10-15   Exceptions
3-10-16   Interference with Enforcement
3-10-1   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens and safety of property of this City by providing for removal of
abandoned motor vehicles and junk, and the elimination of the open storage of
abandoned and junk motor vehicles, junk and machinery except in authorized
places.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 3641.1)
3-10-2   DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
   1.   "Abandoned vehicle" means any of the following:
      a.   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than 48 hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more wheels or
other parts which render the vehicle inoperable; or unsafe or
      b.   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more
than 72 hours; or
      c.   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked on private property or has
been placed on private property without the consent of the owner or person in
control of the property for more than 24 hours; or
      d.   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of the police
authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten days; or
      e.   Any vehicle parked on the street determined by police authority to
create a hazard to other vehicular traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89(1)(b))
However a vehicle shall not be considered abandoned for a period of five (5)
days if its owner or operator is unable to move the vehicle and notifies the
police authority responsible for the geographical location of the vehicle and
requests assistance in the removal of the vehicle.
   2.   "Private property" means any real property within the City which is not
public property as defined in this section.
   3.   "Public property" means any public right-of-way open for the purposes
of vehicular travel.
   4.   A "junk vehicle" means any vehicle without current license plates or
which has any one of the following characteristics:
      a.   Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield, or window or
headlight or any other cracked or broken glass.
      b.   Any vehicle with a broken or loose fender, door or bumper or hood or
door handle or window handle or steering wheel, trunk top or trunk handle or
tail pipe.
      c.   Any vehicle which has become the habitat of rats, mice, or snakes,
or any other vermin or insects.
      d.   Any motor vehicle if it lacks an engine or two or more wheels or
other structural parts which render said motor vehicle totally inoperable.
      e.   Any other vehicle which, because of its defective or obsolete
condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to the public health and
safety.
(Cedar Falls v. Flett 330 N.W. 2nd 251, 253, Iowa 1983)
   5.   "Vehicle" means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and
shall include without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, trailer,
motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof.
   6.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-
ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery
and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances; iron, steel
or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tinware,
plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly stacked
firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.
   7.   “Demolisher” means any city or public agency organized for the disposal
of solid waste, or any person whose business it is to convert a vehicle to
junk, processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle
vehicles.
   8.   “Police authority” means the Iowa highway safety patrol or any law
enforcement agency of a county or city.
(Code of Iowa Sec. 321.89[1a])
3-10-3   REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES AND JUNK.
   1.   The police authority may, without prior notice or hearing, remove and
impound any abandoned vehicle and/or junk as defined in section 3-10-2. The
police authority may hire other personnel, equipment, and facilities for the
purpose of removing, preserving, storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles
and/or junk.
   2.   The impoundment and storage of all vehicles and junk pursuant to this
chapter shall be in such areas or places designated by the City Council.
   3.   When a vehicle or junk is taken into custody and impounded under the
provisions of this chapter, the police authority shall maintain a record of the
vehicle and/or junk, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's
trade name, body style, vehicle identification number, and license plate and
year displayed on the vehicle. The records shall include the date and hour of
tow, location towed from, location towed to, person or firm doing the towing,
reason for towing, and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89(2))
   4.   Nothing in this chapter shall govern the procedures of any police
officer in taking into custody and impounding any vehicle to be used or
proposed to be used as evidence in a criminal case involving crimes other than
violations of this chapter.
3-10-4   NOTIFICATION OF OWNERS AND LIENHOLDERS.
   1.   When a vehicle or junk is taken into custody under the provisions of
this chapter or under any provisions of State law, the police authority shall
notify, within 20 days, by certified mail with five-days return receipt, the
last known registered owner of the vehicle or junk, all lienholders of record,
and any other known claimant to the vehicle or junk or to personal property
found in the vehicle, addressed to their last known addresses of record, that
the abandoned vehicle or junk has been taken into custody. Notice shall be
deemed given when mailed. The notice shall:
      a.   Describe the year, make, model, and serial number of the vehicle or
junk.
      b.   Describe the personal property found in the vehicle or junk.
      c.   Describe the location of the facility where the vehicle or junk is
being held.
      d.   Inform the persons receiving notice:
         (1)   of their right to reclaim the vehicle or junk and personal
property within 21 days after the effective date of the notice;
         (2)   that the right can be exercised upon payment of all towing,
preservation, notice, and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle or
junk in custody;
         (3)    that failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their
right to reclaim the vehicle or junk within the reclaiming period shall be
deemed a waiver by the owner and all lienholders of all right, title, claim,
and interest in the vehicle or junk;
         (4)    that failure to reclaim the vehicle or junk is deemed consent
to the sale of the vehicle or junk at a public auction or disposal of the
vehicle or junk to a demolisher.
      e.   State that any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or
junk or personal property who disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle
or junk or personal property by the police authority or the assessment of fees
and charges provided by this chapter may request a hearing to contest these
matters in accordance with the provisions of Section 3-10-6.
      f.   State that a request for a hearing must be in writing and received
by the department prior to the expiration of the 21 day reclaiming period.
      g.   State that in the event a hearing is requested immediate release of
the vehicle or junk may be obtained by posting a cash bond as required by
Section 3-10-5.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89(3)(a))
   2.   The owner, lienholders or any person receiving notice may, by written
request received by the police authority prior to the expiration of the 21 day
reclaiming period, obtain an additional fourteen days within which the vehicle
or junk may be reclaimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89(3)(c))
   3.   Notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in
the area where the vehicle or junk was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet
the requirements of this chapter. The published notice may contain multiple
listings of abandoned vehicles or junk but shall be published within the same
time requirements and shall contain the same information as prescribed for
mailed notice in this section. Published notice shall be used if:
      a.   the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, or
      b.   the registration contains no address for the owner, or
      c.   it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity
and address of all lienholders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89(3)(b))
   4.   If the persons receiving notice do not request a hearing or exercise
their right to reclaim the vehicle or junk or personal property within the
reclaiming period, the owner of the vehicle or junk or owners of the personal
property shall no longer have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the
vehicle or junk.
   5.   No court in any case in law or equity shall recognize any right, title,
claim, or interest of the owner and lienholders after the 21 day reclaiming
period.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89(3))
3-10-5   IMPOUNDMENT FEES AND BOND.
   1.   Before the owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession of any
vehicle or junk that has been impounded under the provisions of this chapter or
any other provision of law may recover such vehicle or junk, such person shall
present to the police authority, evidence of such person's identity and right
to possession of the vehicle or junk, shall sign a receipt for its return, and
shall pay the costs of:
      a.   an impoundment fee
      b.   towing charges
      c.   preservation charges
      d.   storage charges
      e.   notice charges
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89(3)(a))
   2.   The owner or lienholder shall pay three dollars ($3.00) if claimed
within five (5) days of impounding, plus one dollar ($1.00) for each additional
day within the reclaiming period plus towing charges if stored by the City, or
towing and storage fees, if stored in a public garage, whereupon said vehicle
shall be released. The amount of towing charges, and the rate of storage
charges by privately owned garages, shall be established by resolution of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
   3.   If a hearing is requested under Section 3-10-4 (1)(e), the owner or
person lawfully entitled to possession of the vehicle or junk shall be
permitted to secure the immediate release of the vehicle upon posting a cash
bond in an amount equal to the sum of:
      a.   the fees required by Section 3-10-5(2)
      b.   the amount of the fine or penalty for each violation for which there
is an outstanding or otherwise unsettled traffic violation notice or warrant.
3-10-6   HEARING PROCEDURES.
   1.   The registered owner, any lienholder of record, or duly authorized
agents thereof, may object to the legality of the impoundment or the assessment
of fees and request a hearing thereon. No person shall be entitled to more than
one hearing on each impoundment. Upon receipt of a timely objection to the
impoundment, the objector shall be informed of the reason for the impoundment
and a hearing shall be held, without unnecessary delay, before the City Council
pursuant to 1-4-1 at seq.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89(3))
3-10-7   AUCTION OR DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the
police authority shall make a determination as to whether or not the motor
vehicle should be sold for use upon the highway and shall dispose of the motor
vehicle in accordance with state law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89(4))
3-10-8   JUNK VEHICLES AND JUNK DECLARED A NUISANCE.
It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any
private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or junk
vehicle. Except as hereinafter provided, it is hereby declared that the
parking, leaving, or storage of a junk vehicle, or any junk, upon either public
or private property within the corporate limits of the City of Cascade, Iowa,
constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance
within the meaning of Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk or junk
vehicle is stored upon private property or public property in violation
thereof, the owner of the property shall be liable for said violation.
EXCEPTIONS. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk
vehicle stored within.
3-10-9   NOTICE TO ABATE.
   1.   Whenever the police authority shall find junk or a junk vehicle placed
or stored on private property within the City in violation of Section 3-10-8,
the police shall notify, by certified mail with five days' return receipt, the
following persons:
      a.   the owner of the property.
      b.   the occupant of the property.
   2.   The notice to abate shall:
      a.   describe, to the extent possible, the year, make, model, and color
of the vehicle or junk in general.
      b.   describe the location of the junk or junk vehicle.
      c.   state that the junk or the junk vehicle constitutes a nuisance under
the provisions of this chapter.
      d.   state that the owner of the property shall remove or repair the said
junk or junk vehicle within ten days.
      e.   assessment of city costs. A statement that if the nuisance or
condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within
the time prescribed the city will abate it and assess the costs against such
person.
3-10-10   ABATEMENT BY MUNICIPALITY.
If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to
abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping
an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall
be filed with the City Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the
municipality.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
3-10-11   COLLECTION OF COST OF ABATEMENT.
The Clerk shall mail a statement of the total expense incurred to the property
owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown
by the statement has not been paid within one month, the Clerk shall certify
the costs to the County Treasurer and the costs shall then be collected with,
and in the same manner, as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
3-10-12   DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found any
abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle whose
title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may, without notification
procedures, dispose of such motor vehicle if it lacks an engine, or two (2) or
more wheels, or other structural part which renders the vehicle totally
inoperable, to a demolisher for junk without the title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
3-10-13   PROCEEDS FROM SALES.
Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the expense
of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing and notification required, in
accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner of the motor
vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days, and then shall be
deposited in the reimbursement fund of the Iowa Department of Public Safety.
Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the amount necessary to meet
costs the police authority shall apply for reimbursement from the Department of
Public Safety.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
3-10-14   DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.
Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor vehicle
for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or otherwise demolish such motor
vehicle. When a demolisher acquires a motor vehicle under Section 80.08,
demolisher shall apply to the police authority for a certificate to demolish
the vehicle. The application shall include the name and address of the
applicant, the year, make, model and serial number of the motor vehicle. After
the motor vehicle has been demolished, processed or changed so that it
physically is no longer a motor vehicle, the demolisher shall surrender the
auction sales receipt or certificate of authority to dispose of or demolish a
motor vehicle to the State Department of Public Safety for cancellation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
3-10-15   EXCEPTIONS.
This chapter shall not apply to the following:
   1.   A junk vehicle or junk in general in an enclosed building.
   2.   A junk vehicle or junk in general on the premises of a business
enterprise operated in a district properly zoned therefor, as authorized under
the Zoning Ordinance or restricted residence district of this City, when
necessary to the operation of said business enterprise.
   3.   A junk vehicle or junk in an appropriate storage space or depository
maintained in a lawful place and lawful manner by this City.
3-10-16   INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT.
No person shall interfere in any way with the enforcement provision of this
chapter.
CHAPTER 11
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
3-11-1   Enforcement Officer
3-11-2   General Definition of Unsafe
3-11-3   Unsafe Building
3-11-4   Notice to Owner
3-11-5   Conduct of Hearing
3-11-6   Posting of Signs
3-11-7   Right to Demolish
3-11-8   Costs
3-11-1   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
The City Administrator is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
3-11-2   GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE.
All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or not provided with
adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous
to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to
safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose of this
chapter, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or
removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 & 364.12[3a])
3-11-3   UNSAFE BUILDING.
“Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home meeting any or all of the
following criteria:
   1.   Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any
portion thereof, because of (a) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (b)
faulty construction; (c) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of
the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (d) the
deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or (e) any other cause,
is likely to partially or completely collapse.
   2.   Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure,
or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is
being used.
   3.   Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer
to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is
likely to cause sickness or disease.
   4.   Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
   5.   Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
(6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
3-11-4   NOTICE TO OWNER.
The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building or
structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such is
found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement
officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice
stating the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in
charge of the building or premises, within forty-eight (48) hours or such
reasonable time as the circumstances require, to commence either the required
repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure
or portions thereof, and all such work shall be completed within ninety (90)
days from date of notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement
officer. If necessary, such notice shall also require the building, structure,
or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the
required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected and approved by the
enforcement officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [3h])
   1.   Notice Served. Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail
to the owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa, if
the owner is found within the City limits. If the owner is not found within the
City limits such service may be made upon the owner by registered mail or
certified mail. The designated period within which said owner or person in
charge is required to comply with the order of the enforcement officer shall
begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.
   2.   Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she may
request a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written request
for hearing within the time provided in the notice.
3-11-5   CONDUCT OF HEARING.
If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the
date, time and place of hearing.
   2.   Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why
the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
   3.   Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and
may issue such order as it deems appropriate.
3-11-6   POSTING OF SIGNS.
The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. CITY OF CASCADE,
IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, demolition,
or removal are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written
permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the building
except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the
building.
3-11-7   RIGHT TO DEMOLISH.
In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to
repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or
portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as
a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement
officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the
cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
3-11-8   COSTS.
Costs incurred under Section 3-11-7 shall be paid out of the City treasury.
Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and levied as
a special assessment against the land on which the building or structure is
located, and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for collection in the
manner provided for other taxes. Additionally, the City shall collect costs
associated with the repair, rehabilitation and demolition with a lawsuit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
(Ord. 09-16, Passed May 9, 2016)
EDITOR’S NOTE
Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order of the Council for the
administration of this chapter are provided in the APPENDIX of this Code of
Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this procedure. We recommend you
review the situation with your attorney before initiating procedures and follow
his or her recommendation carefully.
CHAPTER 12
POLICE DEPARTMENT
3-12-1   Department Established
3-12-2   Organization
3-12-3   Peace Officer Qualifications
3-12-4   Required Training
3-12-5   Compensation
3-12-6   Peace Officers Appointed
3-12-7   Police Chief: Duties
3-12-8   Departmental Rules
3-12-9   Summoning Aid
3-12-10   Taking Weapons
3-12-11   Contract Law Enforcement
3-12-1   DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
The police department of the City is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.
3-12-2   ORGANIZATION.
The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement
officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the
Council.
3-12-3   PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.
In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement
officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification standards
established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
3-12-4   REQUIRED TRAINING.
All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law at
an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment.
Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11 [2])
(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
3-12-5   COMPENSATION.
Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such compensation
as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
3-12-6   PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED.
The Mayor shall appoint the Police Chief upon City Council approval and the
Police Chief shall appoint, subject to the approval of the City Council, the
other members of the department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
3-12-7   POLICE CHIEF: DUTIES.
The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
   1.   General. Perform all duties required of the police chief or marshal by
law or ordinance.
   2.   Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations and bring
all persons committing any offense before the proper court.
   3.   Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the
Police Chief.
   4.   Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to
the State Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
   5.   Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including
conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
   6.   Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers,
boards and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
   7.   Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for
the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
   8.   Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by
showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City
ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the disposition of the
charge.
   9.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report
as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
   10.   Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and
be responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles, equipment and
materials of the department.
3-12-8   DEPARTMENTAL RULES.
The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the Code of
Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary for
the operation of the department.
3-12-9   SUMMONING AID.
Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as
the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, 804.17)
3-12-10   TAKING WEAPONS.
Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items
which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have
within such person’s control to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, 804.18)
3-12-11   CONTRACT LAW ENFORCEMENT.
In lieu of the appointment of a police chief by the Mayor as provided by
Section 30.06, the Council may contract with the County Sheriff or any other
qualified lawful entity to provide law enforcement services within the City and
in such event the Sheriff or such other entity shall have and exercise the
powers and duties of the Police Chief as provided herein. (Code of Iowa, Sec.
28E.30)
CHAPTER 13
RESERVE POLICE FORCE
3-13-1   Establishment
3-13-2   Membership
3-13-3   Term of Service; Grounds for Dismissal
3-13-4   Limited Powers
3-13-5   Compensation
3-13-6   Firearms
3-13-1   ESTABLISHMENT.
There is hereby created and established the Cascade Reserve Police Force, as
provided by Chapter 80D, Code of Iowa, and subject to the regulations therein
contained. The Reserve Police Force shall serve until abolished by the Council.
3-13-2   MEMBERSHIP.
Membership in the Reserve Police Force shall be as prescribed in the Reserve’s
bylaws, rules and regulations and shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor
and the Police Chief. The Mayor and Police Chief may, from time to time,
prescribe such other bylaws, rules and regulations as they, in their sole
discretion, may deem to be desirable. All rules, regulations or bylaws of the
Reserve shall be approved by the Police Chief.
3-13-3   TERM OF SERVICE; GROUNDS FOR DISMISSAL.
The members of the Reserve shall serve at the discretion of the Police Chief
and shall be removed and discharged from the Reserve at any time upon violation
of any bylaw, rule or regulation prescribed as aforesaid or upon recommendation
of the Reserve Executive Committee. No member of the Reserve shall violate this
Code of Ordinances or the laws of the State of Iowa or of the United States of
America, and such violation shall be grounds for summary dismissal.
3-13-4   LIMITED POWERS.
The members of the Reserve are subject to lawful orders of members of the
Police Department and the Mayor.
3-13-5   COMPENSATION.
Members of the Reserve are considered employees of the City during those
periods when they are performing police duties as authorized and directed by
the Police Chief, or the Assistant Chief in the absence of the Chief, and they
shall receive a salary of one dollar ($1.00) per year. However, said Reserve
members are not entitled to any benefits or obligations of Police Retirement
benefits or Civil Service.
3-13-6   FIREARMS.
Members of the Reserve shall not, at any time, carry firearms except as
provided by Section 80D.7 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 14
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE
3-14-1   Establishment and Purpose
3-14-2   Organization
3-14-3   Approval by Council
3-14-4   Operations and Training
3-14-5   Care of Vehicles and Equipment
3-14-6   Injury and Liability Insurance
3-14-7   Mutual Aid
3-14-8   Fees and Records
3-14-9   Charges for Services
3-14-10   Explanation of Charges
3-14-11   Ambulance Fund
3-14-12   Payment of Fees
3-14-13   Contract with Townships
3-14-1   ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
A municipal volunteer emergency medical service of the City of Cascade is
hereby established to provide emergency medical and ambulance services in the
City of Cascade and to area townships.
3-14-2   ORGANIZATION.
The emergency medical service shall consist of a Director and such other
officers and personnel as may be recommended by the Director and authorized by
the Council. All personnel of the emergency medical service shall be trained in
emergency medical procedures and protocols.
3-14-3   APPROVAL BY COUNCIL.
All personnel of the emergency medical service and all stipends paid to them
shall be approved by the Cascade City Council.
3-14-4   OPERATIONS AND TRAINING.
The emergency medical service shall be under the direction, deployment and
oversight of the Director. Ongoing training and qualifying of emergency medical
service personnel shall also be the duty and responsibility of the Director.
3-14-5   CARE OF VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
The care and maintenance of the vehicles and equipment of the emergency medical
service shall be the direct responsibility of the Director.
3-14-6   INJURY AND LIABILITY INSURANCE.
The Council shall contract to insure the City against liability for worker’s
compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization,
nursing, and medical attention for ambulance personnel injured in the
performance of their duties with the emergency medical service. All emergency
medical service personnel shall be covered by the contract. The Council shall
also contract to insure against liability of the City and emergency medical
service personnel for injuries, death or property damage arising out of and
resulting from performance of emergency medical services within or outside the
corporate limits of the City.
3-14-7   MUTUAL AID.
Subject to approval by resolution of the City Council, the emergency medical
service may enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted EMS
services. Copies of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
3-14-8   FEES AND RECORDS.
It shall be the responsibility of the Director to bill the fees and charges of
the emergency medical service and maintain a set of books and the records of
the emergency medical service.
3-14-9   CHARGES FOR SERVICE.
The following fees and charges for emergency medical services are hereby
established:
Fees/Charges Amount
Fees/Charges                            Amount
1. BLS (Basic Life Support) Rate        $1,000.00
2. ALS1 (Advanced Life Support) Rate    $1,000.00
3. ALS2 (Advance Life Support) Rate     $1,200.00
4. BLS on Scene Care - No Supplies Used $0
5. BLS on Scene Care - Supplies Used    $110.00
6. ALS on Scene Care                    $200.00
7. Inconvenience Fee                    $200.00
8. An inconvenience fee is charged when it is deemed by the EMS director that
the patient is utilizing the ambulance service as something other than it is
intended to as an emergency medical provider and as something else such as
repeated home health or nursing care.
 
(Ord. 45-13, passed 1-13-14; Ord. 05-23, passed 1-23-23; Ord. 07-24, passed 3-
11-24; Ord. 14-24, passed 6-10-24)
3-14-10   EXPLANATION OF CHARGES.
The following is an explanation of the above fees and charges, and when the
fees and charges will be charged:
   1.   BLS is Basic Life Support and the BLS fee is charged when basic
treatment is given and patient is transported.
   2.   ALS is Advanced Life Support and the ALS1 fee is charged when it is
medically necessary or an assessment by an advanced life support provider is
given, one or more ALS interventions is performed, and the patient is
transported.
   3.   The ALS2 fee is charged when it is medically necessary to administer at
least three different medications by intravenous push/bolus or continuous
infusion or proved one or more of the following ALS procedures – manual
defibrillation/cardioversion, endotracheal intubation, central venous line,
cardiac pacing, chest compression, surgical airway, and intraosseous line.
   4.   BLS on Scene Care is charged when the emergency medical service
responds to a call, provides basic treatment, and the patient refuses transport
and/or is simply not transported.
   5.   ALS on Scene Care is charged when the emergency medical service
responds to a call, provides treatment including an ALS assessment or at least
one ALS intervention.
   6.   Mileage is based on loaded miles traveled from pickup of patient to
arrival at the destination. Any portion of a mile will be billed as a complete
mile.
3-14-11   AMBULANCE FUND.
All monies received by the City as payment for emergency medical services shall
be credited to the Ambulance Fund. Such fees collected and other emergency
medical service revenues shall be used exclusively for the operation,
maintenance, and administration of the emergency medical service, including but
not limited to personnel, equipment, maintenance, oversight, and expenditures
related to billing and collections. Expenditures from the Ambulance Fund shall
be made by appropriation of the City Council.
3-14-12   PAYMENT OF FEES.
The City Council may contract with third party billing and collection services
to facilitate the billing and collection of monies owed to the City for
emergency medical services. The City may bring suit in the name of the City
against any person upon failure of such person to pay for the provision of
emergency medical service when such service has been rendered by the emergency
medical service. Any such civil action shall be in addition to other remedies
available by law or in equity. Nothing in this Chapter shall authorize the
City, its officials, or personnel, to refuse or delay emergency medical service
to any person for the reason that such person has not paid for emergency
medical service or owes for previous emergency medical service.
3-14-13   CONTRACT WITH TOWNSHIPS.
The City Council shall have the authority under Chapter 28E of the Code of Iowa
to contract with area Townships for the purpose of extending and providing
emergency medical service to the Townships.
CHAPTER 15
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
3-15-1   Purpose
3-15-2   Definitions
3-15-3   Cleanup Required
3-15-4   Liability for Cleanup Costs
3-15-5   Notifications
3-15-6   Police Authority
3-15-7   Liability
3-15-1   PURPOSE.
In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety and welfare from the
leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated to
establish responsibility for the treatment, removal and cleanup of hazardous
substance spills within the City limits.
3-15-2   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control,
identify, analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove or dispose of a hazardous
substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])
   2.   “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual,
imminent or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance
onto the land, into a water of the State or into the atmosphere which creates
an immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety or to the
environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])
   3.   “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not
limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an
irritant or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat, or other
means. “Hazardous substance” may include any hazardous waste identified or
listed by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under
section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1,
1977, or any hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous
material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])
   4.   “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles,
stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the
release of which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers,
and any other person in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous
condition occurs, whether the person owns the hazardous substance or is
operating under a lease, contract, or other agreement with the legal owner of
the hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])
3-15-3   CLEANUP REQUIRED.
Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping,
spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the hazardous
substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the environment
or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground
waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied by a
cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to an
acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the
responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to
begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the
incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based
on the character of the hazardous condition, said notice setting a deadline for
accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City will proceed to procure
cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with
the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished within the deadline. In the
event that it is determined that immediate cleanup is necessary as a result of
the present danger to the public health, safety and welfare, then no notice
shall be required and the City may proceed to procure the cleanup and bill the
responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup. If the bill for
those services is not paid within thirty (30) days, the City Attorney shall
proceed to obtain payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is
beyond the capacity of the City to finance it, the authorized officer shall
report to the Council and immediately seek any State or Federal funds available
for said cleanup.
3-15-4   LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS.
The responsible person shall be strictly liable to the City for all of the
following:
   1.   The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City as a result of the
failure of the responsible person to clean up a hazardous substance involved in
a hazardous condition.
   2.   The reasonable costs incurred by the City to evacuate people from the
area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the person.
   3.   The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of,
or loss of City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous
condition caused by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury,
destruction or loss.
3-15-5   NOTIFICATIONS.
   1.   A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing
of a hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources
and the Police Chief of the occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon as
possible but not later than six (6) hours after the onset of the hazardous
condition or discovery of the hazardous condition. The Police Chief shall
immediately notify the Department of Natural Resources.
   2.   Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the
Police Chief, which shall then notify the Department of Natural Resources.
3-15-6   POLICE AUTHORITY.
If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer or an
authorized representative may:
   1.   Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a
hazardous condition, and
   2.   Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a
hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.
No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under
this section.
3-15-7   LIABILITY.
The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries, or
losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the
responsible person as defined in Section 36.02[4].
CHAPTER 16
SNOW REMOVAL
3-16-1   Purpose
3-16-2   Snow Emergency Declaration
3-16-3   Snow Removal Routes
3-16-4   Driveways & Snow from Private Property
3-16-5   Removal of Snow & Ice from Sidewalks
3-16-6   Vehicle Parking During a Snow Emergency
3-16-1   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish and maintain uniform definitions
and procedures concerning snow and ice removal for the City of Cascade. The
City will provide snow and ice removal in a safe and cost-effective manner,
taking into account safety, budget, personnel and environmental concerns. This
Chapter does not guarantee that the streets, public parking lots, city
maintained sidewalks, and other public areas will be free of snow and ice; but
rather attempts to maintain an adequate traveling surface for properly equipped
vehicles and pedestrians during winter conditions. Snow and ice removal from
public streets, public parking areas, city maintained sidewalks, and other
public areas is an emergency operation that takes precedence over other non-
emergency work for the public works department.
3-16-2   SNOW EMERGENCY DECLARATION.
A snow emergency is defined as a snowfall event of any amount of snow combined
with ice, rain, sleet. freezing rain and/or just wind that creates blowing and
drifting of newly accumulated snow which the City deems appropriate to declare
a snow emergency. The Mayor, the City Administrator and/or his/her designee may
declare a snow emergency. A snow emergency may be declared in advance of an
anticipated storm, during a storm, or after a storm. A snow emergency will
normally not last more than 24 hours past the end of the last snowfall or the
end of the snow event; but may be extended or shortened when conditions
warrant. The public will be informed of a snow emergency through mass media
outlets as deemed necessary by the Mayor or City Administrator.
(Ord. 22-23, Passed 12-11-23; Ord. 24-24, Passed 12-9-24)
3-16-3   SNOW REMOVAL ROUTES.
The City Council shall establish and maintain a priority list of streets,
public parking areas, city maintained sidewalks, and other public areas for
snow and ice removal by resolution.
3-16-4   DRIVEWAYS AND SNOW FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
City snowplows will not clear private driveways. The snow placed in driveways
by the city plows is an unavoidable consequence of removing snow from the
streets and it is the responsibility of the property owner to remove. Snow from
private driveways, parking lots and sidewalks may not be placed on city
streets. The only exception is snow in the Downtown Business District where the
proximity of buildings to the street leaves no place other than the street to
remove snow to. Downtown snow must be placed on the street in such a way that a
safety hazard is not created and the travel path of the street is not
obstructed.
3-16-5   REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE ACCUMULATIONS ON SIDEWALKS.
It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to remove snow and ice
accumulations promptly from sidewalks. Sidewalks include any ADA accessible
ramps. If a property owner does not remove snow and ice accumulations within 24
hours following the conclusion of a snow event, the City may do so and assess
the actual costs, in addition to a $50 administrative fee, against the property
owner, for collection in the same manner as a property tax. The City will first
attempt to make contact with the property owner.
(Ord. 22-23, Passed 12-11-23; Ord. 24-24, Passed 12-9-24)
3-16-6   VEHICLE PARKING DURING A SNOW EMERGENCY.
No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any public
street, alley or City- owned off-street parking area during a snow emergency
proclaimed by the Mayor or City Administrator, unless the snow has been removed
or plowed from said street, alley or parking area and the snow has ceased to
fall. Vehicles parked on the street during a snow emergency are subject to tow
or a citation, pursuant to Cascade Code
3-3-94 at the owner's expense. The City will first attempt to make contact with
the owner, if the owner can be determined. A snow emergency parking ban shall
continue from its proclamation through the duration of the snow or ice storm
and the 24- hour period after cessation of the storm except as above provided
upon streets that have been fully opened. The ban shall be of uniform
application and the Police Chief is directed to publicize the requirements,
using all available news media, prior to the start time of each event. The
emergency may be extended or shortened when conditions warrant.
(Ord. 22-23, Passed 12-11-23)
CHAPTER 17
FIREWORKS
3-17-1   Definition
3-17-2   Fireworks Use Regulations
3-17-3   Fireworks Sale Regulations
3-17-4   Exceptions
3-17-5   Penalties
3-17-1   DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   1.   Fireworks. The term "fireworks" includes any item or class of items
defined in Iowa Code Sec. 727.2(1)(a).
(Iowa Code §§ 727.2; 100.19)
3-17-2   FIREWORKS USE REGULATIONS.
It is unlawful for any person to use or explode any fireworks; with the
following exceptions, July 3 and July 4; 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.; and December
31; 9:00 a.m. and 12:30 a.m. January 1. The city may, upon application in
writing, grant a permit for the display of fireworks by a city agency, fair
associations, amusement parks and other organizations or groups of individuals
approved by city authorities when the fireworks display will be handled by a
competent operator. No permit shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or
sponsoring organization has filed with the city evidence of insurance in the
following amounts:
   Personal injury      $250,000 per person
   Property damage      $50,000
   Total exposure      $1,000,000
(Iowa Code § 727.2)
(Ord. 3-25, Passed June 23, 2025)
3-17-3   FIREWORKS SALE REGULATIONS.
The City hereby adopts all standards, rules, regulations, and the like
promulgated or that will be promulgated by the State Fire Marshall regarding
the sale of fireworks pursuant to Iowa Code §§ 100.1; 100.19; 727.2. The City
specifically adopts National Fire Protection Association standard 1124 with
respect to the requirements for the safe handling, storage, transportation,
display, and retail of fireworks.
All other provisions of the City Code of Ordinances not in conflict with this
Section or with the laws of the State of Iowa remain valid and enforceable.
(Iowa Code §§ 100.1; 100.19; 727.2)
3-17-4   EXCEPTIONS.
This subchapter does not prohibit the sale by a resident, dealer, manufacturer
or jobber of fireworks as are not prohibited; or the sale of any kind of
fireworks if they are to be shipped out of state; or the sale or use of blank
cartridges for a show or theatre, or for signal purposes in athletic sports or
by railroads or trucks for signal purposes, or by a recognized military
organization. This subchapter does not apply to any substance or composition
prepared and sold for medicinal or fumigation purposes.
(Iowa Code § 727.2)
3-17-5   PENALTIES.
Any person who violates the provisions of the fireworks ordinance shall be
guilty of a scheduled simple misdemeanor violation punishable by a $500 fine in
addition to established court costs. Persons who cause injury as a result of
reckless discharging of fireworks shall be guilty of a serious misdemeanor
charge with appearance before a magistrate required.
(Iowa Code, Sections 100.19; 727.2)
(Ord. 4-17, Passed June 26, 2017)
CHAPTER 18
NOISE
3-18-1   Purpose
3-18-2   Definitions
3-18-3   Requirements, Duties and Responsibility
3-18-4   Test Measurements
3-18-5   Permits
3-18-6   Excluded Sounds
3-18-7   Penalties for Offenses Pertaining to Noise Control
3-18-1   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to further clarify noise as a nuisance and
prevent excessive sound, which is a serious hazard to the public health and the
quality of life in the City.
(Ord. 16-24, passed 8-12-24)
3-18-2   DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms are defined for use in this chapter:
   1.   "Plainly audible" means any sound which clearly can be heard by a
person's unimpaired and unaided auditory senses; however, words or phrases need
not be discernible and said sound shall include bass reverberation.
   2.   "Sound amplification system" means any device which produces,
reproduces, or amplifies sound. Sound amplification system shall not include a
motor vehicle horn, backup warning device, theft alarm, or any other sound
authorized or required by this code or the Code of Iowa.
   3.   "Emergency work" means work made necessary to restore property to a
safe condition following a public calamity, work to restore public utilities,
or work required to protect persons and property from an imminent danger.
   4.   "Emergency vehicle" means a motor vehicle used in response to a public
calamity or to protect persons and property from imminent danger.
   5.   "Sound" means a temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other
physical quantity, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and
rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed to distant
points.
(Ord. 16-24, passed 8-12-24)
3-18-3   REQUIREMENTS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   1.   No person shall engage or participate in the making and creating of an
excessive or unusually loud sound within the City heard and measured in the
manner prescribed below, except when done under and in compliance with a permit
issued pursuant to this section.
   2.   It shall be the duty of persons in a position of ownership, possession
or control of premises to prevent such premises from being the site of
activities producing sound levels in excess of what is permitted under this
section. Failure or refusal to perform such duty shall constitute a violation
of this section.
   3.   It shall be the duty of persons in positions of leadership or
responsibility with respect to unincorporated associations, groups, gatherings
and assemblages of people to prevent such from causing or making sound levels
in excess of what is permitted under this section. Failure or refusal to
perform such duty shall constitute a violation of this section.
(Ord. 16-24, passed 8-12-24)
3-18-4   TEST MEASUREMENTS.
   For the purpose of determining and classifying any sound as excessive or
unusually loud, the following test measurements and requirements are to be
applied:
   1.   No person operating, occupying, or who has parked a motor vehicle on
any street, highway, alley, parking lot, or driveway, on either public or
private property, shall operate or permit the operation of any sound
amplification system from within or on such motor vehicle so that the sound is
plainly audible at a distance of 50 or more feet from the vehicle.
   2.   No person owning, renting, leasing, occupying, using, or having charge
of any dwelling, tavern, building, structure, or other premises, or any part
thereof, shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification
system so that the sound is plainly audible 100 feet beyond the property line.
   3.   No person shall operate or permit operation of a self-contained,
portable, hand-held sound amplification system, on public or private property,
in such a manner so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 50 or
more feet from the system or, if the system is on private property, beyond the
property line.
(Ord. 16-24, passed 8-12-24)
3-18-5   PERMITS.
   Applications for a permit for relief from the provisions of this chapter may
be made to the City Administrator or a duly authorized representative pursuant
to the following procedure:
   1.   All permits must be applied for in writing during normal business hours
stating what devices are to be employed, where they are to be employed, on what
dates and at what times of day they are to be used, the nature of the sounds to
be produced or amplified and the approximate number of people in attendance,
and the persons responsible for the activity.
   2.   Permits granted shall state with reasonable specificity the dates,
locations, times, nature of the sound, devices permitted, approximate number of
people in attendance, and the persons responsible for the activity.
   3.   Permits shall not be arbitrarily or unreasonably withheld, nor shall
the free expression of ideas or lawful speech be restrained, but sound and
noise producing conduct having no communicative value and serving only to
unreasonably disturb and disrupt the enjoyment of residences and normal
pursuits shall be restrained.
   4.   The City Administrator, with consent from the Police Chief, may approve
permits or may, at their discretion, direct the permit to the City Council for
consideration and approval.
(Ord. 16-24, passed 8-12-24)
3-18-6   EXCLUDED SOUNDS.
   Notwithstanding the requirements, prohibitions, and terms of this section
previously set forth herein, the following noises/disturbances shall not be
subject to the requirements, prohibitions, and terms of this section except as
expressly set forth herein, as follows:
   1.   Emergencies. The sound emitted in the performance of emergency work or
to alert persons to the existence of an emergency.
   2.   Alarms. The sound emitted by the intentional sounding of any fire,
burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar stationary emergency
signaling device for emergency purposes, or for the essential testing of such
device when conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
   3.   Church Bells. The sound emitted by church carillons, bells or chimes.
   4.   Snow Removal Equipment. The sound emitted by motor-powered, muffler-
equipped snow removal equipment and City-owned or hired snow removal equipment.
   5.   Religious Ceremonies. The sound emitted in conjunction with a religious
celebration.
   6.   Law Enforcement. The sounds made or caused to be made by law
enforcement officials in the performance of their official duties.
   7.   Lawn and Garden Equipment. The sound emitted by motor-powered, muffler-
equipped lawn and garden equipment operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m.
   8.   School and Community Youth Sporting Activities. The sounds made by
children, students, employees and/or the general public while in attendance at
any school or athletic sponsored event.
   9.   Parades. The sound made by participants and observers of any parade
that has been approved by the City Council or School Board.
   10.   City Operations. The sound made or caused to be made by City-owned or
hired equipment or facilities for the conduct of City operations.
   11.   City-Owned Facilities. This includes public and community events at
all City owned parks and the daily activities at the City's municipal pool.
   12.   Industry. Normal and customary sounds generated by industrial
enterprises including but not limited to loading and unloading, manufacturing
noise, and shift change whistles or buzzers.
(Ord. 16-24, passed 8-12-24)
3-18-7   PENALTIES FOR OFFENSES PERTAINING TO NOISE CONTROL.
   1.   A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a municipal
infraction punishable by a penalty as described by Chapter 1-3 of this Code of
Ordinances.
   2.   Alternatively, a violation of any provision of this chapter can be
charged by a peace officer of the City as a simple misdemeanor.
   3.   For multiple violations of this Chapter, the City will consider these
violations as a nuisance under Title III Chapter 2 and follow the nuisance
abatement process as outlined in Title III, Chapter 2 Nuisances Sections
3-2-4 through
3-2-12.
(Ord. 16-24, passed 8-12-24)
TITLE IV
MENTAL AND PHYSICAL HEALTH
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL CONTROL
4-1-1   Definitions
4-1-2   License
4-1-3   Immunization
4-1-4   At Large Prohibited
4-1-5   Animal Nuisances
4-1-6   Impounding
DANGEROUS ANIMALS
4-1-7   Dangerous Animals Prohibited
4-1-8   Seizure, Impoundment and Disposition of Dangerous Animals
VICIOUS ANIMALS
4-1-9   Keeping a Vicious Animal
4-1-10   Seizure, Impoundment and Disposition of Vicious Animals
4-1-11   Animal Neglect
4-1-12   Abandonment of Cats and Dogs – Penalties
4-1-13   Livestock
4-1-14   Owners Duty
4-1-15   Prohibited Acts
4-1-16   Confinement
4-1-17   Kennel Dogs
4-1-1   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined as follows:
   1.   The term "dogs" shall mean animals of the canine species whether
altered or not.
   2.   The term "at large" shall mean any licensed or unlicensed animal found
off the premises of the owner and not under the control of a competent person,
restrained within a motor vehicle, housed in a veterinary hospital or kennel,
on a leash or "at heel" beside a competent person and obedient to that person's
command.
   3.   The term "owner" shall mean any person owning, keeping, sheltering or
harboring an animal.
4-1-2   LICENSE.
   1.   Annual License Required. Every owner of a dog over the age of six (6)
months shall procure a dog license from the Police Department on or before the
first day of July of each year. The form of the application shall state the
breed, sex, age, color, markings, and name, if any, of the dog, and the address
of the owner and shall be signed by the owner. The application shall also state
the date of the most recent rabies vaccination, the type of vaccine
administered and the date the dog shall be revaccinated.
   2.   Fee. The annual license fee for each male dog, for each female dog, and
for each spayed dog shall be set by resolution by the City Council.
   3.   License Records. Upon payment of the license fee, and providing proof
of a current vaccination against rabies, the Police Department shall issue to
the owner a license which shall contain the name of the owner, the owner's
place of residence and a description of the dog. The Police Department shall
keep a duplicate of each license issued as a public record, which will show:
      a.   The serial number and date of each application for a license.
      b.   The description of the dog as specified in the application, together
with the name of the owner of the dog.
      c.   The date when each license tag is issued and the serial number of
each tag, the date of the most recent rabies vaccination, the type of vaccine
administered, and the date the dog shall be revaccinated.
      d.   The amount of all fees paid.
      e.   Such other data as may be required by law.
   4.   License Tags. Upon issuance of the license, the Police Department shall
deliver or mail to the owner a metal tag stamped with the number of the license
and the year for which it is issued. The license tag shall be securely fastened
to a collar or harness which shall be worn by the dog for which the license is
issued.
   5.   Delinquency. All license fees shall become delinquent on the first day
of July of the year in which they are due and a delinquent penalty of one
dollar ($1.00) shall be added to each unpaid license on and after said date.
A license issued for one dog shall not be transferable to another dog. Upon the
expiration of the license the owner shall remove said tag from the dog. Any dog
found running at large without the license tag attached to its collar or
harness shall be deemed unlicensed.
   6.   Duplicate Tags. Upon the filing of an affidavit that the license tag
has been lost or destroyed, the owner may obtain another tag from the Cascade
Police Department. The Police Department shall enter in the license record the
new tag number assigned. The fee for duplicate tags shall be established by
resolution of the Council.
   7.   Transfers of Licensed Dogs. Upon transfer of a licensed dog into the
City, the owner shall surrender the original license tag to the Police
Department. The Police Department shall preserve the surrendered tag and,
without a license fee, issue a new license tag, provided that proof of
registration and rabies vaccination is shown.
4-1-3   IMMUNIZATION.
All dogs six (6) months or older shall be vaccinated against rabies. Before
issuance of the license the owner shall furnish a veterinarian's certificate
showing that the dog for which the license is sought has been vaccinated, and
that the vaccination does not expire within six (6) months from the effective
date of the dog license. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any dog
to not be vaccinated against rabies. A tag showing evidence of proper
vaccination shall be worn by every dog when not confined.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
4-1-4   AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
No owner or person having custody of an animal shall permit such animal to run
at large.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.41)
4-1-5   ANIMAL NUISANCES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit an animal under such person's
control or within such person's custody to commit a nuisance. An animal shall
be considered a nuisance if it:
   1.   Damages, soils, defiles or defecates on private property other than the
owner's or on public walks and recreation areas unless such waste is
immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner.
   2.   Causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions.
   3.   Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking or
chases persons, bicycles, automobiles, or other vehicles, or molests, attacks
or interferes with persons or other domestic animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
4-1-6   IMPOUNDING.
   1.   Any unlicensed or unvaccinated dog found at large or any licensed dog
found at large in violation of this chapter shall be seized and impounded, or,
at the discretion of the Peace Officer, the owner may be served a summons to
appear before a proper court to answer charges made thereunder.
   2.   Owners of licensed dogs shall be notified within two (2) days that upon
payment of impounding fees, the dog will be returned. If the impounded licensed
dogs are not recovered by their owners within seven (7) days after notice, the
dogs shall be disposed of as provided in Section 717B.4 Code of Iowa.
   3.   Impounded unlicensed dogs may be recovered by the owner, upon proper
identification, by payment of the license fee, impounding fee and boarding
costs, and the costs of vaccination if vaccination is required. If such dogs
are not claimed within seven (7) days after notice, they shall be disposed of
in a humane manner. The impounding fee shall be set by Resolution of the
Cascade Council. (Ordinance 52-04, 2-9-04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37)
   4.   Any animal found to have bitten a person or other animal shall be
confined as directed by the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
   5.   This section shall not apply to a law enforcement dog or horse used by
the law enforcement agency, that is acting in the performance of its duties,
which has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec 351.39)
DANGEROUS ANIMALS
4-1-7   DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   1.   No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor for any purpose within the
City limits, a dangerous animal.
   2.   Definitions. A dangerous animal is:
      a.   Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle, and which is of a
wild nature or disposition, and which is capable of killing, inflicting serious
injury upon, or causing disease among human beings or domestic animals, and
having known tendencies as a species to do so.
      b.   The following are animals which shall be deemed to be dangerous
animals per se:
         (1)   Lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, lynx, and bobcats;
         (2)   Wolves, coyotes, and foxes;
         (3)   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunks and mink;
         (4)   Raccoons;
         (5)   Bears;
         (6)   Monkeys, chimpanzees, and apes;
         (7)   Alligators and crocodiles;
         (8)   Scorpions; gila monsters;
         (9)   Snakes that are venomous or constrictors;
         (10)   Any cross breed of such animals which have similar
characteristics of the animals specified above.
         (11)    Bees or Bee Hives
      c.   Any animals declared to be dangerous by the City Council.
   3.   Dangerous Animals Exceptions. The keeping of dangerous animals shall
not be prohibited in the following circumstances:
      a.   The keeping of dangerous animals in a public zoo, bona fide
educational or medical institution, humane society, or museum where they are
kept as live specimens for the public to view, or for the purpose of
instruction, research or study, and has obtained the written approval of the
City Council.
(Ordinance 07-23, 6-26-23)
4-1-8   SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   1.   In the event that a dangerous animal is found at large and unattended
upon public property, park property, public right-of-way or the property of
someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to persons or property,
such animal may, in the discretion of the Animal Control Officer, be destroyed
if it cannot be confined or captured. The City shall be under no duty to
attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous animal found at large, nor
shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to its
destruction.
   2.   Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping,
sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal on premises in the City, the Animal
Control Officer shall cause the matter to be investigated and if after
investigation, the facts indicate that the person named in the complaint is
keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal in the City, the Animal
Control Officer shall order the person named in the complaint to safely remove
such animal from the City, permanently place the animal with an organization or
group allowed under Section
4-1-7(3)(a) of this chapter to possess dangerous animals, or destroy the
animal, within three (3) days of the receipt of such order. Such order shall be
contained in a notice to remove the dangerous animal, which notice shall be
given in writing to the person keeping, sheltering or harboring the dangerous
animal, and shall be served personally or by certified mail. Such order and
notice to remove the dangerous animal shall not be required where such
dangerous animal has previously caused serious physical harm or death to any
person, in which case the Animal Control Officer shall cause the animal to be
immediately seized and impounded or killed if seizure and impoundment are not
possible without risk of serious physical harm or death to any person.
   3.   The order to remove a dangerous animal issued by the Animal Control
Officer may be appealed to the Council. In order to appeal such order, written
notice of appeal must be filed with the Clerk within three (3) days after
receipt of the order contained in the notice to remove the dangerous animal.
Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of
right to appeal the order of the Animal Control Officer.
   4.   The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall
be delivered personally or by certified mail to the Clerk. The hearing of such
appeal shall be scheduled within seven (7) days of the receipt of notice of
appeal. After such hearing, the Council may affirm or reverse the order of the
Animal Control Officer. Such determination shall be contained in a written
decision and shall be filed with the Clerk within three (3) days after the
hearing or any continued session thereof.
   5.   If the Council affirms the action of the Animal Control Officer, the
Council shall order in its written decision that the person owning, sheltering,
harboring or keeping such dangerous animal remove such animal from the City,
permanently place such animal with an organization or group allowed under
Section
4-1-7(3)(a) to possess dangerous animals or destroy it. The decision and order
shall immediately be served upon the person against whom rendered in the same
manner as the notice of removal. If the original order of the Animal Control
Officer is not appealed and is not complied with within three (3) days or the
order of the Council after appeal is not complied with within three (3) days of
its issuance, the Animal Control Officer is authorized to seize and impound
such dangerous animal. An animal so seized shall be impounded for a period of
seven (7) days. If at the end of the impoundment period, the person against
whom the decision and order of the Council was issued has not petitioned the
District Court for a review of said order, the City shall cause the animal to
be disposed of by sale, permanently place such animal with an organization or
group allowed under Section
4-1-7(3)(a) of this chapter to possess dangerous animals or destroy such animal
in a humane manner.
(Ordinance 07-23, 6-26-23)
VICIOUS ANIMALS
4-1-9   KEEPING A VICIOUS ANIMAL.
A vicious animal is deemed so when it shall have attacked or bitten any person
without provocation, or when the propensity to attack or bite persons or other
animals shall exist and such propensity is known or ought to reasonably be
known to the owner thereof. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to
harbor or keep a vicious animal within the City, except in the following
circumstances:
   1.   Animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency.
   2.   The keeping of guard dogs; however, guard dogs, must be kept within a
structure or fixed enclosure at all times, and any guard dog found at large may
be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the provisions of Section
4-1-10. Any premises guarded by a guard dog shall be prominently posted with a
sign containing the wording “Guard Dog,” “Vicious Dog” or words of similar
import, and the owner of such premises shall inform the Police Department that
a guard dog is on duty at said premises.
(Ordinance 07-23, 6-26-23)
4-1-10   SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   1.   The Animal Control Officer or designee, in his or her discretion or
upon receipt of a complaint alleging that a particular animal is a vicious
animal, may initiate proceedings to declare such animal a vicious animal. A
hearing on the matter shall be conducted by the Council. The person owning,
keeping, sheltering or harboring the animal in question shall be given not less
than seventy-two (72) hours’ written notice of the time and place of said
hearing. Said notice shall set forth the description of the animal in question
and the basis for the allegation of viciousness. The notice shall also state
that if the animal is determined to be vicious, the owner will be required to
remove it from the City or allow it to be destroyed. The notice shall be served
upon any adult residing at the premises where the animal is located, or may be
posted on those premises if no adult is present to accept service.
   2.   If, after hearing, the Council determines that an animal is vicious,
the Council shall order the person owning, sheltering or harboring or keeping
the animal to remove it from the City, or to cause it to be destroyed in a
humane manner. The order shall immediately be served upon the person against
whom issued in the same manner as the notice of hearing. If the order is not
complied with within three (3) days of its issuance, the Animal Control Officer
is authorized to seize and impound the animal. An animal so seized shall be
impounded for a period of seven (7) days. If at the end of the impoundment
period, the person against whom the order of the Council was issued has not
petitioned the District Court for a review of such order, the Animal Control
Officer shall cause the animal to be destroyed.
   3.   Failure to comply with an order of the Council issued pursuant hereto
shall constitute a misdemeanor offense.
   4.   Any animal found at large which displays vicious tendencies may be
processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the foregoing, unless the animal is
so vicious that it cannot be safely be apprehended, in which case the Animal
Control Officer may immediately destroy it or unless its ownership is not
ascertainable, in which case the Animal Control Officer may destroy it after
three (3) days’ impoundment.
   5.   Any animal which is alleged to be vicious and which is under
impoundment or quarantine at the animal shelter shall not be released to the
owner, but shall continue to be held at the expense of the owner pending the
outcome of the hearing. All costs of such impoundment or quarantine shall be
paid by the owner if the animal is determined to be vicious. If the animal is
not determined to be vicious, such impoundment or quarantine shall be paid by
the City.
4-1-11   ANIMAL NEGLECT.
It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines, in any place, an animal,
excluding livestock, to fail to supply the animal during confinement with a
sufficient quantity of food or water, or to fail to provide a confined dog or
cat with adequate shelter, or to torture, deprive of necessary sustenance,
mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by any means which causes unjustified pain,
distress or suffering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
4-1-12   ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS — PENALTIES.
A person who has ownership or custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat
or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another person who will
accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the cat or dog to a
state licensed animal shelter or pound. A person who violates this section is
guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8) (Ordinance 07-23, 6-26-23)
4-1-13   LIVESTOCK
   1.   Regulations. It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the
City except by written consent of the Council or except in compliance with the
City’s zoning regulations.
   2.   Neglect. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock
in any place to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with
customary animal husbandry practices or to deprive the livestock of necessary
sustenance or to injure or destroy livestock by any means which causes pain or
suffering in a manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
4-1-14   OWNER’S DUTY.
It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog, cat or other animal which has
bitten or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or
attack to report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It
shall be the duty of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board
of health the existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from
rabies.
4-1-15   PROHIBITED ACTS.
It is unlawful for any person to do the following:
   1.   Aid or cause any animal, whether owned by such person or not, to escape
confinement or impoundment, whether such confinement or impoundment is upon
such person’s property or that of another, by opening any gate, door or window,
by making an opening in any fence, enclosure or structure, or by unleashing
such animal.
   2.   Fail to restrain an animal owned by such person or in such person’s
custody or control within an enclosure or upon a leash when such animal is left
unattended outside or is not at heel. The animal must be restrained so as to
prevent the animal from leaving the premises of its owner or from coming in
contract with public right-of-way or the property of another.
   3.   Interfere in any manner with any employee or designated representative
of the City so as to hinder, delay or prevent the execution of such employee’s
duties in relation to the matters and things contained in these chapters
pertaining to Animal Control.
   4.   Fail to keep in a clean and sanitary condition the premises and any
pen, kennel, shelter, house or person’s dwelling or other structure where an
animal under such person’s care and control is at any time kept. At least once
every twenty-four hours, or more often if odors or health problems arise, such
persons shall pick up any and all feces so as to prevent its accumulation and
the same shall be properly disposed of. Feces shall be held in watertight and
fly-tight containers pending disposal and shall be disposed of at least once
weekly. The animal and the place where the animal is maintained shall also be
kept free of obnoxious odors and shall be maintained so as not to attract or
permit the harborage or breeding of flies and other insects or rodents or other
vermin. All animal food and water shall be stored and placed for the animal’s
consumption in such a manner so that it will not become food for rodents and
other vermin.
   5.   Except with advanced permission of the City Council, no person shall
own, harbor or keep more than a combined total of three (3) dogs or five (5)
cats, or a mixture of eight (8) such animals over the age of four months. This
limit shall not apply to an appropriate licensed kennel, sanctuary, veterinary
officer, or similar business that provides boarding or veterinary care for such
animals in properly zoned commercial districts.
   6.   No owner or walker of any animal shall permit the animal to discharge
feces upon any public or private property, other than the property of the owner
of the animal. The owner or walker shall be deemed to permit the animal’s
discharge of feces if the owner does not immediately thereafter take steps to
remove and clean up the feces from the property.
(Ordinance 52A-04, 7-26-04)
   7.   All feces removed as aforesaid shall be placed in a container and shall
be stored in a sanitary manner in an appropriate refuse container until it is
removed pursuant to refuse collection procedures or otherwise disposed of in a
sanitary manner.
(Ordinance 52A-04, 7-26-04; Ordinance 07-23, 6-26-23)
4-1-16   CONFINEMENT.
   1.   When the City receives information that any person has been bitten by
an animal or that a dog or animal is suspected or having rabies, a police
officer shall order the owner to deliver such animal to a veterinarian in the
County for examination within twenty-four hours.
   2.   If the animal has been vaccinated in the manner required by this Code
of Ordinances, the owner may, after the animal has been examined by a
veterinarian, confine the animal at his or her place of residence. If this is
not possible, the animal must be confined at a veterinary hospital. In either
case, the animal must be confined for a period of fourteen (14) days.
   3.   If the animal is confined by the owner, the same veterinarian who
examined the animal at commencement of confinement, or a veterinarian
designated by the original veterinarian, must re-examine the animal and issue a
written release before the owner may end such confinement.
   4.   If the owner fails to confine the animal as ordered, the animal shall
be apprehended and impounded by the City, and after two weeks, the City may
humanely destroy the animal. If the animal is returned to its owner, the owner
shall pay the costs of impoundment.
   5.   If the animal has not been vaccinated in the manner required by this
Code of Ordinances, the animal shall be confined at a veterinary hospital for
fourteen (14) days or be immediately humanely destroyed and the brain
transported to a qualified laboratory for examination.
   6.   The veterinarian examining such animal shall report his or her findings
to the Dubuque County Board of Health, to the City and to the physician
attending the victim within twenty-four hours of the final examination. Said
reports should be made immediately by telephone or in person and verified in
writing at the earliest opportunity.
   7.   The owner of any animal reasonably subjected to the foregoing
procedures shall pay all expenses resulting from such apprehension,
confinement, examination and/or destruction.
4-1-17   KENNEL DOGS.
Kennel dogs which are kept or raised solely for the bona fide purpose of sale
and which are kept under constant restraint are not subject to the provisions
of this ordinance.
TITLE V
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT - EDUCATION AND CULTURE
CHAPTER 1
LIBRARY SERVICES
5-1-1   Public Library
5-1-2   Library Trustees
5-1-3   Qualifications of Trustees
5-1-4   Organization of the Board
5-1-5   Powers and Duties
5-1-6   Power to Contract with Others for the Use of the Library
5-1-7   Reserved
5-1-8   Library Accounts
5-1-9   Annual Report
5-1-1   PUBLIC LIBRARY.
There is hereby established a free public library for the City, to be known as
the Cascade Public Library.
5-1-2   LIBRARY TRUSTEES.
The board of trustees of the Cascade Public Library, hereinafter referred to as
the board, consists of five (5) members. All board members shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5)
5-1-3   QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.
All of the members of the board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of
the City. Members shall be over the age of eighteen (18) years and shall not be
an employee of the City.
5-1-4   ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.
   1.   Term of office. All appointments to the board shall be for three (3)
years, except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July first.
Appointments shall be made every two (2) years of one-third the total number as
near as possible, to stagger the terms.
(Code of Iowa Sec. 336.5)
   2.   Vacancies. The position of any trustee shall be declared vacant if said
trustee moves permanently from the City or if said trustee is absent from six
(6) consecutive regular meetings of the board, except in the case of sickness
or temporary absence from the City. Vacancies in the board shall be filled by
the City Council, and the new trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for
which the appointment is made.
(Code of Iowa Sec. 336.6)
   3.   Compensation. Trustees shall receive such compensation for their
services as established by resolution of the Council. Trustees not wanting to
receive said compensation shall submit a written statement to the City Clerk
stating the desire not to be compensated.
   4.   Meetings. The regular meeting of the Library Board shall be the first
Tuesday of every month at 4:30 p.m. at the Cascade Public Library. The public
meeting shall be video recorded and broadcasted on the city’s website or other
social media resources used by the city.
(Ord. 16-23, Passed 12-11-23; Ord. 22-24, Passed 10-28-24; Ord. 1-25, Passed 2-
24-25)
5-1-5   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   To meet and elect from its members a president, a secretary, and such
other officers as it deems necessary. The City Treasurer shall serve as Board
Treasurer, but shall not be a member of the Board.
(Code of Iowa Sec. 336.8(1)
   2.   To have charge, control and supervision of the public library, its
appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.
(Code of Iowa Sec. 336.8(2)
   3.   To direct and control all the affairs of the library.
   4.   To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian to employ such
assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper management of the
library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, that prior to such
employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and employees shall
have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the board voting
in favor thereof.
(Code of Iowa Sec. 336.8(3)
   5.   To remove by a two-thirds vote of the board the librarian and provide
procedures for the removal of assistants or employees for misdemeanor,
incompetency or inattention to duty, subject, however, to the provisions of
Chapter 35C, Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa Sec. 336.8(4)
   6.   To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make purchases of
books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other library
materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the library within
budgetary limits set by the board.
(Code of Iowa Sec. 336.8(5)
   7.   To authorize the use of the library by non-residents of the City and to
fix charges therefore unless a contract for free service exists.
(Code of Iowa Sec. 336.8(6)
   8.   To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with Ordinances and the law, for the care, use, government and
management of the library and the business of the board, fixing and enforcing
penalties for violations.
(Code of Iowa Sec. 336.8(7)
   9.   To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated for
library purposes by the City Council, and of all monies available by gift or
otherwise for the erection of library buildings, and of all other monies
belonging to the library including fines and rentals collected, under the rules
of the board.
(Code of Iowa Sec. 336.8(8)
   10.   To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed
property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to
said property in the name of the library; to execute deeds and bills of sale
for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them
from such gifts, for the improvement of the library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 336.8(9)
   11.   To keep a record of its proceedings.
   12.   To enforce the performance of conditions of gifts, donations, devises
and bequests accepted by the City. The board shall enforce performance by
taking action against the City Council.
   13.   To have authority to make agreements with the local County historical
associations, where such exists, and to set apart the necessary room and to
care for such articles as may come into the possession of the association. The
trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and materials
for the preservation and protection of such articles as are in their judgment
of a historical and educational nature and pay for the same out of funds
allocated for library purposes.
(Code of Iowa Sec. 336.17)
5-1-6   POWER TO CONTRACT WITH OTHERS FOR THE USE OF THE LIBRARY.
   1.   Contracting. The board may contract with any other boards of trustees
of free public libraries, any other City, school corporation, private or semi-
private organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County, or
with the trustees of any County library district for the use of the library by
their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 336.18(1))
   2.   Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority
vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing
body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five (5)
percent in number of electors who voted for governor in the territory of the
party at the last general election. The petition must be presented to the
governing body not less than forty (40) days before the election. The
proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law that is held in
the territory of the party who is seeking to terminate the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 336.18(2)(a and b))
5-1-7 RESERVED.
5-1-8   LIBRARY ACCOUNTS.
All money appropriated by the City Council from the general fund for the
operation and maintenance of the library shall be set aside in an account for
the library. Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders of the board, signed
by its president and secretary. The warrant writing officer is the City Clerk.
5-1-9   ANNUAL REPORT.
The board shall make a report to the City Council immediately after the close
of the municipal fiscal year. This report shall contain statements of the
condition of the library, the number of books added thereto, the number
circulated, the amount of funds collected, and the amount of money expended in
the maintenance of the library during the year, together with such further
information required by the City Council.
5-1-10   INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY.
It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear, deface,
mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper, periodical,
book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging to the Library.
5-1-11   NOTICE POSTED.
There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library notices informing
the public of the following:
   1.   Failure to Return. Failure to return to the Library materials for two
(2) months or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library
materials, or failure to return Library equipment for one (1) month or more
after the date the person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence
of intent to deprive the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the
mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that such material or equipment
is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the
materials or equipment.
   2.   Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be
detained and searched pursuant to law.
TITLE VI
PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
MOBILE HOME REGULATION
6-1-1   Definitions
6-1-2   Location of Mobile Homes
6-1-3   Location of Manufactured Homes
6-1-4   Special Permits for Location of Mobile Homes Outside Mobile Home Parks
6-1-5   Emergency and Temporary Parking
6-1-6   Traffic Code Applicable
6-1-7   Building Requirements
6-1-8   Mobile Home Hookups
6-1-1   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined as follows:
   1.   “Factory-built structure” means any structure which is, wholly or in
substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing
facilities for installation, or assembly and installation, on a building site.
“Factory-built structure” includes the terms “mobile home,” "manufactured
home", and “modular home.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.3(8)
   2.   “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure built under
authority of 42 U.S.C. Section 5403, that is required by federal law to display
a seal from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and
was constructed on or after June 15, 1976.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1(3)
   3.   “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed, or reconstructed
as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or
more persons; but shall also include any such vehicle with motive power not
registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa. Mobile homes were constructed before
June 15, 1976.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1(5)
   4.   “Mobile home park” means a site, lot, field, or tract of land upon
which three or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of any
of these homes, are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit
enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and electrical services available.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1(6)
   5.   “Modular home” means a factory-built structure which is manufactured to
be used as a place of human habitation, is constructed to comply with the Iowa
State Building Code for modular factory-built structures.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1(7)
6-1-2   LOCATION OF MOBILE HOMES.
All mobile homes shall be placed or parked in a mobile home park unless
permitted otherwise by State law. This section shall not apply to mobile homes
parked or placed upon private property as part of a dealer's or a
manufacturer's stock not used as a place for human habitation.
6-1-3   LOCATION OF MANUFACTURED HOMES.
Nothing herein shall disallow the siting of a proposed residential structure
solely because the proposed structure is a manufactured home.
Manufactured homes shall be allowed under the same zoning requirements as site-
built housing, and the City may allow siting of manufactured homes which
otherwise comply with standards imposed for site-built housing, provided that
any manufactured home must comply with installation standards prescribed by the
manufacturer pursuant to 42 USC 5404. Nothing herein shall be construed to
impose standards upon any manufacturer, distributer or retailer in respect to
the design, construction or safety of any manufactured home, and no City
Building Code requirements shall be enforced which are different from any
federal regulations pursuant to 42 USC 5403 which are applicable to
manufactured homes.
   1.   Foundation. The foundation of any manufactured home shall be a
permanent frost free foundation except to the extent the manufacturer’s
specifications require otherwise. All manufactured homes must be made visually
compatible with surrounding residential structures.
   2.   Zoning Requirements. All other zoning requirements, including but not
limited to those relating to minimum square footage requirements and minimum
dimension requirements applicable in R-1 or R-2 zoning, transportation, water,
sewer, or other land development requirements shall apply to manufactured homes
to the same extent as to site-built homes.
   3.   Zoning Amendments:
      a.   Chapter 165, R-1, A, is amended as follows:
“Statement of Intent. The "R-1” Single-Family District is intended to
accommodate low density, single-family dwellings which shall be at least 1000
square feet in size, which shall be at least 24 feet in width and which are
traditional site-built construction or manufactured construction comporting
with 42 U.S.C. § 5403 and having permanent foundation systems which are
visually compatible with surrounding residential structures and related
recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally required to
service the residents within the district. Low density residential areas shall
be protected from higher density residential development and from the
encroachment of incompatible uses.”
      b.   Chapter 165, R-2, A is amended as follows:
“Statement of Intent. The "R-2" Mixed Residential District is intended to
accommodate moderate density developments which may include a variety of
dwelling types ranging from single-family to or-family residences wherein each
dwelling unit, or unit within each multi-family structure, is at least 1000
square feet in size, is at least 24 feet in width and which shall be
traditional site-built construction or manufactured construction comporting
with 42 U.S.C. § 5403 and having permanent foundation systems which are
visually compatible with surrounding residential structures.”
(Ord. 11-16, Passed July 25, 2016)
6-1-4   SPECIAL PERMITS FOR LOCATION OF MOBILE HOMES OUTSIDE MOBILE HOME PARKS.
The City Council, upon application of a mobile home owner, may grant a permit
for a mobile home to be located for a limited time on premises outside mobile
home parks. The City Council shall issue such special permits when it appears
that location within local mobile home park is impracticable or impossible and
public health, safety, and welfare interests will not be seriously affected by
granting the permit. Application for the permit shall include:
   1.   A statement concerning the practicability of location within a local
mobile home park.
   2.   A description of sanitation facilities contained within the mobile home
and those facilities available at the proposed location.
   3.   A statement of the desired duration of the special permit.
6-1-5   EMERGENCY AND TEMPORARY PARKING.
Emergency or temporary parking of mobile homes upon the streets, alleys, or
highways, or any other public or private place for a period not in excess of
seven days shall not constitute a violation of 6-1-2, but such parking shall be
subject to any prohibitions or regulations contained in other Ordinances of
this City.
6-1-6   TRAFFIC CODE APPLICABLE.
The owner of a mobile home park may elect to have City traffic provisions of
the City Code apply to real property in the mobile home park and any person
located on the real property. The owner of a mobile home park may waive this
right by filing a waiver with the County Recorder.
6-1-7   BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
All mobile homes, modular homes and factory built homes as defined in the Iowa
Code located outside a mobile home park shall comply with all Ordinances
relating to residences or homes in the community and shall be affixed to a
permanent perimeter foundation unless it is incompatible with the structural
design of the home. Any home located outside a mobile home park on the date
this ordinance takes effect shall be exempt from the permanent foundation
requirement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26)
6-1-8   MOBILE HOME HOOKUPS.
A mobile home dealer or an employee of a mobile home dealer may perform water,
gas, electrical, and other utility service connections in a mobile home space,
or within ten feet of such space, located in a mobile home park, and the dealer
or an employee of the dealer may install a tie-down system on a mobile home
located in a mobile home park. The connections are subject to inspection and
approval by city officials and the mobile home dealer shall pay an inspection
fee of $_______. No additional permits shall be required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 322B.3)
*Editor's note. The section in parenthesis should be included at the time the
section is first adopted and not during a recodification. In other words, do
not add this language to Ordinances already in effect unless you know the exact
date the chapter went into effect..
CHAPTER 2
UTILITIES - SANITARY SYSTEM
6-2-1   Definitions
6-2-2   Use of Public Sewers Required
6-2-3   Private Sewage Disposal
6-2-4   Building Sewers and Connections
6-2-5   Use of the Public Sewers
6-2-6   Protection from Damage
6-2-7   Powers and Authority to Inspectors
6-2-8   Penalties
6-2-1   DEFINITIONS.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this Ordinance shall be as follows:
   1.   "BOD" (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at 20 degrees C, expressed in milligrams
per liter or parts per million.
   2.   "Building Drain" shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping
of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five (5) feet (l.5 meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
(IAC 567-69.3(1))
   3.   "Building Sewer" shall mean the extension from the building drain to
the public sewer or other place of disposal.
(IAC 567-69.3(1))
   4.   "Combined Sewer" shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.
   5.   "Garbage" shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage,
and sales of produce.
   6.   "Industrial Wastes" shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   7.   "Natural Outlet" shall mean any outlet into watercourse, pond, ditch,
or other body of surface or groundwater.
   8.   "Person" shall mean any individual, firm, company, association,
society, corporation, or group.
   9.   "pH" shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
   10.   "Properly Shredded Garbage" shall mean the waste from the preparation,
cooking, dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (l/2) inch (l.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
   11.   "Public Sewer" shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   12.   "Sanitary Sewer" shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
   13.   "Sewage" shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.
   14.   "Sewage Treatment Plant" shall mean any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
   15.   "Sewage Works" shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping,
treating, and disposing of sewage.
   16.   "Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   17.   "Slug" shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste
which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds
for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5)
times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
   18.   "Storm Drain" (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a sewer
which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   19.   "Superintendent" shall mean the Superintendent of Public Utilities of
the City of Cascade or the Superintendent's authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
   20.   "Suspended Solids" shall mean solids that either float on the surface
of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
   21.   "Watercourse" shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs,
either continuously or intermittently.
6-2-2   USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
City or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
   2.   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this Ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(f))
   3.   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   4.   The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the City,
is hereby required at such owner's expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, provided that
said public sewer is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the property line.
Billing for sanitary sewer service shall begin the date of official notice to
connect to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(f))
(IAC 567-69.3(3))
SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY
   The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the city so situated
that it may be served by the city sewer system may apply to the council for
permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions
stipulated by resolution of the council
6-2-3   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   1.   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provision of Section 6-2-2(4), the building sewer shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   2.   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Superintendent. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other
information as are deemed necessary by the Superintendent.
   3.   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent. The Superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and
before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within 72 hours of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.
   4.   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Natural
Resources of the State of Iowa and the County Health Department. No permit
shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface
soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 1,500 square
feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural
outlet.
   5.   At such times as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in 6-2-2(4), a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this Ordinance,
and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities
shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(f))
   6.   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City.
   7.   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the County Health
Officer.
   8.   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected at the building owner's expense, to said sewer within sixty (60) days
and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled
with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(f))
6-2-4   BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   1.   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent. The
application for the permit shall set forth the location and description of the
property to be connected with the sewer system and the purpose for which the
sewer is to be used, and shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or
other information considered pertinent. The permit shall require the owner to
complete construction and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer
within thirty (30) days after the issuance of the permit, except that when a
property owner makes sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond the
owner’s control or peculiar hardship, such time period is inequitable or
unfair, an extension of time within which to comply with the provisions herein
may be granted. Any sewer connection permit may be revoked at any time for a
violation of these chapters.
Before a permit may be issued for excavating for plumbing in any public street,
way or alley, the person applying for such permit shall have executed unto the
City of Cascade and deposited with the City Clerk a corporate surety in the sum
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned that the applicant will perform
faithfully all work with due care and skill, and in accordance with the laws,
rules and regulations established under the authority of any Ordinances of the
City of Cascade pertaining to plumbing. This bond shall state that the person
will indemnify and save harmless the City of Cascade and the owner of the
premises against all damages, costs, expenses, outlay and claims of every
nature and kind arising out of unskillfulness or negligence on the applicant's
part in connection with plumbing or excavating for plumbing as prescribed in
this Ordinance. Such bond shall remain in force and must be executed for a
period of two (2) years except that on such expiration it shall remain in force
as to all penalties, claims and demands that may have accrued thereunder prior
to such expiration. In lieu of a surety bond, a cash deposit of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) may be filed with the City.
   3.   All cost and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
   4.   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where (1) one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer; and (2) the properties served are in a
planned development, with zero setbacks such as a condominium or multi-family
units and is approved in advance by the City Council. In the case of any shared
services, proof of a joint maintenance agreement must be recorded on the
property and provided to the City on all impacted properties, so as to outline
all responsibilities of maintenance costs prior to any connection taking place.
   5.   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new building sewers
only when they are found, upon examination and testing by the Superintendent,
to meet all requirements of this Ordinance. The Superintendent may require that
the old sewer be excavated for the purpose of facilitating inspection. No old
cesspool or septic tank shall be connected to any portion of a building sewer
that is also connected to the public sewer. Cesspools and septic tanks shall be
located, and drained in a manner approved by the Superintendent and removed or
filled with sand, crushed rock or any other solid material approved by the
Superintendent, except as exempted by the Superintendent.
   6.   The building sewer shall be constructed in accordance with applicable
portions of the last published (State Plumbing Code of Iowa), applicable
specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and
applicable portions of the Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of
Practice No. 9."
      a.   Each connection to the public sewer shall be made to the fittings
designated for that property. If a fitting in the public sewer is not available
for the designated property, the connection shall then be made under the direct
supervision of the Superintendent. Connections to the public sewer not made to
an existing wye or tee shall be made by a hole cutter or careful chisel
cutting. The connection shall be rendered water and gas tight, by use of rubber
gaskets. The building sewer shall not protrude into the public sewer.
      b.   All building sewers shall be constructed of the following materials
conforming to the indicated standards. In absence of provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall
apply.
   Vitrified Clay Pipe VCP
         (1)   Pipe and Fittings -ASTM C-700 "Standard Specification or
Vitrified Clay Pipe, Extra Strength, Standard Strength and Perforated."
         (2)   Coupling and Joints -ASTM C-425 "Standard Specification for
Compression Joints for Vitrified Clay Pipe and Fittings".
   Extra Heavy Cast Iron Soil Pipe
         (1)   Pipe and Fittings -ASTM A-74 "Standard Specification for Cast
Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings."
         (2)   Joints -ASTM C-564 "Standard Specification for Rubber Gaskets
for Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings."
   Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC)
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) and joints shall be installed according to the
manufacturers' recommendations and shall conform to:
         (1)   Pipe -A.S.T.M. D-3034, "Type P.S.M. Poly (PVC) and Fittings."
         Minimum wall thickness:
         4" - 0.125"
         6" - 0.180"
         8" - 0.240"
         10" -0.300"
         (2)   Joints -A.S.T.M. D-1869, A.S.T.M. D-1312, "Flexible Elastomeric
Seals."
         (3)   Minimum velocity: 2.50 feet per second with sewer half full.
         (4)   Deviations: any deviation in alignment or grade shall be made
only with written approval of the Superintendent and shall be made only with
properly curved pipe and fittings.
         Pipe Specifications. Building sewer pipe shall be free from flaws,
splits or breaks. Materials shall be as specified in Division 4 of the State
Building Code or the City plumbing regulations.
         Jointing. Fittings, type of joint and jointing material shall be
commensurate with the type of pipe used, subject to the approval of the
Superintendent.
         Unstable Soil. No sewer connection shall be laid so that it is exposed
when crossing any watercourse. Where an old watercourse must of necessity be
crossed or where there is any danger of undermining or settlement, cast iron
soil pipe or verified clay sewer pipe thoroughly encased in concrete shall be
required for such crossings. Such encasement shall extend at least six (6)
inches on all sides of the pipe. The cast iron pipe or encased clay pipe shall
rest on firm, solid material at either end.
         Preparation of Basement or Crawl Space. No connection for any
residence, business or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be made
unless the basement floor is poured, or in the case of a building with a slab
or crawl space, unless the ground floor is installed with the area adjacent to
the foundation of such building cleared of debris and backfilled. The backfill
shall be well compacted and graded so that the drainage is away from the
foundation. Prior to the time the basement floor is poured, or the first floor
is installed in buildings without basements, the sewer shall be plugged and the
plug shall be sealed by the Superintendent. Any accumulation of water in any
excavation or basement during construction and prior to connection to the
sanitary sewer shall be removed by means other than drainage into the sanitary
sewer.
         INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED. Grease, oil, sludge and sand interceptors shall
be provided by gas and service stations, convenience stores, car washes,
garages, and other facilities when in the opinion of the Superintendent, they
are necessary for the proper handling of such wastes that contain grease in
excessive amounts or any flammable waste, sand or other harmful ingredients.
Such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. When required, such interceptors shall be installed in accordance with
the following:
         Design and Location: All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
as provided by the Iowa Public Health Bulletin and Division 4 of the State
Building Code, to be approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located so as
to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
         Construction Standards. The interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped
with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and watertight.
         Maintenance. All such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at
the owner's expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient operations at
all times.
         Backflow Preventer Required. All new construction, repair or
reconfiguration of the sanitary sewer system in a structure requires the
installation of a sewer backflow preventer installed downstream of all drains.
         Sewer Tap. Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable
location. If no properly located "Y" branch is available, a "Y" saddle shall be
installed at the location specified by the Superintendent.
The public sewer shall be tapped with a tapping machine and a saddle
appropriate to the type of public sewer shall be glued and attached with
stainless steel clamps to the sewer. At no time shall a building sewer be
constructed so as to enter a manhole unless special written permission is
received from the Superintendent and in accordance with the Superintendent
direction if such connection is approved.
         c.   No building sewer for residential or commercial buildings shall
be less than four inches in diameter. No building sewer for industries or
multiple dwellings shall be less than six inches in diameter.
         d.   Unless otherwise authorized, all building sewers shall have a
grade of not less than one-eighth (1/8) inch per foot. A grade of one-fourth
(1/4) inch per foot shall be used wherever practical.
         e.   All excavation shall be open trench work unless authorized by the
Superintendent. The foundation in the trench shall be formed to prevent any
subsequent settlement of the pipes. If the foundation is good firm earth, the
earth shall be pared or molded to give a full support to the lower quadrant of
each pipe. Bell holes shall be dug. Where the floor of the trench is of hard or
rocky material, the trench shall be excavated to four inches below the pipe and
brought back to the proper grade with gravel, course sand or similar material
so as to provide a firm foundation and uniform support for the building sewer
line. Backfilling shall be placed in layers and solidly tamped or packed up to
two feet above the pipe. Back-filling shall not be done until final inspection
is made by the Superintendent. Building sewers shall be laid straight at
uniform grade between connections or fittings.
         f.   Cleanouts shall be provided for each change in direction or grade
if the change exceeds 45 degrees and at least every 100 feet.
   7.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth shall be sufficient to
afford protection from frost. All excavations required for the installation of
a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the
said Superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance
with A.S.T.M. Specification (Designation C12). No backfill shall be placed
until the work has been inspected by the Superintendent or the Superintendent's
representative. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the
building sewer.
   8.   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   9.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All
such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Superintendent
before installation.
   10.   Each and every part of the building sewer shall be inspected and
approved by the Superintendent before being concealed or back-filled. The
applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent or the
Superintendent's representative.
   11.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City.
   12.   The City shall, in no event, be held responsible for claims made
against it by reason of the breaking of any mains or service pipes, or by
reason of any other interruption of the service caused by the breaking of
machinery or stoppage for necessary repairs; and no person shall be entitled to
damages nor have any portion of a payment refunded for any interruption.
   12-1   Abatement of Violations. Construction or maintenance of building
sewer lines whether located upon the private property of any owner or in the
public right of way, which construction or maintenance is in violation of any
of the requirements of this chapter, shall be corrected at the owner’s expense
within thirty (30) days after date of official notice from the council of such
violation. If not made within such time the council shall in addition to other
penalties herein provided have the right to finish and correct the work and
assess the cost thereof to the property owner. Such assessment shall be
collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes.
   13.   The premises receiving sanitary sewer service, shall at all reasonable
hours, be subject to inspection by duly authorized personnel of the City.
   14.   The Owner of the property served by a building sewer shall be 100%
responsible for the operation, maintenance, repair, blockage, surface
replacement, and any damage resulting from operation, maintenance repair and
blockage of said building sewer, from the point of connection with the building
drain to the Public Sewer. The materials used to repair the right-of-way must
be the same original material such as concrete or asphalt, unless otherwise
pre-approved by the City.
   15.   Connection Charge. Before any permit is issued and connection made, a
connection charge shall be paid to the City. The City may determine what
connections will be made under this section and connections may be denied, or
an additional connection fee negotiated, if the City makes a determination that
the requested hookup will place an unreasonable burden on the water and/or
sewer mains. A connection fee will be charged for each time a new connection is
made to the sanitary sewer system regardless of whether the connection is made
to a stubbed-out sewer lateral or sewer main. The connection fee will be
established by Resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 01-22, passed 8-22-22; Ord. 07-22, passed 11-14-22; Ord. 11-24, passed 5-
28-24)
6-2-4-1   SPECIFICATIONS FOR SEWER SERVICE LINES
Purpose. This chapter governs the construction of new sewer service lines and
the replacement of existing sewer service lines in the city.
Utility Locations. Prior to beginning excavation, the contractor shall notify
all utility companies of the location of the excavation work and request field
location of their facilities. The contractor shall exercise care in excavating
near all utilities or service connections to these utilities. They shall be
protected, supported and maintained in service or restored to the condition in
which they were found. Where such utilities cannot be replaced so as to occupy
their original location, they shall be relocated by the respective utility
company with the cooperation and assistance of the contractor. In the case of
drain tile or sewers, the contractor shall relocate such facilities under the
direction of the City.
Trench Excavations. Excavation may be carried on by any reasonable method
preferred by the contractor which shall insure systematic progress without
danger to the completed work or the private or public property adjacent to the
work. Whenever the contractor shall excavate below the grade of the sewer
service line, they shall backfill the trench to grade with selected sand tamped
in place.
Sewer Service Taps. All service taps shall be performed by Sewer Department
personnel. They shall be located at the ten o’clock or two o’clock position on
the circumference of the pipe. No taps shall be made less than twelve inches
from a joint and never directly on top of the main. Taps shall be a minimum of
twelve inches apart.
Service Lines Sewer Saddle. On clay tile or P.V.C. sewer mains, a sewer saddle
is required and type shall be determined by the City Superintendent. A larger
saddle will be needed if the sewer main diameter is larger. A minimum of one 5-
gallon bucket of approved mortar mix is to be packed around and underneath the
saddle and under the sewer main.
Sewer Service Pipes. Service pipe shall be P.V.C. Schedule 40 or clay tile. The
diameter shall be 4-inch. If a larger diameter pipe is needed it must be
approved by the Superintendent before the contractor can proceed with the
project. A 6-inch service line shall only be connected to an 8-inch or larger
main. A service line of 8-inch diameter or larger shall require a manhole at
the connection.
Sewer Service Caps. Service caps shall be 4-inch Schedule 40, cemented to end
of stub-in.
Inspection. All material found during the progress of the work to have cracks,
flaws or other defects shall be rejected. All defective materials furnished by
the contractor shall be promptly removed by the contractor from the site. No
connections, replacements or cut-offs shall be covered or backfilled until
inspection and approval have been completed. Contractors shall call the Sewer
Department for inspection prior to any backfilling in the city right-of-way.
Work shall be uncovered for inspection at the order of the Superintendent and
shall be in full view from above the ditch, prior to backfilling.
Backfill Material. All backfill material shall be subject to the prior approval
of the city. If, in the opinion of the city, the material excavated constituted
unsuitable backfill, the contractor shall provide, unless otherwise stated, at
the contractor’s own expense, acceptable backfill material. No frozen material
shall be used for backfilling. All surplus excavated material which is not used
in backfilling shall be loaded and disposed of by the contractor at the
contractor’s own expense.
6-2-5   USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
   1.   Storm Water. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or
storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the
Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
      a.   Storm water conducted from roofs or other impervious areas shall be
dispersed entirely upon the grounds of the owner of the contributing property
or it shall be drained or conducted into ditches, storm drains or gutters where
available on public property or easements legally useable for that purpose, or
into public streams. No storm water shall be purposely directed onto a
neighboring property and any outlet must be at least ten (10) feet from the
common property line with any abutting owner or City right of way.
      b.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, including
interior and exterior foundation drains, downspouts, uncontaminated cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer or combined
sewer.
      c.   Storm water and all other unpolluted water shall be discharged to a
storm sewer, except that unpolluted cooling or process water shall only be so
discharged upon approval by the Superintendent. The Superintendent may also
approve discharge of unpolluted water into a natural outlet or a combined
sewer, provided the discharge complies with applicable state and federal
regulations.
      d.   The City Engineer is authorized to grant an exemption from the
provisions of this section to permit the connection of downspouts into a
combined sewer or to permit any water to be discharged into a combined sewer
after written application is made for an exemption. A written permit shall be
issued granting the exemption if, in the opinion of the City Engineer:
         (1)   A reasonably available absorption area is not present for the
water;
         (2)   Allowing the downspout to discharge onto the ground, sidewalk,
street or alley will create a hazardous or unsatisfactory condition or the
failure to permit the discharge of water as applied for would create a
hazardous or unsatisfactory condition; or
          (3)   Disconnection from the sewer would require major structural
alteration.
(1999 Code, § 97.01) (Ord. 13-23, passed 8-14-23) Penalty, see § 53.99
   2.   Illegally Discharged Storm Water.
      a.   In the event it is determined that storm-water, surface water, water
from downspouts or any water is illegally discharged into any sanitary sewer or
combined sewer in violation of Chapter 97.01, the city shall serve a written
notice upon the person responsible for the illegal discharge, the owner of the
property, and any tenant occupying the property ordering the removal of the
illegal connection or discharge. The notice shall be signed by the City
Engineer or an authorized representative and shall allow 15 calendar days for
the removal of the illegal connection or discharge. Said notice will be served
by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, upon the
responsible person, owner and tenant. The notice shall provide for a right to a
hearing before the City Council on the order to remove. Any person requesting a
hearing before the City Council must submit a written request to the City
Administrator within 15 calendar days after receipt of the order to remove.
Failure to submit said request within 15 calendar days after receipt of the
order to remove shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and the
right to any appeal. The removal of the illegal connection or discharge
requires the disconnection of any pipe carrying the prohibited discharge to the
sewer system either at ground level or underground and the capping or blocking
of the remaining pipe so as to prevent any water from entering the sewer
system. The City shall have the prerogative to inspect and approve any removal.
         (1)   In the event the owner does not remove the illegal connection or
discharge and does not receive an exemption, the owner shall be charged a
surcharge based on roof area as set forth in the following schedule:
 
Roof Area                              Monthly Surcharge
Less than 3,000 square feet            $15
3,000 square feet to 4,999 square feet $30
5,000 square feet to 9,999 square feet $50
10,000 square feet and up              $100
 
         (2)   There shall be one surcharge per property, regardless of the
number of downspout connections. The City Engineer shall provide the Clerk with
a current list of buildings with downspout connections. The surcharge shall be
part of the sewer service bill and collected in the same manner.
         (3)   Nothing in this section shall preclude or abridge such other
legal rights the City may have to enjoin or deter illegal storm water
discharge. In the event that any person in violation of this section fails to
comply with the terms of this section after notice provided for herein and
following any requested hearing as provided for herein, the City may file an
action in the District Court to obtain injunction against continued violation
and any other appropriate relief allowed by law.
(Ord. 5-17, Passed July 27, 2017)
   3.   Surface waters exception. Special permits for discharging surface
waters to a public sanitary sewer may be issued by the Council upon
recommendation of the Superintendent where such discharge is deemed necessary
or advisable for purposes of flushing, but any permit so issued shall be
subject to revocation at any time when deemed to the best interests of the
sewer system.
   4.   Prohibited Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewers:
      a.   Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha,
fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      b.   Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic
or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or
by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) milligrams
per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
      c.   Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
      d.   Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in
quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works
such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk
containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
      e.   Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow. Any waters or wastes having (a) a
five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred (300) parts
per million by weight, or (b) containing more than three hundred fifty (350)
parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or (c) having an average daily
flow greater than two (2) percent of the average sewage flow of the City, shall
be subject to the review of the Superintendent. Where necessary in the opinion
of the Superintendent, the owner shall provide, at the owner’s expense, such
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (a) reduce the biochemical oxygen
demand to three hundred (300) parts per million by weight, or (b) reduce the
suspended solids to three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight, or
(c) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes.
Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the
Superintendent and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until
said approvals are obtained in writing.
   5.   Restricted Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if
it appears likely in the opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can
harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to
such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent
factors. The substances restricted are:
      a.   High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher
than one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (65 degrees C).
      b.   Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease,
or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) milligrams
per liter or six hundred (600) milligrams per liter of dispersed or other
soluble matter.
      c.   Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one
hundred fifty (150) degrees F (0 and 65 degrees C).
      d.   Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is,
to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than
one-half (½) inch in any dimension.
      e.   Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
      f.   Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials.
      g.   Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other
taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits
which may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of
the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal, or other
public agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
      h.   Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-
life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
      i.   Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of
9.5.
      j.   Unusual Wastes. Materials which exert or cause:
         1)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).
         2)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
         3)   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
         4)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
      k.   Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers
for their maintenance and repair.
      l.   Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials or substances
which react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases,
develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable
concentration or create any other condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
      m.   Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances which are
not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
   6.   Restricted Discharges - Powers. If any waters or wastes are discharged,
or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 5 and which in
the judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent
may:
      a.   Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the
public sewage system;
      b.   Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
      c.   Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or
      d.   Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling
and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of Chapter 5 Utilities - Billing Charges.
   7.   Special Facilities. If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and
subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.
   8.   Control Manholes. When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install
a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s
expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
   9.   Testing of Wastes. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the
characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter
shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods
of the Examination of Water and Wastewater,” published by the American Public
Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or
upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty- four (24) hour
composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended
solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four (24) hour composites of all
outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from periodic grab samples).
     10.   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water
or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the
Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
   11.   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   12.   No statement contained in this article shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment, therefore, by
the industrial concern.
6-2-6   PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   1.   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
6-2-7   POWERS AND AUTHORITY TO INSPECTORS.
   1.   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The
Superintendent or the Superintendent's representatives shall have no authority
to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining,
ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing
on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities
for waste treatment.
   2.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in 6-2-7(1), the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the City shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company
and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City
employees and the City shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to
its property by the City employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
Section 6-2-5(8).
   3.   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
6-2-8   PENALTIES.
   1.   Any person found to be violating any provision of this Ordinance except
Section 6-2-6 shall be served by the City with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   2.   Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the time limit provided for in subsection 1 hereof, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not exceeding
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
   3   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance is liable
to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the City by reason of
such violations.
Footnote: See 384.38(3) concerning establishing districts and connection fees
(H.F. 2343, 1994 legislative session).
CHAPTER 3
UTILITIES - WATER SYSTEM
WATER SYSTEM
6-3-1   Enforcement
6-3-2   Adoption of State Plumbing Code
6-3-3   License Required
6-3-4   Mandatory Connections
6-3-5   Permit
6-3-6   Water Supply Control
6-3-7   Making the Connection
6-3-8   Connection Charge
6-3-9   Excavations
6-3-10   Inspection and Approval
6-3-11   Completion by the City
6-3-12   Water Meter Testing
6-3-13   Responsibility for Water Service Pipe
6-3-14   Other Regulations
WATER METERS
6-3-15   Purpose
6-3-16   Water Use Metered
6-3-17   Fire Sprinkler Systems-Exception
6-3-18   Location of Meters
6-3-19   Meter Setting
6-3-20   Meter Costs
6-3-21   Meter Repairs
6-3-22   Right of Entry
6-3-23   Second Water Meter
SPECIFICATIONS FOR WATER SERVICE LINES
6-3-24   Purpose
6-3-25   Service Interruptions
6-3-26   Utility Locations
6-3-27   Trench Excavation
6-3-28   Water Service Taps
6-3-29   Operation of Valves and Hydrants
6-3-30   Water Used
6-3-31   Corporation Stop
6-3-32   Service Lines Tapping Saddle Clamps
6-3-33   Water Service Pipe
6-3-34   Curb Stop
6-3-35   Curb Stop Blocking
6-3-36   Curb Box
6-3-37   Inspection
6-3-38   Backfill Material
6-3-39   Compaction of Excavated Area
6-3-40   Wellhead Protection
6-3-41   Private Wells
WATER SYSTEM
6-3-1   ENFORCEMENT.
The Superintendent of public utilities shall supervise the installation of
water service pipes and their connections to the water main and enforce all
regulations pertaining to water services in this City in accordance with this
chapter. This chapter shall apply to all replacements of existing service pipes
as well as to new ones. The City Council shall make such rules, not in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter, as needed for the detailed operation of
the waterworks. In the event of an emergency the Superintendent may make
temporary rules for the protection of the system until due consideration by the
City Council may be had.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
6-3-2   ADOPTION OF STATE PLUMBING CODE.
The installation of any water-service pipe and any connection with the
municipal water system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable
provisions, whether regulatory, procedural or enforcement provisions, of the
State Plumbing Code.
6-3-3   LICENSE REQUIRED.
All installation of water service pipes and connections to the municipal water
system shall be made by a plumber approved by the City. The Superintendent
shall have the power to suspend the approval of any plumber for violation of
any of the provisions of this Ordinance. A suspension, unless revoked, shall
continue until the next regular meeting of the City Council. The Superintendent
shall notify the plumber immediately by personal written notice of the
suspension, the reasons for the suspension, and the time and place of the City
Council meeting at which the plumber will be granted a hearing. At this City
Council meeting the Superintendent shall make a written report to the City
Council stating the Superintendent's reasons for the suspension, and the City
Council, after fair hearing, shall affirm or revoke the suspension or take any
further action that is necessary and proper. The plumber shall provide a surety
bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) secured by a responsible
surety bonding company authorized to operate within the State, conditioned to
indemnify and save the City harmless against all losses or damages that may
arise from or be occasioned by the making of connections to the water system or
excavations therefore or by carelessness, negligence or unskillfulness in
making the same. Such bond shall remain in force and must be executed for a
period of one year except that on such expiration it shall remain in force as
to all penalties, claims and demands that may have accrued thereunder prior to
such expiration. In lieu of a surety bond, a cash deposit of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) may be filed with the City.
6-3-4   MANDATORY CONNECTIONS.
All residences and business establishments within the City limits intended or
used for human habitation, occupancy or use shall be connected to the public
water supply if it is reasonably available and if the building is not furnished
with pure and wholesome water from some other source.
6-3-5   PERMIT.
Before any person makes a connection with the public water system, a written
permit must be obtained from the City Administrator and Water Superintendent.
The application for the permit shall be filed at the same time as the building
permit and on the same form. The Water Superintendent shall sign and issue the
permit, if the proposed work meets all the requirements of this chapter and if
all fees or charges required under this chapter have been paid. The Water
Superintendent may at any time revoke the permit for any violation of this
chapter and require that the work be stopped. The property owner shall pay all
charges in accordance with
6-3-8. The owner shall notify the City Administrator when the connection to the
City water meter is ready for inspection by the Water Superintendent. The water
meter must be connected and operational prior to any water consumption from the
City's water system.
(Ord. 42-13, Passed August 26, 2013; Ord. 01-22, passed 8-22-22)
6-3-6   WATER SUPPLY CONTROL.
The plumber who makes the connection to the municipal water system shall
install a main shut-off valve of the inverted key type on the water-service
pipe near the curb with a suitable lock of a pattern approved by the
Superintendent. The shut-off valve shall be covered with a heavy metal cover
having the letter "W" marked thereon, visible and even with the pavement or
ground.
The plumber also shall install a shut-off valve and waste cock on every service
pipe inside the building near the entrance of the water-service pipe into the
building; this must be located so that the water can be shut off conveniently
and the pipes drained. Where one service pipe is installed to supply more than
one customer, there shall be separate shut-off valves inside the building for
each customer so that service to one customer can be shut off without
interfering with service to the others.
6-3-7   MAKING THE CONNECTION.
Any connection with the municipal water system must be made under the direct
supervision of the Superintendent or the Superintendent's authorized assistant.
All taps in the water main must be at least (12) inches apart and on the side
and near the top and not in any case within 18 inches of the hub.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
6-3-8   CONNECTION CHARGE.
Before any permit is issued in accordance with
6-3-5 and connection made, a connection charge shall be paid to the City. The
City may determine what connections will be made under this section and
connections may be denied, or an additional connection fee negotiated, if the
City makes a determination that the requested hookup will place an unreasonable
burden on the water and/or sewer mains. A connection fee will be charged for
each time a new connection is made to the water system regardless of whether
the connection is made to a stubbed-out water lateral or water main. The
connection fee will be established by Resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 01-22, passed 8-22-22)
6-3-9   EXCAVATIONS.
Excavations to do work under this Ordinance shall be dug so as to occasion the
least possible inconvenience to the public and to provide for the passage of
water along the gutter. All such excavations shall have proper barricades at
all times, and warning lights placed from one-half hour before sunset to one-
half hour after sunrise. In refilling the excavation the earth must be laid in
layers and each layer tamped thoroughly to prevent settlement, and this work,
and any street, sidewalk, pavement or other public property that is affected,
must be restored to as good a condition as it was previous to the excavation.
The plumber must maintain the affected area in good repair to the satisfaction
of the City Council for three months after refilling. All water service pipes
must be laid so as to prevent rupture by settlement of freezing. No excavation
shall be made within six (6) feet of any laid water or sewer pipe while the
ground is frozen, and no water or sewer pipe shall be exposed to frost, except
by special written permission of the Superintendent.
6-3-10   INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
All water-service pipes and their connections to the municipal water system
must be inspected and approved in writing by the Superintendent before they are
covered, and the Superintendent shall keep a record of such approvals. If the
Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed
immediately to correct the work so that it will meet with the Superintendent's
approval. Every person who uses or intends to use the municipal water system
shall permit the Superintendent or the Superintendent's authorized assistants
to enter the premises to inspect and make necessary alterations or repairs at
all reasonable hours and on proof of authority.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
6-3-11   COMPLETION BY THE CITY.
Should any excavation be left open or partly refilled for twenty-four (24)
hours after the water-service pipe is installed and connected with the
municipal water system, or should the work be improperly done, the
Superintendent shall have the right to finish or correct the work, and the City
Council shall assess the costs to the property owner or the plumber. If the
plumber is assessed, the plumber must pay the costs before the plumber can
receive another permit, and the plumber's bond required by the Plumbing
Ordinance shall be security for the assessment. If the property owner is
assessed, such assessment shall be collected with and in the same manner as
general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
6-3-12   WATER METER TESTING.
The Superintendent of Public Works or their designee shall make a test of the
accuracy of any water meter at any time when requested in writing. If it is
found that such meter overruns to the extent of 5% or more, the cost of the
test shall be paid by the City and a refund shall be made to the customer for
overcharges collected since the last known date of accuracy, but not for a
longer period than 3 months. If the meter is found to be accurate or slow or
less than 5% fast, the user shall pay a testing charge of $100.00.
(Ord. 48-14, Passed May 27, 2014)
6-3-13   RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE.
   1.   Installation. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the water service pipe from the curb stop to the building served
shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss
or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of
said water service pipe.
   The cost to repair the water service pipe from the city water main to the
curb box and from the curb box to the residence shall be paid by the property
owner 100%. The materials used to repair the right-of-way must be the same
original material such as concrete or asphalt, unless otherwise pre- approved
by the City.
(Ord 1-18, Feb 12, 2018; Ord. 09-24, passed 5-28-24)
6-3-14   OTHER REGULATIONS.
   1.   Abandoned Service Lines: All service lines which are no longer used
must be permanently closed off at the distribution water main at the expense of
the property owner. This work shall be completed within six months from the
date of abandonment. If not completed in the required time, the city or its
agent, after written notice to the owner, shall complete the work and bill the
property owner.
   2.   Tapping Mains. All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the
direct supervision of the Superintendent in accord with the Specifications for
Water Service Lines section in 6-3 and the following:
      a.   Independent Services. No more than one house, building or premises
shall be supplied from one tap unless special written permission is obtained
from the Superintendent and unless provision is made so that each house,
building or premise may be shut off independently of the other.
      b.   Sizes of Taps. All mains six (6) inches or less in diameter shall
receive no larger than a three-fourths (3/4) inch tap. All mains of over six
(6) inches in diameter shall receive no larger than a one inch tap. Where a
larger connection than a one inch tap is desired, two (2) or more small taps or
saddles shall be used, as the Superintendent shall order.
      c.   Corporation Cock. A brass corporation cock, of the pattern and
weight approved by the Superintendent, shall be inserted in every tap in the
main. The corporation cock in the main shall in no case be smaller than one
size smaller than the service pipe.
      d.   Location Record. An accurate and dimensional sketch showing the
exact location of the tap shall be filed with the Superintendent in such form
as the Superintendent shall require.
   3.   Installation of Water Service Pipe. Water service pipes from the main
to the meter setting shall be type K copper tubing. Pipe must be laid
sufficiently waving, and to such depth, as to prevent rupture from settlement
or freezing.
   4.   Failure to Maintain. When any portion of the water service pipe which
is the responsibility of the property owner becomes defective or creates a
nuisance and the owner fails to correct such nuisance the City may do so and
assess the costs thereof to the property.
   5.   Curb Stop. There shall be installed within the public right-of-way a
main shut-off valve on the water service pipe at the outer sidewalk line with a
suitable lock of a pattern approved by the Superintendent.
   6.   Interior Stop and Waste Cock. There shall be installed a shut-off valve
and waste cock on every service pipe inside the building as close to the
entrance of the pipe within the building as possible and so located that the
water can be shut off conveniently and the pipes drained. Where one service
pipe supplies more than one customer within the building, there shall be
separate valves for each such customer so that service may be shut off for one
without interfering with service to the others.
   7.   Shutting Off Water Supply. After following the procedures set out in
Section
6-5-5, the Superintendent may shut off the supply of water to any customer
because of any substantial violation of this chapter, or valid regulation under
2-3-10 that is not being contested in good faith. The supply shall not be
turned on again until all violations have been corrected and the Superintendent
has ordered the water to be turned on.
   8.   Operation of Curb Stop and Hydrants. It is unlawful for any person
except the Superintendent to turn water on at the curb stop, and no person,
unless specifically authorized by the City, shall open or attempt to draw water
from any fire hydrant for any purpose whatsoever.
   9.   Backflow Valves. All new construction, repair or reconfiguration of the
water system in a structure requires the installation of a dual check valve
backflow preventer. All such installation shall be in accordance with the
Uniform Plumbing Code.
   10.   Repair Or Reconnection Prohibited: Repair, partial replacement, or
reconnection of a lead or galvanized service line to a distribution water main
is prohibited and must be replaced at which time any part of the service or
items like the curb stop are in need of repair or when a lead or galvanized
line is visually observed or confirmed.
   11.   Lead Or Galvanized Service Line Replacement Requirement: Any lead or
galvanized service line that develops a leak or other defect shall require a
full lead or galvanized service line replacement in lieu of repair. The method
of connection at the distribution water main shall comply with the City’s
adopted tapping policies and approved materials. The owner shall report to the
Water Department any planned lead or galvanized service line replacement prior
to commencing work. The cost of such replacement shall be the responsibility of
the property owner.
(Ord. 15-24, 7-22-24)
WATER METERS
6-3-15   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water and
facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among
customers.
6-3-16   WATER USE METERED.
All water furnished customers shall be measured through meters furnished by the
City and installed by a plumber.
6-3-17   FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS - EXCEPTION.
Fire sprinkler systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection
without meters under the direct supervision of the Superintendent. No open
connection can be incorporated in the system, and there shall be no valves
except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which must be
sealed open.
6-3-18   LOCATION OF METERS.
All meters shall be so located that they are easily accessible to meter readers
and repairmen and protected from freezing. In multiple family buildings, the
meters shall be installed in one room with a central location in the building.
6-3-19   METER SETTING.
The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and fittings for proper
setting of the meter including a globe type valve on the discharge side of the
meter. Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the Superintendent and
shall be of a design and construction approved by the Superintendent.
6-3-20   METER COSTS.
The full cost of any meter larger than a ¾-inch meter shall be paid to the City
by the property owner or customer prior to the installation of any such meter
by the City, or, at the sole option of the City, the property owner or customer
may be required to purchase and install such meter in accordance with
requirements established by the City.
6-3-21   METER REPAIRS.
Whenever a water meter owned by the City is found to be out of order the
Superintendent shall have it repaired. If it is found that damage to the meter
has occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or property
owner, or the meter is not owned by the City, then the property owner shall be
liable for the cost of repairs.
6-3-22   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The Superintendent shall be permitted to enter the premises of any customer at
any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter.
6-3-23   SECOND WATER METERS.
Each property owner in the City may have a second water meter installed to
measure water that is not discharged into the sanitary sewer system, in
accordance with the following:
   1.   The Council must approve the installation of the second water meter
prior to installation.
   2.   The property owner shall pay for the second water meter, a remote
reading device and for all costs associated with connecting the water meter to
the property.
The property owner shall install a back flow valve.
When meter and items are installed, the city will complete an inspection
ensuring all is installed correctly.
An annual inspection by the city is required with a fee of $30.00 being charged
to persons with a second water meter.
   3.   The property owner shall pay the monthly minimum for water service to
the second water meter for the entire year and not for just the months that the
property owner may plan to use the second meter. In addition, the property
owner shall pay for water usage at the current rates for all water used.
(Ord. 12-17, Oct 23, 2017)
   SPECIFICATIONS FOR WATER SERVICE LINES
6-3-24   PURPOSE.
This chapter governs the construction of new water service lines and the
replacement of existing water service lines in the City.
6-3-25   SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS.
In the event the contractor’s operation interrupts service to the Water
Department’s customers and they do not promptly restore such services, the
Department reserves the right to enter the work and restore the service with
Department personnel. The labor and machine time required for restoration of
service shall be charged to the contractor.
6-3-26   UTILITY LOCATIONS.
Prior to beginning excavation, the contractor shall notify all utility
companies of the location of the excavation work and request field location of
their facilities. The contractor shall exercise care in excavating near all
utilities or service connections to these utilities. They shall be protected,
supported and maintained in service or restored to the condition in which they
were found. Where such utilities cannot be replaced so as to occupy their
original location, they shall be relocated by the respective utility company
with the cooperation and assistance of the contractor. In the case of drain
tile or sewers, the contractor shall relocate such facilities under the
direction of the City. No excavation shall be made near any water main until
Water Department personnel are on hand to shut off the main and authorize the
contractor to proceed. The contractor shall not operate valves on existing
water mains.
6-3-27   TRENCH EXCAVATION.
The contractor shall excavate all trenches to provide a minimum cover of five
and one-half (5.5) feet above the top of the water service line. Excavation may
be carried on by any reasonable method preferred by the contractor which shall
insure systematic progress without danger to the completed work or the private
or public property adjacent to the work. Whenever the contractor shall excavate
below the grade of the water service line, they shall backfill the trench to
grade with selected sand tamped in place.
6-3-28   WATER SERVICE TAPS.
Corporation stops shall be located at the ten o’clock or two o’clock position
on the circumference of the pipe unless this would result in any part of the
service line attached to the corporation to have less than five feet of cover.
Where five feet of cover is not available, the location of the corporation may
be rotated downward, but no lower than the mid-point of the main to be tapped.
Water Department personnel shall make all taps on all department water mains.
6-3-29   OPERATION OF VALVES AND HYDRANTS.
The operation of all valves and hydrants shall be under the control of the
Water Department at all times. The contractor shall notify the Department when
the contractor is ready for a valve or hydrant to be operated and this work
shall be performed by employees of the Department.
6-3-30   WATER USED.
All water required for flushing, testing or sterilization of service lines will
be furnished by the Water Department at no cost to the contractor. The
contractor will be allowed to use City water at regular meter rates for all
other purposes, but before any water is used, the contractor shall notify the
Water Department office. A suitable meter will be provided by the Department
upon payment of the standard charge. No water shall be used other than that
water required for the items listed above without a meter. Opening and closing
of the fire hydrants shall be performed only by an authorized employee of the
Water Department.
6-3-31   CORPORATION STOP.
Corporation stop shall be a Mueller H-15000 or A.Y. McDonald 4701 with a flared
copper outlet. The corporation stops shall be limited to ¾-inch.
6-3-32   SERVICE LINES TAPPING SADDLE CLAMPS.
Tapping saddles shall be SMITH-BLAIR Model 317 and of the pipe size of the
water main, minimum 4-inch. Saddle size shall be the same as the water main.
6-3-33   WATER SERVICE PIPE.
Service pipe shall be Type K copper on the portion of the service within the
City right-of-way and/or between the water main and the curb stop. On the
section of the service outside of the City's right-of-way from the curbs stop
to the building, a property owner may install Type K Copper or a plastic CTS
(copper tube sizing) pipe. When a plastic pipe is installed, it is also
required to install a tracer wire with #12 AWG Copper Clad Steel, High Strength
with minimum 450 pound break load, with minimum 30 mil HDPE insulation
thickness. In addition, when a tracer wire box is installed, a City supplied
bracket shall also be required to make a solid connection between the curb stop
and tracer wire box. The City will charge for the cost of the bracket. All
tracer wire must be installed to City specifications. The diameter shall be ¾-
inch minimum.
(Ord. 08-22, passed 11-14-22; Ord. 11-23, passed 8-28-23)
6-3-34   CURB STOP.
Curb stop shall be Mueller H-15201 with a 1½-inch Minneapolis pattern on the
top of the valve. Flared copper inlet and outlet, minimum diameter ¾-inch.
6-3-35   CURB STOP BLOCKING.
A concrete block shall be placed under the curb stop against unexcavated earth.
The concrete block shall be 4" x 8" x 16". All curb boxes shall be plumb so
Water Department personnel can place their wrenches on the valve.
6-3-36   CURB BOX.
Curb box shall be constructed of five feet of 1½-inch galvanized pipe threaded
with coupling to be screwed into the top of curb stop. Three feet of 2-inch
galvanized pipe shall be placed over the 1½-inch section of pipe and is to be
level with the ground surface of the property when the job is completed. The
curb box lid shall be threaded into the 1½-inch pipe and shall be A. Y.
McDonald Model #5623L, 1½-inch Brass Pentagon Plug (#4511-204). The word
“WATER” in raised letters shall be on the top. When using the Mueller H-15201
curb stop, a 1½" x 2" reducer coupling is needed, which screws on to the curb
stop.
6-3-37   INSPECTION.
All material found during the progress of the work to have cracks, flaws or
other defects shall be rejected. All defective materials furnished by the
contractor shall be promptly removed by the contractor from the site.
6-3-38   BACKFILL MATERIAL.
All backfill material shall be free from cinders, ashes, refuse, vegetable or
organic material, boulders or other material that in the opinion of the
Superintendent is unsuitable. From three feet above the top of the pipe, the
backfill material may contain stones up to four inches in their largest
dimension.
6-3-39   COMPACTION OF EXCAVATED AREA.
Backfill material should be compacted every nine inches for the first eighteen
inches and every twelve inches thereafter to a point twelve inches below the
surface. A crushed stone (Class A) ¾-inch Road Rock base material, eight inches
thick, shall be compacted into the trench.
Footnote: See 384.38(3) concerning establishing districts and connection fees
(H.F. 2343, 1994 legislative session).
6-3-40   WELLHEAD PROTECTION REGULATIONS
Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to institute land use regulations and
restrictions to protect the city’s water supply and well fields, restrict the
location of potential source of contamination in close proximity to the water
supply and to promote public health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the City of Cascade.
Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this
code of ordinances pertaining to the Wellhead Protection Regulations.
   1.   Aquifer means a rock formation, group of rock formations or part of a
rock formation that contains enough saturated permeable material to yield
significant quantities of water.
   2.   Alluvium means sand, clay, ect., gradually deposited by moving water.
   3.   Contamination means the presence of harmful or deleterious substances
in the water supply.
   4.   Groundwater means subsurface water in the saturated zone from which
wells, springs and groundwater runoff are supplied.
   5.   Hazardous Substances mean those materials specified in Substances
Regulated in this chapter.
   6.   Flow System Boundaries means a delineation criterion that uses
groundwater divides, surface water bodies or other hydrologic/physical features
to delineate a Wellhead Protection Area.
   7.   Labeled Quantities means the maximum quantity of chemical as
recommended on the label for specific applications.
   8.   Person means any natural person, individual, public or private
corporation, firm association, joint venture, partnership, municipality,
governmental agency, political subdivision, public officer or any other entity
whatsoever or any combination of such jointly or severally.
   9.   Petroleum Product means fuels (gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene and
mixtures of these products), lubricating oils, motor oils, hydraulic fluids,
solvents and other similar products.
   10.   Pollution means the presence of any substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) or condition (temperature, pH, turbidity) in water
that tends to degrade usefulness of the water.
   11.   Potable Water means water that is satisfactory for drinking, culinary
and domestic purposes meeting current drinking water standards.
   12.   Primary Containment means the first level of product-tight
containment, i.e. the inside portion of that container which comes into
immediate contact on its inner surface with the hazardous material being
contained.
   13.   Public Utility means any utility (gas, water, sewer, electrical,
telephone, cable television, ect.) whether publicly owned or privately owned.
   14.   Secondary Containment means the level of product-tight containment
external to and separate from the primary containment. Secondary containment
shall consist of leakproof trays under containers, floor curing or other
containment systems and shall be of adequate size and design to handle all
spills, leaks, overflows and precipitation until appropriate action can be
further taken. The specific design and selection of materials shall be
sufficient to preclude any substance loss. Containment systems shall be
sheltered so that the intrusion of precipitation is effectively prevented.
   15.   Shallow Well means a well located and constructed in such a manner
that there is not a continuous five-foot layer of low permeability soil or rock
between the aquifer from which the water supply is drawn and a point 25 feet
below the normal ground surface.
   16.   Time Related Capture Zone means the surface of subsurface area
surrounding a pumping well(s) that will supply groundwater recharge to the well
(s) within some specified period of time.
   17.   Toxic Substance means any substance that has the capacity to produce
personal injury or illness to humans through ingestion, inhalation, or
absorption into the body.
   18.   Transit means the act or process of passing through the wellhead
protection zones, where the vehicle in transit may be parked (within the
wellhead protection area) for a period not to exceed two (2) hours.
   19.   Water Pollution means the introduction in any surface or underground
water or any organic or inorganic deleterious substance in such quantities,
proportions and accumulations that are injurious to human plant, animal fish
and other aquatic life or property or that unreasonably interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property or the conduct of business.
   20.   Well means a pit or hole sunk into the earth to reach a resource
supply such as water.
   21.   Well Field means a tract of land that contains a number of wells for
supplying water.
   22.   Wellhead Protection Zones means zones delineated fixed radii criterion
around wellheads within which toxic substances will be regulated to protect the
quality of the underground source.
   23.   Zone of Contribution means the area surrounding a pumping well that
encompasses all areas or features that supply groundwater recharge to the well.
SUBSTANCES REGULATED. The materials regulated by this ordinance shall consist
of the following:
   1.   Substances listed in 40 CFR Section 302.4 List of Hazardous Substance
and Reportable Quantities.
   2.   Substances listed by the Iowa Labor Commission pursuant to Section
898.12 of the Iowa Code (Hazard Chemicals Risks-Right to Know).
   3.   Substances listed in 40 CFR Section 261, subparts A,B,C, and D Federal
Hazardous Waste List.
MAPS OF ZONES OF INFLUENCE.
   1.   Maps. Zone of Protection maps and any amendments thereto are
incorporated by reference and made part of this ordinance. These maps shall be
on file at city hall. At the time of adoption of this ordinance the location of
all wells in Cascade supplying potable water to the water service system shall
be located on the official Wellhead Protection Map with primary zone, secondary
zone and zone or sensitivity indicated.
   2.   Map Maintenance. The zone of protection maps may be updated on an
annual basis. The basis for such an update may include but not limited to the
following:
      A.   Changes in technical knowledge concerning the aquifier.
      B.   Changes in permitted pumping capacity of city wells.
      C.   Addition of wells or elimination of existing wells.
      D.   Designation of new well fields.
   3.   Wellhead Protection Zones. The zones of protection indicated on the
zone of protection maps are as follows:
      A.   Primary Protection Zone. The area within the two (2) year time
related capture zone of any well supplying potable water to the Cascade water
service system.
      B.   Secondary Protection Zone. The area within the ten (10) year time
related capture zone, excluding the Primary Protection Zone of any well
supplying potable water to the Cascade water service system.
      C.   Zone of Sensitivity. The area within the twenty (20) year time
related capture zone, excluding the Primary and Secondary Protection Zones from
any well supplying potable water to the Cascade water service system.
RESTRICTIONS WITHIN THE PRIMARY PROTECTION ZONE.
   1.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted uses withing the
Primary Protection Zone. Uses not listed are to be considered prohibited.
      A.   Industrial buildings within the City of Cascade provided there is no
on-site waste disposal or fuel storage tank facilities associated within this
use and the Iowa DNR “separation of distances for wells” for sources of
contamination is complied with. All sites must comply with the restrictions and
covenants set by the City of Cascade.
      B.   Playground parks.
      C.   Wildlife areas, open spaces.
      D.   Lawns and gardens.
      E.   Non-motorized trails such as biking, skiing, nature and fitness
trails.
   2.   Additional restrictions are as follows:
      A.   No person shall discharge or cause or permit the discharge of a
hazardous substance to soils, groundwater or surface water within the Primary
Protection Zone. Any person knowing or having evidence of a discharge shall
report such information to the Wellhead Protection Officer.
      B.   Any person(s) responsible for discharging or causing or permitting
such discharge of hazardous substances will be financially responsible for all
environmental clean up costs and may be subject to fines as specified in this
ordinance.
      C.   No person shall discharge or cause or permit the discharge of
fertilizers or pesticides in excess of labeled quantities to the soils,
groundwater or surface water within the Primary Protection Zone. Any person
knowing of having evidence of a discharge shall report such information to the
Wellhead Protection Officer.
RESTRICTION WITHIN THE SECONDARY PROTECTION ZONE.
   1.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the Secondary
Protection Zone. Uses not listed are to be considered prohibited.
      A.   All uses listed as permitted in the Primary Protected Zone.
      B.   Sewer – residential and commercial.
      C.   Above ground storage tanks when in compliant with state fire
marshal’s regulations.
      D.   Basement storage tanks.
      E.   Livestock grazing and field cropping activities.
   2.   Additional Restrictions are as follows:
      A.   No person shall discharge or cause or permit the discharge of a
hazardous substance to the soils, groundwater or surface water within the
Secondary Protection Zone. Any person knowing or having evidence or a discharge
shall report such information to the Wellhead Protection Officer.
      B.   Any person(s) responsible for discharging or causing or permitting
such discharge of hazardous substances will be financially responsible for all
environmental cleanup costs and may be subject to fines specified in this
ordinance.
      C.   Any person who stores, handles, produces or uses chemicals within
the Secondary Protection Zone shall make available the relevant MSDS sheets to
the Wellhead Protection Officer regardless of their status under EXCEPTIONS
section.
EXCEPTIONS.
   1.   The following activities or uses are exempt from the provisions of this
ordinance.
      A.   The transportation of any hazardous substance through the well field
protection zones provided the transporting vehicle is in transit.
      B.   The use of any hazardous substance solely as fuel in a vehicle fuel
tank or as a lubricant in a vehicle.
      C.   Fire, police, emergency medical services, emergency management
center facilities or public utility transmission facility.
      D.   Retail sales establishments that store and handle hazardous
substances for resale in their original unopened containers only in the
Secondary Protection Zone and the Zone of Sensitivity.
      E.   Consumer products limited to use at a facility solely for janitorial
or minor maintenance purposes.
      F.   Consumer products located in the home which are used for personal,
family or household purposes.
      G.   The storage and use of hazardous substances as fuel or lubricant to
provide auxiliary power for emergency use to the well field provided an
enclosed secondary containment system is provided for the hazardous substance.
      H.   The use of water treatment chemicals connected with the operation of
the well or plant.
   2.   The use of structures or facilities existing at the time of the
adoption of the ordinance codified by this chapter may be continued even though
such use may not conform with the regulations of the chapter. However, the
storage and use of hazardous substances within the primary protection zone must
provide an enclosed secondary containment system. Such structure or facility
may not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or substituted subsequent to
adoption of said ordinance exemption is granted by city council.
   3.   Any person who engages in nonresidential activities relating to the
storage, handling, use and/or production of any toxic or hazardous substances
who is exempt from this ordinance by law shall not be subject to the
restriction contained herein.
   4.   All requests for permits or special exceptions in the Cascade Wellhead
Protection Zones must be made in writing to the city council. All requests must
include a list of all hazardous chemicals (MSDS sheets will be available upon
request) to be stored, handled used or produced under the permit or special
exception. All requests may be required to include an environmental assessment
report at the discretion of city council. Any exemptions or permits granted
will be made conditional and may include environmental monitoring and cleanup
costs. The exemption or permit will be made void if environmental and/or safety
monitoring indicated that the facility or activity is emitting any releases of
harmful contaminants to the surrounding environment. The facility will be held
financially responsible for all environmental cleanup costs.
DETERMINATION OF LOCATIONS WITHIN ZONES.
   1.   In determining the location of properties within the zones depicted on
the Zone Protection Map, the following rules shall apply:
      A.   Properties located wholly within one (1) zone reflected on the
applicable Zone of Protection Map shall be governed by the restrictions
applicable to that zone.
      B.   For properties having parts lying within more than one (1) zone as
reflected on the applicable Zone of Protection Map, each part shall be governed
by the restrictions applicable to the zone in which it is located.
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   1.   The water superintendent is designated as the Wellhead Protection
Officer unless another person is specifically designated by the city council to
supervise the implementation and enforcement of this ordinance.
   2.   The Wellhead Protection Inspector(s) shall be the water superintendent.
   3.   No building permit shall be issued which is a violation of the Iowa DNR
“Separation Distance From Wells” as modified under Iowa Code as IAC [567] 43.3
(7) Table A. ‘Separation Distances’ or its replacement, a violation of this
ordinance or a source of contamination for a city well.
   4.   No new underground tank(s) will be allowed for auxiliary fuel storage
in the Primary or Secondary Zones.
   5.   Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to the provision and penalties provided
therein.
INSPECTIONS.
   1.   The Wellhead Protection Inspector(s) shall have the power and authority
to enter and inspect all buildings, structures and land within all wellhead
protection zones for the purpose of making an inspection. Failure of a person
having authority over a property to permit an inspection shall be sufficient
grounds and probable cause for a court of competent jurisdiction to issue a
search warrant to the protection officer or inspector to inspect such premises.
   2.   In the event a building or structure appears to be vacant or abandoned
and the owner cannot be readily contacted in order to obtain consent for an
inspection, the officer or inspector may enter into or upon any open or
unsecured portion of the premises in order to conduct an inspection thereof.
   3.   The Wellhead Protection Officer or inspector shall inspect each city
well annually and shall maintain an inventory if applicable of all hazardous
substances which exist within the Primary and Secondary Protection Zones. One
format that may be used is the Iowa DNR Form, OMB No. 2050-0072. MSDS sheets on
these chemicals will be made to the inspector.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND HEARING.
   1.   Whenever the officer or inspector determines that there is a violation
of this ordinance, he/she shall give notice thereof in the manner hereinafter
provided:
      A.   A notice of violation shall be in writing, be dated and signed by
the officer/inspector, specify the violation(s) and date said violation shall
be corrected within ten (10) days of the date on which the inspector issued the
notice.
      B.   Failure of the responsible person(s) to correct the violation within
ten (10) days of the date of issue of notice of violation shall result in the
following fines: First notice of violation $1,000.00; Second notice $5,000.00;
Third notice $10,000.00.
INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   1.   If any person who engages in nonresidential activities stores, handles,
uses and/or produces toxic substances within the wellhead protection zones as
indicated on the zone of protection maps, continues to operate in violation of
the provisions of this ordinance, the city may file an action for injunctive
relief in the court of jurisdiction.
6-3-41   PRIVATE WELLS
PRIVATE WELLS. No person shall install a private drinking or non-drinking water
well, as defined in 567 Iowa Administrative Code 135.2, within City Limits,
unless a determination has been made by the City Superintendent that it is a
closed loop system or the well location is greater than 1,000 feet from where
an area of contamination requiring corrective action under Iowa law has been
determined to exist. In addition, drinking water wells outside the 1,000-foot
restricted area shall not be installed if the building to be served is within
250 feet from an accessible water distribution main owned and controlled by the
City
CHAPTER 4
UTILITIES - REFUSE COLLECTION
6-4-1   Definitions
6-4-2   Garbage and Recycling Containers
6-4-3   Administration
6-4-4   Storage
6-4-5   Collections
6-4-6   Necessity of Permits
6-4-7   Burning of Refuse
6-4-8   Open Burning Restricted
6-4-9   Refuse Other Than Garbage
6-4-10   Sanitary Landfill
6-4-11   Anti-Scavenging
6-4-1   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
   1.   "Refuse". Includes all garbage, rubbish, ashes, or other substances
offensive to sight or smell, dangerous to the public health or detrimental to
the best interests of the community except dead animals not killed for food.
   2.   "Garbage". Includes all animal, fruit, vegetable, and other refuse
resulting from the preparation of food and drink.
   3.   "Rubbish". Includes all other refuse not falling within the term
"garbage" except those objects too large to be placed in cans.
   4.   "Can". Means a container for the storage of garbage or rubbish, which
is:
      a.   Provided with a handle and tight fitting cover.
      b.   Made of non-corrosive material.
      c.   Water-tight.
      d.   With a capacity of no more than thirty-two (32) gallons.
   5.   “Nuisance” under this section shall mean an excess of smoke or smell,
whereby a nearby neighbor shall have a cause to complain and a reasonable
person would find the action to negatively impact neighbors in the vicinity.
(Ord. 51-14, Passed September 8, 2014)
6-4-2   GARBAGE AND RECYCLING CONTAINERS.
The City will provide each residential and commercial parcel with a container
from the private garbage hauler hired by the City and all are required to use
these containers. All are also required to use the City hired contractor for
all regular, weekly pick-ups. A different hauler may only be hired privately
for temporary, short-term needs such as construction, renovation projects or
special events. A private hauler hired for temporary use, that is not the
contractor hired by the City for weekly pick-up, must be permitted by the City
as provided in section
6-4-6. All City provided cans or containers shall be kept covered and
reasonably clean at all times. The cans or containers shall be placed at the
curb on the collection day no later than 7:00 a.m., in a position readily
accessible to the collector, with any two toters being placed at least three
feet apart.
(Ord. 04-24, passed 3-11-24)
6-4-3   ADMINISTRATION.
Administration of this chapter shall be by the Superintendent of refuse, or
such employee designated by the Superintendent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4)
6-4-4   STORAGE.
All garbage must be drained. All rubbish shall be placed in a can except as
otherwise provided.
6-4-5   COLLECTIONS.
All garbage and rubbish shall be taken from dwellings at least once each week
and from commercial, industrial, and institutional premises as frequently as
may be necessary, but not less than once each week.
All cans for garbage and rubbish shall be kept as provided in the rules and
regulations for collection of refuse.
6-4-6   NECESSITY OF PERMIT.
No person shall collect garbage or rubbish except such person's unless
otherwise by contract or permit approved by the Superintendent of refuse and
issued by the Clerk.
In the event any business, firm, or corporation may elect to dispose of refuse
or waste matter, for temporary needs, the same may be done provided that such
disposal and transporting of any refuse or waste matter complies with the
provisions of this chapter, is approved by the City and a permit issued by the
Clerk. The annual permit fee for a hauler, other than the one hired by the
City, shall be $100.
(Ord. 04-24, passed 3-11-24)
6-4-7   BURNING OF REFUSE.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or incinerate any garbage,
rubbish, or refuse within the City except by permission of the City Council.
   2.   This section shall not apply to any incinerator operated under a
license granted by the City or any burning conducted under the direction of the
fire department for training purposes.
   3.   This section shall not apply to outdoor cooking appliances used for
residential recreational purposes using commonly acceptable fuels.
6-4-8   OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED.
No person shall allow, cause or permit open burning of combustible materials
where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air without passing
through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is permitted in the
following circumstances:
(IAC, 567-23.2[455B] and 567-100.2)
   1.   Trees and Tree Trimmings. The open burning of trees and tree trimmings
at a City-operated burning site by City employees only, provided such burning
is conducted in compliance with the rules established by the State Department
of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3b])
(Ord. 51-14, Passed September 8, 2014)
   2.   Recreational Fires. Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation and
ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission of visible air
contaminants established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3e])
   3.   Training Fires. Fires set for the purpose of bona fide training of
public or industrial employees in fire fighting methods, provided that written
notification is postmarked or delivered to the Director at least ten (10)
working days before such action commences. All asphalt roofing and materials
containing asbestos shall be removed prior to the training fire.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3g])
   4.   Clean wood being burned to dispose of industrial waste, such as
pallets, on property zoned M-1 Light Industrial or M-2 Heavy Industrial, which
must be called in to Emergency Dispatch prior to the start of a fire and after
first obtaining an annual Industrial Burn permit from the City.
(Ord. 01-24, Passed January 22, 2024)
   5.   Variance. Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials not
permitted herein may make application for a variance to the Director.
(IAC, 567-23.2[2])
6-4-9   REFUSE OTHER THAN GARBAGE.
Each person shall dispose of all refuse other than garbage and rubbish
accumulation on the premises such person owns or occupies before it becomes a
nuisance. Any such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more
than thirty (30) days shall be deemed a nuisance and the city may proceed to
abate such nuisance in accordance with the provisions of Title III, Chapter 2
of this Code or initiating proper action in district court.
6-4-10   SANITARY LANDFILL.
The sanitary landfill facilities operated by Dubuque Metropolitan Area Solid
Waste Agency is hereby designated as the official agency for the disposal of
solid waste produced or originating within the city. City Council by resolution
may establish reasonable rules and regulations necessary to control its use by
the public and make charge for the use thereof.
6-4-11   ANTI-SCAVENGING.
It shall be a violation of this Code for any person to sort through, scavenge
or remove any garbage, waste, refuse, rubbish or recycling material that has
been placed in a designated garbage or recycling container. Unauthorized
collection, removal or scavenging of material placed in a garbage or recycling
container shall be a violation of this Code and punishable as set forth in the
Municipal Code.
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2017)
Littering Prohibited. No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water
or land, except that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the
authorized collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or
receptacles provided for such purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor
vehicle, the driver of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the act in
any case where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor vehicle actually
discarded the litter.
Open Dumping Prohibited. No person shall dump or deposit or permit the dumping
or depositing of any solid waste on the surface of the ground or into a body or
stream of water at any place other than a sanitary disposal project approved by
the Director, unless a special permit to dump or deposit solid waste on land
owned or leased by such person has been obtained from the Director. However,
this section does not prohibit the use of dirt, stone, brick or similar
inorganic material for fill, landscaping, excavation or grading at places other
than at a sanitary disposal project.
CHAPTER 5
UTILITIES - BILLING CHARGES
6-5-1   Utility Defined
6-5-2   Districts
6-5-3   Disposition of Fees and Charges
6-5-4   Billing for Utility Service
6-5-5   Discontinuing Services, Fees
6-5-6   Residential Rental Property
6-5-7   Customer Guarantee Deposits
6-5-8   Water Rates of Service
6-5-9   Refuse Collection Rates
6-5-10   Recycling Materials
6-5-11   Rate of Sewer Rent and Manner of Payment
6-5-12   Determination and Payment of Sewer Rent From Premises With Private
Water Systems
6-5-13   Utility Billing Errors and Adjustments Policy
6-5-1   UTILITY DEFINED.
For use in this chapter, utility is the sewer, water, and refuse collection
systems operated by the City.
6-5-2   DISTRICTS.
There shall be one sewer and water district which encompasses all of the City
of Cascade, Iowa.
6-5-3   DISPOSITION OF FEES AND CHARGES.
All money received under this chapter shall be deposited in the City treasury
not later than the last day of the month in which it was received and a written
report of the amount and source of the fees and charges shall be on file with
the City Clerk.
6-5-4   BILLING FOR UTILITY SERVICE.
Utility services shall be billed as part of a combined service account, which
includes water, sewer, garbage, recycling, electric and gas. The utility bill
shall include the charges incurred by the customer for regular services, plus
any fees, penalties or previous balance. Utility bills shall be paid monthly.
   1.   Utility bills shall be due on the 15th of each month. If the 15th falls
on a weekend or holiday, the bill shall be paid on the first business day
following the holiday or weekend by 12:00pm.
   2.   Customers shall be in receipt of a monthly utility bill by the 25th of
each month.
   3.   A delinquent notice shall be mailed to all customers not paying the
utility bill by the due date, with a 2% penalty added. Delinquent customers
shall have 12 days to pay their delinquent bill.
(Ord. 6-17, Passed August 14, 2017)
6-5-5   DISCONTINUING SERVICE, FEES.
   1.   If any account is not paid within thirty days from the end of any given
period, the service to such owner or person so supplied with the utility shall
be discontinued after the following procedures have been complied with:
      a.   The Public Works Director, or his or her authorized representative,
shall shut off the supply of water to any customer who, not having contested
the amount billed in good faith, has failed to pay the bill for water on or
before the tenth (10th) day after mailing of written notice that the water
supply will be shut off. The Utility Manager shall send such notice within
forty-eight (48) hours following the delinquent date, or on the first office
day following such first day after the delinquent date. When a Sunday or legal
holiday intervenes during the notice period, such days shall not be counted.
The Utility Manager shall notify each delinquent customer that service will be
disconnected if payment of the combined service account, including late payment
charges, is not received by the date specified in the notice of delinquency.
Such notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to the customer in whose name the
delinquent charges were incurred and shall inform the customer of the nature of
the delinquency and afford the customer the opportunity for a hearing prior to
discontinuance.
If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or landlord of the property or
premises has made a written request for notice, the notice of delinquency shall
also be given to the owner or landlord.
If a hearing is requested by noon of the day preceding the shut off the City
Administer shall conduct an informal hearing and shall make a determination as
to whether the disconnection is justified.
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2017)
      b.   The Utility Manager shall send a disconnect or discontinuance notice
by ordinary mail providing the following notice to customers: "You are advised
that you may request a hearing on this matter to the City Administrator by noon
on the day preceding the scheduled shut-off date or discontinuance of service."
      c.   When a hearing is requested by a customer, the City Administer or
the designee shall conduct a hearing within two (2) days following the request.
The customer shall have the right to present evidence or propose a payment
plan. The decision of the City Administrator is final.
   2.   Lien for Nonpayment.
      a.   If service is discontinued for nonpayment of fees and charges, a fee
of $25.00 shall be paid to the Utility Manager in addition to the rates or
charges then due before such service is restored. If any such service charge is
not paid within sixty (60) days from the date it is due, the same shall
constitute a lien upon the premises served by said municipal system, which said
lien shall be collected in the same manner as taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84(2))
   3.   A lien shall not be certified to the County Treasurer for collection
unless thirty (30) days prior written notice by ordinary mail of the intent to
certify a lien is given to the account holder of the delinquent account. If the
account holder is a tenant, and if the owner or property lessor of the property
has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given to the
owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84 (3))
   4.   If the property in which there are delinquent utilities owing is sold
before the City certifies the lien to the County Treasurer, the City may
certify the delinquent utilities against another property located in this state
owned by the delinquent user.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84(3)(a)(3)
   5.   There will be no extension of water service after the current billing,
unless an extension is preapproved due to extenuating circumstances. The
Utility Manager or the authorized representative will determine whether to
authorize an extension of time to pay, based on individual circumstances and
the customer’s payment history. Repeat violators will not be extended past the
shutoff date at the discretion of the City.
6-5-6   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY.
Residential rental property where a charge for any of the services of water,
sewer systems, storm water drainage systems, sewage treatment, solid waste
collection, and solid waste disposal is paid directly to the City by the tenant
is exempt from a lien for delinquent rates or charges associated with such
services if the landlord gives written notice to the City utility that the
property is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the
rates or charges. A City utility may require a deposit not exceeding the usual
cost of ninety (90) days of the services of water, sewer systems, storm water
drainage systems, sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste
disposal to be paid to the utility. Upon receipt, the utility or enterprise
shall acknowledge the notice and deposit. A written notice shall contain the
name of the tenant responsible for the charges, the address of the residential
rental property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the occupancy
begins. A change in tenant shall require a new written notice to be given to
the City utility within thirty (30) business days of the change in tenant. When
the tenant moves from the rental property, the City utility shall return the
deposit, within ten days, if the charges for the services of water, sewer
systems, storm water drainage systems, sewage treatment, solid waste
collection, and solid waste disposal are paid in full.
A change in the ownership of the residential rental property shall require
written notice of such change to be given to the City utility within thirty
(30) business days of the completion of the change of ownership. The lien
exemption for rental property does not apply to charges for repairs related to
a service of water, sewer systems, storm water drainage systems, sewage
treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal if the repair
charges become delinquent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84(3)(d))
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84(3)(e))
(ECIA Model Code Amended in 2012)
6-5-7   CUSTOMER GUARANTEE DEPOSITS.
There shall be required from every customer not the owner of the premises
served a seventy dollar ($70.00) deposit intended to guarantee the payment of
bills for service. The required deposit amount will be waived if the customer
provides a letter of credit from a most recent utility provider that shows
twelve (12) months of no delinquency on the account. The City does reserve the
right to charge a customer, including the owner of the premises, a deposit. The
original amount of the deposit will be refunded to the customer or credited to
the customer’s account after twelve (12) months of continued service so long as
during this twelve (12) month period there has been no delinquency on the
account.
(Ord. 13-16, Adopted July 25, 2016)
6-5-8   WATER RATES OF SERVICE.
Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the City based upon use
of water as determined by meters provided for in Section 6-3. Each location,
building, premises or connection shall be considered a separate and distinct
customer whether owned or controlled by the same person or not. Water shall be
furnished at the following monthly rates per property serviced within the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Monthly Meter Charge. There is imposed for each billing period
regardless of actual metered usage during such billing period, a meter charge
to each separately metered residential, commercial, industrial premise,
directly or indirectly served by a connection to the water system, unless water
connection is shutoff by city employees at the curb box. If curb box is
defective and inoperable, monthly meter charge will be billed until such time
the curb box can be shut off. This charge shall be $13.33. If water connection
cannot be shut off at the curb box due to the water connection providing water
to multi-units, the monthly meter charge will be waived. The waiving of this
monthly meter charge only applies if the property owner shuts the water off in
the basement or at the meter and has a lockable tag added by the City
employees.
   2.   Water Use Rates. In addition to the monthly meter charge, there shall
be imposed the following water rate charges based on actual metered usage
during the billing period, unless water has been shutoff at the curb box or a
lockable tag added to the meter or water shutoff in the basement by city
employees:
      a.   $2.42 per 1,000 gallons of usage
      b.   $25.00 per 1,000 gallons of usage for occasional or bulk water sales
      c.   $4.84 per 1,000 gallons of usage for water outside the city limits.
   3.   Water Reconnection Fee. When a customer requests to discontinue water
service to their property by shutting the curb stop off, a fee shall be charged
in the amount of $25.00 for reconnection.
   4.   No Meter Reading; Bill Calculation. Where a meter has ceased to
register or a meter reading could not be obtained, the quantity of water
consumed for billing purposes will be based on an average of the prior six
months consumption, and the conditions of the water service during the time the
meter did not register.
(Ord. 40-13, Passed June 10, 2013)
(Ord. 46-14, Passed April 28, 2014)
(Ord. 3-16, Passed February 22, 2016)
(Ord. 18-16, Passed September 12, 2016)
(Ord. 23-16, Passed October 24, 2016)
(Ord. 28-16, Passed November 28, 2016)
(Ord. 02-17, Passed March 27, 2017)
(Ord. 10-17, Sept 11, 2017)
   5.   Rates Outside the City. Water service shall be provided any customer
located outside the corporate limits of the City which the City has agreed to
serve at the same rates provided in Section 6-5-8. No such customer, however,
will be served unless the customer shall have signed a service contract
agreeing to be bound by the ordinances, rules and regulations applying to water
service established by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 & 384.84)
6-5-9   REFUSE COLLECTION RATES.
   The City shall charge the following fees for solid waste collection and
disposal service, used or available:
      1.   One or two family houses $11.50/month
      2.   Apartments with separate water meters $11.50/month
      3.   Apartments when water is furnished by owner $11.50/month
      4.   Commercial toters (without dumpsters) $15.60/month
Commercial Dumpster Rates:
      2 yard dumpster      $60.00/month
      3 yard dumpster      $85.00/month
      4 yard dumpster      $110.00/month
      6 yard dumpster      $160.00/ month
      8 yard dumpster      $210.00/month
   5.   Garbage Tote and Fees. The city shall charge $10.00 per extra tote or
replacement tote for customer pick up. The city shall charge an additional
$10.00 per tote delivered by the city.
   6.   Garbage Collection Limits. The City shall limit garbage collection as
follows: Residential units are limited to garbage that fits in the City
provided container that is not overflowing or unable to close the lid near1y
flat. Additional garbage shall be placed in garbage bags and tagged with a
sticker purchased from the city at a cost of $2.00 per tag for each additional
bag. If toters or dumpsters are overfilled, and the hauler bills the City,
those fees will be billed to the customer on their utility bill.
   7.   Extra Containers or Extra Pick-ups. Residential customers may request
additional garbage toters and will be billed separately for each one.
Commercial customers that have toters may request additional garbage toters and
will be billed separately for each one. Commercial dumpster rates are based on
one pick-up per week. Commercial dumpsters customers requesting 2 or 3 pick-ups
per week will have the fees doubled or tripled.
(Ord. 09-15, passed 11-23-15; Ord. 11-15, passed 11-23-15; Ord. 19-16, passed
9-12-16; Ord. 23-16, passed 10-24-16; Ord. 16-19, passed 12-16-19; Ord. 09-22,
passed 12-12-22; Ord. 03-24, passed 2-12-24; Ord. 23-24, passed 11-25-24; Ord.
04-25, passed 11-24-25)
6-5-10   RECYCLING MATERIALS.
The City shall charge the following fees for curbside collection of comingled
recyclable materials.
      1.   Residential $7.50/month
      2.   Commercial $9.50/month
   3.   Recycling Tote and Fees. The City shall charge $10.00 per extra
recycling tote or replacement tote for customer pick up. The City shall charge
an additional $10.00 per tote delivered by the city.
      Refuse collection and recycling fees will be ceased if water is shutoff
at the curb box or at the meter and has a lockable tag installed by the City
employees.
(Ord. 02-15, passed 3-9-15; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-23-2015; Ord. 11-15, passed
11-23-15; Ord. 19-16, passed 9-12-16; Ord. 23-16, passed 10-24-16; Ord. 16-19,
passed 12-16-19; Ord. 03-24, passed 2-12-24; Ord. 23-24, passed 11-25-24; Ord.
04-25, passed 11-24-25)
6-5-11   RATE OF SEWER RENT AND MANNER OF PAYMENT.
Each customer shall pay sewer service charges for the use of and for the
service supplied by the municipal sanitary sewer system based upon the amount
of water consumed as follows:
   1.   Monthly Meter Charge. There is imposed for each billing period
regardless of actual metered water usage during such billing period, a meter
charge to each separately metered residential, commercial, industrial premise,
directly or indirectly served by a connection to the sewer system, unless water
connection is shutoff by city employees at the curb box. If curb box is
defective and inoperable, monthly meter charge will be billed until such time
the curb box can be shut off. This charge shall be $19.00. If water connection
cannot be shut off at the curb box due to the water connection providing water
to multi-units, the monthly meter charge will be waived. The waiving of this
monthly meter charge only applies if the property owner shuts the water off in
the basement or at the meter and has a lockable tag added by the city
employees.
   2.   Sewer Use Rates. In addition to the monthly meter charge, there shall
be imposed the following sewer rate charges based on actual metered water usage
during the billing period, unless water has been shutoff at the curb box or a
lockable tag added to the meter or water shutoff in the basement by city
employees:
      a.   $11.83 per 1,000 gallons of usage.
(Ord. 15-23, Passed November 13, 2023)
(Ord. 40-13, Passed June 10, 2013)
(Ord. 46-14, Passed April 28, 2014)
(Ord. 3-16, Passed February 22, 2016)
(Ord. 8-16, Passed April 25, 2016)
(Ord. 18-16, Passed September 12, 2016)
(Ord. 23-16, Passed October 24, 2016)
6-5-12   DETERMINATION AND PAYMENT OF SEWER RENT FROM PREMISES WITH PRIVATE
WATER SYSTEMS.
Users whose premises have a private water system shall pay a sewer rent in
proportion to the water used and determined by the City Council either by an
estimate agreed to by the user or by metering the water system. The rates shall
be the same as provided in Section 6-5-10 applied as if a City water bill were
to be paid. Rent shall be paid at the same time and place as provided in
Section 6-5-10.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84(1))
Special Agreements Permitted. No statement in these chapters shall be construed
as preventing a special agreement, arrangement or contract between the council
and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted subject to special conditions, rate and cost as
established by the council.
Footnote: See Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38(3) concerning establishing districts
and connection fees.
6-5-13 UTILITY BILLING ERRORS AND ADJUSTMENTS POLICY.
   1   Intent and Purpose. This policy is intended to establish the maximum
time period for: (1) the collection of billing undercharges; and (2) the refund
or credit for billing overcharges. This rule shall supplement all other
applicable rules and policies of the City of Cascade that may pertain to the
calculation of utility service billing errors, overcharges and undercharges,
the recovery of undercharges, and the refund or credit for overcharges.
   2.   Joint Billing for Combined Services. The City Council is the governing
body of the City of Cascade and its water, sewer utilities and garbage
services. The City Council is solely responsible for the establishment,
imposition, adjustment, and collection of rates and charges, including billing
adjustments relating to overcharges and undercharges. However, pursuant to Iowa
Code section 384.84(8)(b), two or more city utilities, including board-governed
city utilities under Iowa Code chapter 388, may contract for the joint billing
or collection of combined service accounts. The City Council of Cascade, which
governs the city's water and sewer utilities, and the Board of Trustees of the
Cascade Municipal Utilities ("CMU"), which governs the city's gas and electric
utilities, have agreed that CMU will undertake the billing and collection of
combined service accounts for all of the city-owned utility services.
   3.   Duty to Review Usage and Notify. Customers and ratepayers ("Customers")
of the City's water and sewer utilities shall have a duty to review all billing
invoices and other billing communications sent to them, whether from the City
or from CMU, to monitor their utility usage, and to notify the City or CMU
promptly if the usage appears out of the ordinary, whether deficient or
excessive in general or relative to prior billings and usage. Such notification
shall be given to the City or to CMU, if there is an agreement to undertake
joint billing for combined service accounts. Failure to promptly notify the
City or CMU of a potential or suspected billing error may be a basis for denial
of a request for a refund or credit for an overcharge for the time period after
the customer was aware of or suspected the potential overcharge.
   4.   Time Period for Billing Adjustments. If for any reason the City or CMU
determines there has been a billing error with regard to the amounts due and
owing for water or sewer service, the City or CMU may adjust the amount due and
owing as provided in this rule or may authorize CMU to do so under the joint
billing agreement. The time period for recovery of undercharges and for a
refund or credit of overcharges shall be limited as follows:
      a.   The maximum time period for which an undercharge may be recovered
from the customer is three (3) years. The maximum time period for which an
overcharge may be refunded or credited to the customer is also three (3) years.
      b.   There shall be no recovery of an undercharge, nor a refund or credit
for an overcharge, for a time period that is more than three (3) years prior to
the time notification was given, whether by the customer or by the City or CMU,
as applicable.
      c.   In the case of a failure by the customer to promptly notify the City
or CMU, or by the City or CMU to promptly notify the customer, of a potential
or suspected overcharge or undercharge, there shall be no recovery of an
undercharge or refund or credit for an overcharge for the time period after the
customer suspected or was aware of the potential overcharge or the City or CMU
suspected or was aware of the potential undercharge.
      d.   No interest shall be applied to undercharges or overcharges.
      e.   CMU shall include the City Administrator in large payment
arrangements when there are undercharge billing adjustment payment arrangements
and in all cases inform the City of undercharges and overcharges involving the
water, sewer and garbage billing.
      f.   Examples:
         (1)   If a meter error results in a customer being overcharged by 10%
for each bill for the most recent two-year period and the customer gives the
City Utility prompt notice once the customer suspects the overcharge, the
customer will receive a full refund or credit of the overcharge.
         (2)   If the 10% overcharge has occurred for the most recent seven (7)
years and the customer gives prompt notice to the City Utility once the
customer suspects the overcharge, the customer will receive a refund or credit
for the most recent three (3) years of the overcharge.
         (3)   If the 10% overcharge occurred for a seven (7)-year period which
began ten (10) years ago and stopped three (3) years ago, and the customer
gives prompt notice to the Utility once the customer suspects the overcharge,
the customer will not receive a refund or credit for the overcharge because the
overcharge was more than three (3) years ago. The outcome is the same without
regard to whether the customer knew, should have known, or could have known of
the overcharge.
      g.   Recovery of Undercharges. Undercharges payable under this rule may
be recovered by the City or CMU by applying the amount of the undercharge to
the customer's bill in a lump sum or by applying it monthly over a period of
time up to one year. The customer and the City or CMU may enter into a payment
plan the terms of which are established by contract, though the offering of a
payment plan is solely at the City or CMU's discretion. A customer's failure to
pay an undercharge, or failure to enter into a payment plan, or a breach of a
payment plan, may result in a disconnection of service or in a lien upon the
property as provided by law.
      h.   Refund or Credit of Overcharges. Overcharges payable to a customer
may be refunded or credited to the customer as provided in this rule, in the
City or CMU's discretion. If the City or CMU provides a refund, it may be paid
in a lump sum or monthly over a period of time up to one year. If the City or
CMU provides a credit, the credit shall be applied to the customer's account
balance for the applicable utility for each billing cycle thereafter until the
credit has been used in full.
      i.   If a customer gives notice of a suspected or potential overcharge
and the City or CMU does not agree, and if the source of the overcharge
involves the meter, the customer's sole remedy is to request a meter test
pursuant to the rules of the applicable utility service.
      j.   This rule shall not be construed to require a cash refund to a
current customer if the amount is less than $5.00 nor to a previous customer in
an amount less than $10.00.
   5.   Authority. This policy is adopted under the authority reserved for and
granted to the City or CMU by applicable law, including the following:
      a.   Municipal Home Rule authority under the Iowa Constitution, as
amended (at the time of adoption of this Policy, Article III, Section 38A of
the Iowa Constitution) and its statutory implementation in Iowa Code chapter
364;
      b.   Iowa Code section 384.84, as amended regarding the establishment,
imposition, adjustment, and collection of rates and charges by the governing
body of the city utility; and
      c.   Iowa Code Chapter 388.
   6.   Non-Applicability and Waiver. The provisions of this policy are not
subject to and shall not be subject to or modified by the discovery rule or
theories of continuing violations, statutory law (unless expressly regulating
municipal utility ratemaking authority), provisions or theories of general
contract law, equitable principles, or other common law theories or remedies
which might otherwise have the effect of extending the time period for or the
amount of collection of underpayments and refunds or credit for overpayments.
By accepting utility service from the City, the customer expressly waives,
holds harmless from, and agrees not to assert any of the aforementioned claims,
causes of action, or theories against the City, or in relation to its sewer
service, water service, or financial management, in any forum whatsoever.
   7.   Severability. If any part or provision of this rule is legally declared
invalid or unenforceable by a court of law with proper jurisdiction, that part
or provision of the rule will be construed consistent with applicable law as
nearly as possible, and the remaining parts and provisions will remain in full
force and effect. Such invalidity or non-enforceability will not invalidate or
render unenforceable any other part or provision of this Policy.
(Ord. 10-24, passed 5-28-24)
CHAPTER 6
STREET CUTS, EXCAVATIONS
6-6-1   Excavation Permit Required
6-6-2   Application for Permit
6-6-3   Permit Fees
6-6-4   Safety Measures
6-6-5   Backfilling and Restoration
6-6-6   Minimum Construction Standards
6-6-1    EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED.
Excavating within the right-of-way of public streets and alleys, and of public
grounds, and the cutting of surfacing or paving of the traveled way therein,
shall not be done by any person, firm, association, or corporation without
obtaining a permit from the City Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2))
6-6-2   APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
No person shall commence excavation in any public street or public ground until
that person has applied to the City Clerk for an excavation permit. Such
application shall indicate the location of the excavation, the name and address
of the applicant who is to do the work, the person responsible for the
refilling of said excavation and restoration of the street or alley surface,
whether public liability insurance is in force, and that the applicant has
checked the underground map of all utilities, and other owners of underground
facilities, and that the applicant has notified those persons or companies of
the time that excavation will commence. The making of an application shall be
deemed notice to the City of the plan to cut the street surfacing or pavements,
and to obstruct the public way.
In an emergency, authorized persons or companies may commence excavations
provided that they shall have made a reasonable effort to inform the City and
the utilities whose underground utilities might be involved in any way, and
those involved in the excavation shall make written application at the earliest
practicable moment. The Clerk may provide on the form for the certification
that the applicant has notified all utilities and other parties required by
this Ordinance.
Utility companies are exempt from the permit application. They shall however
comply with all other provision and shall post with the city a yearly bond in
the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to guarantee such compliance.
6-6-3   PERMIT FEES.
For streets or alleys with asphalt or concrete surface 7 years old or less, the
bond/deposit shall be $3,000.00. Upon restoration of the street surface said
bond/deposit shall be returned to the applicant less any costs incurred by the
city.
For streets or alleys with an asphalt or concrete surface over 7 years of age
and for all other street surfaces the bond/deposit shall be $250.00. Upon
restoration of the street surface said bond/deposit shall be returned to the
applicant less any costs incurred by the city.
Insurance Required. Each applicant shall file a certificate of insurance
indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect
for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and
employees for the following minimum amounts:
Bodily Injury $100,000.00 per person; $250,000.00 per accident
Property Damage $100,000.00 per accident.
All costs and expenses incident to the excavation shall be borne by the permit
holder/property owner. The permit holder/owner shall indemnify the city from
any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such
excavation.
6-6-4   SAFETY MEASURES.
Any person, firm, or corporation cutting a pavement or surfacing or excavating
in the streets shall erect suitable barricades, maintain warning lights from
sunset to sunrise each night, and take such other precautions as necessary for
the safety of the public, whether vehicles or pedestrians. Vehicles, equipment,
materials, excavated material, and similar items shall likewise be protected by
lights and warning devices, such as traffic cones, flags, etc. Where traffic
conditions warrant, the party excavating may be required to provide flagmen, if
in the judgment of the Chief of Police the public safety requires it.
Compliance with City Ordinances and regulations shall not be deemed to waive
the requirements that the party excavating shall comply with all the
requirements of the labor safety laws and the rules of the Iowa Department of
Labor, nor shall any failure be deemed a responsibility of the City.
6-6-5   BACKFILLING RESTORATION AND INSPECTION.
All work shall be subject to inspection by the city. Backfill should not be
deemed completed nor resurfacing of any improved street or alley surface begun
until such backfill is inspected and approved by the city. The permit holder/
property owner shall provide the city with notice at least twenty-four (24)
hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is desired. Any person
excavating in the streets shall be responsible for the backfilling of the
excavation in accordance with City specifications and the restoration of the
pavement or surfacing to as good a condition as that existing prior to the
excavation. If any excavator fails to backfill or restore the pavement or
surfacing properly within forty-eight (48) hours of the completion of the
underground work, the City reserves the right to backfill and resurface or
install new paving and charge the cost thereof to the party excavating.
6-6-6   MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
Streets within the City shall be constructed in accordance with industry
standards, including but not limited to at least the following minimum
standards.
   1.   Protection of Existing Utilities. Contractors shall locate existing
underground utilities in the work area before the commencement of construction
activities and protect the same from damage or interference during
construction.
   2.   Proof Roll Required. On all road construction, repair, or replacement
projects, a proof roll test shall be performed with a dump truck loaded to the
maximum single axle legal gross weight of 20,000 pounds or the maximum tandem
axle legal gross weight of 34,000 pounds. During the roll test, trucks shall be
operated at less than 10 miles per hour. Roll tests shall include at least one
pass for each 12 feet of roadway width. Compacted material in the subgrade
receiving fill shall be considered unstable if the surface shows yielding by
examination of soil wave from the loaded tires or if the compacted material
develops ruts more than 2 inches in depth. If soft or yielding areas are
observed, the unstable material shall be removed and replaced with 3 inch
breaker run or Macadam stone meeting Iowa DOT gradation 13, per article
4109.02, compact material. Additional roll tests shall be performed until
appropriate compaction is achieved.
   3.   Suitable Material. Material used in fill areas, under the subgrade, and
in the construction of embankments shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
      a.   Density of 95 pcf or greater per AASHTO T 99.
      b.   Plasticity index less than 30 per AASHTO M 145.
      c.   Liquid limit less than 50 per AASHTO M 145.
      d.   For soils placed below seasonal high groundwater, granular soil
shall be used.
   4.   Select Subgrade Materials. The select subgrade consists of the top 12
inches immediately below the rock base of the pavement. All select subgrade
materials shall be approved by the City or the City Engineer before placement.
Approval of select subgrade materials shall be based on AASHTO M 145.
Additionally:
      a.   Cohesive soils must meet all of the following requirements:
         (1)   45% or less silt size fraction.
         (2)   Density of 110 pcf or greater according to ASTM D 698 or AASHTO
T 99 (standard Proctor).
         (3)   Plasticity index greater than 10.
         (4)   A-6 or A-7-6 soil of glacial origin.
      b.   Granular soil shall meet all of the following requirements:
         (1)   15% or less silt or clay.
         (2)   Density of 110 pcf or greater according to ASTM D 698 or AASHTO
T 99 (standard Proctor).
         (3)   Plasticity index less than 3.
         (4)   A-1, A-2, A-3 (0). Crushed stone, crushed Portland cement
concrete, clean gravel, or clean sand.
   5.   Site Preparation. Site preparation shall be completed prior to
commencement of other earthwork activities. Site preparation shall include
removing or stripping off the upper soil layer(s) from the existing ground and
removal of trees, brush, windfalls, logs, roots, and stumps. All organic
materials, topsoil, and stones greater than 3 inches shall be removed. Areas
receiving fill should be scarified to a minimum depth of 6 inches and compacted
to a minimum 95% of the maximum dry density per modified Proctor, ASTM D1557. A
certified testing laboratory shall be required to perform soil and density
testing in areas receiving 12 inches or more of fill. Three tests across the
roadway section shall be required per 100 lineal foot of roadway before placing
fill. Testing documentation shall be provided to the City upon request.
Additionally, the compacted materials in areas receiving 12 inches or more of
fill shall receive a proof roll test observed by the City and/or the City
Engineer.
   6.   Earthwork Grading. Earthwork grading shall be performed in accordance
with Iowa DOT specifications 2102 and 2107. If fill is required, suitable
material shall be placed in successive uniform horizontal layers not exceeding
9 inches in depth over the entire area before compaction. Each layer of fill
must shall be compacted to at least 95% of the maximum dry density per modified
Proctor, ASTM D1557. A certified testing laboratory shall be required to
perform soil and density testing in areas receiving 12 inches or more of fill.
Three tests across the roadway section shall be required per 100 lineal foot of
roadway for each 12 inches of vertical grade. Testing documentation shall be
provided to the City upon request.
   7.   Subgrade Preparation. Streets and roadways shall be constructed on 12
inches of stabilized subgrade, following site preparation and earthwork grading
activities, in accordance with Iowa DOT specifications 2109 and 2113. The
prepared subgrade shall only consist of suitable or select subgrade materials.
All other materials not defined as either select or suitable shall be
considered unsuitable and shall not be used.
Twelve (12) inches of subgrade, uniform in composition, shall be installed
under new pavement or rock subbase to the proposed roadway width plus 3 feet on
each side. Select materials shall be used unless granular stabilization
materials or subgrade treatment is specified. Additionally:
      a.   Subgrade compaction in fill areas shall require:
         (1)   Construction in two 6 inch lifts.
         (2)   Moisture content within a range of optimum moisture to +/-3%.
         (3)   Soil at least 98% of the maximum dry density per modified
Proctor, ASTM D1557.
         (4)   Verification by three soil density tests per 100 lineal foot of
roadway. Testing documentation shall be provided to the City upon request.
         (5)   Verification by proof roll test observed by the City Engineer or
designee.
      b.   Subgrade compaction in cut areas shall require:
         (1)   Excavation and stockpiling of the top 6 inches of subgrade.
         (2)   Scarifying and compacting the bottom 6 inches of subgrade.
         (3)   Replacement and compacting of the top 6 inches of subgrade.
         (4)   Moisture content within a range of optimum moisture to +/-3%.
         (5)   Compacting subgrade to at least 98% the maximum dry density per
modified Proctor, ASTM D1557.
         (6)   Three soil density tests per 100 lineal foot of roadway. Testing
documentation shall be provided to the City upon request.
         (7)   Proof roll test observed by the City and/or the City Engineer.
         (8)   Aggregate Base. Streets and roadways shall be constructed on a
compacted aggregate base extending the full roadway width plus 3 feet on each
side in accordance with Iowa DOT specifications 2111 and 412. Portland cement
concrete pavement shall be constructed on 10 inches of compacted modified
subbase meeting Iowa DOT gradation 14 per article 4109.02. Hot mix asphalt
pavement shall be constructed on 12 inches of 3 inch breaker run or Macadam
stone meeting Iowa DOT gradation 13 per article 4109.02 and 6 inches modified
subbase meeting Iowa DOT gradation 14 per article 4109.02
         (9)   Longitudinal Sub-drain. Streets and roadways shall be
constructed with longitudinal 4 inch sub-drain along the outside edge of the
pavement the entire length of the roadway wherever possible. Installation of
sub-drain shall be in accordance with Iowa DOT specification 2502. Sub-drain
pipe shall meet Iowa DOT specification 4143. Engineering fabric shall meet Iowa
DOT article 4196.01.B.2. Porous backfill shall be clean granular material
meeting Iowa DOT gradation 12a per article 4109.02.1 or similar. Sub-drain
shall be approximately 6 inches behind each curb extending the entire length of
the roadway beginning at the outlet (ditch, storm sewer, etc.) and proceed
continuously upgrade. The sub-drain trench shall be a minimum of 12 inches and
a maximum of 36 inches below the road subbase. The sub-drain trench shall be
lined with engineering (filter) fabric prior to the placement of the porous
backfill and the pipe. The fabric shall have a complete overlap at the top of
the trench the full width of the trench. The sub-drain pipe shall be placed 2
inches above the bottom of the trench When the sub-drain outlets into a ditch
or similar, a ten foot piece of 6 inch corrugated metal pipe meeting Iowa DOT
specification 4141 or C900 PVC pipe shall be installed with a rodent guard.
         (10)   Residential Streets. Residential streets shall be surfaced with
6 inch Portland cement concrete or 5 inch hot mix asphalt. Portland cement
concrete pavement, curb and gutter, and sidewalks, and driveways shall be
constructed in accordance with Iowa DOT specifications 2301, 2316, 2511, 2512,
2515, and 2516. Hot mix asphalt roadway shall be constructed with a minimum of
2 lifts and in accordance with Iowa DOT specification 2303 and 2317. The
minimum residential street width shall be 31 feet from back-of-curb to back-of-
curb. Pavement cross slope shall be a minimum 2% and a maximum 3%. The curb
height shall be 6 inches above the gutter except at driveways where the curb
height shall be a minimum of 2 inches and a maximum of 3 inches. The curb shall
be integral to the Portland cement pavement. A 30 inch Portland cement curb and
gutter section shall be required for Hot Mix Asphaltic pavement. Construction
shall accommodate curb ramps in conformance with ADA and Iowa DOT
specifications and details.
         (11)   Pavement Materials. Residential streets shall be surfaced with
Portland cement concrete or hot mix asphalt. Curb and gutter, sidewalks, and
driveways shall be Portland cement concrete. Portland cement concrete shall be
Class C-3 per Iowa DOT specification 2512 with a minimum 28-day compressive
strength of 4,000 psi and target air content of 8% +/-1%. Portland cement shall
be ASTM C150 Type I or I/II. Slag shall conform to ASTM C989 and fly ash shall
conform to ASTM C618 Class C. Cement substitution rate shall not exceed 15%.
Concrete shall receive a thorough coat of white curing compound immediately
after finishing. Hot mix asphalt shall meet Iowa DOT gyratory design and
mixture criteria for 300,000 ESALs. The asphalt binder shall be PG 58-28 for a
1/2 inch mix.
         (12)   Concrete Qualify Control. All Portland cement concrete and hot
mix asphalt shall be tested by a certified laboratory assuring quality.
Portland cement concrete shall be sampled according to ASTM C172. A minimum of
one test per 100 cubic yards of concrete each day is required. Each test shall
include a minimum of 4 cylinders, temperature, slump, and air content. Hot mix
asphalt testing shall be in accordance with Iowa DOT specification 2303.04.
         (13)   Sidewalks and Driveways. Portland cement concrete pavement for
the sidewalk and driveways shall be constructed in accordance with Iowa DOT
specifications 2301, 2511, 2515, and 2516. Sidewalks shall be placed 12 inches
inside the Right-of-Way. Sidewalks shall slope towards the roadway with a
maximum cross slope of 2% and a maximum longitudinal slope of 5%, where
possible. Sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness of 4 inches and a minimum
width of 4 feet with a 4 inch compacted modified subbase meeting Iowa DOT
gradation 14 per article 4109.02. Sidewalks crossing driveways shall have a
minimum thickness of 6 inches. Where sidewalks intersect existing streets,
pedestrian ramps, and curbs the minimum thickness shall be 6 inches and shall
be constructed in conformance with ADA and Iowa DOT specifications and details.
Driveways shall be surfaced with a minimum 6 inch Portland cement concrete on
top of 6 inch compacted modified subbase meeting Iowa DOT gradation 14 per
article 4109.02. Driveways shall have a maximum longitudinal slope of 10%.
         (14)   Industrial and Commercial Streets. Industrial and commercial
streets shall be surfaced with minimum 10 inch thick doweled Portland cement
concrete in accordance with Iowa DOT specifications 2301, 2316, and 2512. The
minimum width shall be 31 ft from back-of-curb to back-of-curb or 24 feet with
6 foot crushed stone shoulders in rural sections. For a rural section with
drained ditches the maximum ditch slope shall be 3:1. Pavement cross slope
shall be a minimum of 2% and maximum of 3%.
         (15)   Roadway Salts and Deicing Solutions. Portland cement concrete
pavement shall not receive any application of roadway salts or deicing
solutions for the first 12 months following construction. Roadway salts or
deicing solutions shall not be applied within 300 feet of fresh concrete.
During the first 12 months following construction, the application of clean
granular material shall be the only material applied to Portland cement to
improve driving conditions.
(Ord. 9-17, Passed 28, 2017)
CHAPTER 6A
STREET USE
6A-6-1   Removal of Warning Devices
6A-6-2   Obstructing/Defacing
6A-6-3   Placing Debris On
6A-6-4   Playing In
6A-6-5   Barricaded Street
6A-6-6   Business Purpose
6A-6-7   Washing Vehicles
6A-6-8   Burning Prohibit
6A-6-9   Maint of Parking
6A-6-10   Dumping Snow
6A-6-11   Driveway Culverts
6A-6-1   Removal of Warning Devices.
It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, push down, destroy or carry
away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article or
extinguish any lamp or other light erected or placed thereupon for the purpose
of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said street or alley
without the consent of the person in control thereof.
6A-6-2   Obstructing or Defacing.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface or injure any street or alley
in any manner.
6A-6-3   Placing Debris.
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley glass,
glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal,
leaves, grass or any other debris likely to be washed into the storm sewer and
clog the storm sewer or any substance likely to injure person, animal or
vehicle.
6A-6-4   Playing In.
It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled or play games on streets/alleys
except in the areas blocked off by the city for such purposes
6A-6-5   Traveling on Barricaded Street/Alley.
It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on a street/
alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs or flares placed thereon
by the authority of a city official, police officer or member of the fire
department.
6A-6-6   Use for Business Purpose.
It is unlawful to park, store or place temporarily or permanently machinery,
junk or other goods, wares and merchandise of any kind upon streets/alleys for
the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering same for sale without
permission of the council.
6A-6-7   Washing Vehicles.
It is unlawful for any person to use public sidewalks, streets/alleys for the
purpose of washing or cleaning automobile, truck equipment or a vehicle of any
kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does not prevent
persons from washing or cleaning his/her own vehicle or equipment when it is
lawfully parked in the street/alley.
6A-6-8   Burning Prohibited.
No person shall burn trash, leaves, rubbish or other combustible material in
the curb gutter or on paved or surfaced street/alley.
6A-6-9   Maintenance of Parking or Terrace.
It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain all
property outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines upon the
public streets, except that the abutting property owner shall not be required
to remove diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly owned property or right
of way. Maintenance includes timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs and
picking up litter.
If the property owner fails to perform an action required within a reasonable
time the city may perform the required action and assess the cost against the
abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
6A-6-10   Dumping of Snow.
It is unlawful for any person to push, place, throw or cause to be placed ice
or snow from private property, sidewalks or driveways onto the traveled way of
a street/alley so as to obstruct gutters or impede the passage of vehicles upon
the street/alley except where in the cleaning of large commercial drives in the
business district it is necessary to move the snow onto the street/alley
temporarily. Such accumulation shall be removed promptly by the property owner
or agent.
6A-6-11   Driveway Culverts.
The property owner shall at the owner’s expense install culverts deemed
necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s property.
Before installing a culvert permission must first be obtained from the city. In
the event repairs are needed to the culvert it shall be the responsibility of
the property owner to make such repairs. If the property owner fails to do so
the city shall have the right to make the repairs and assess the cost against
the property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
CHAPTER 7
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
6-7-1   Purpose
6-7-2   Definitions
6-7-3   Platting Required
6-7-4   Procedure
6-7-5   Requirements of Preliminary Plat
6-7-6    Referral of Preliminary Plat
6-7-7   Action by Commission
6-7-8   Final Plat
6-7-9   Referral of Final Plat
6-7-10   Requirements of Final Plat
6-7-11   Final Plat Attachments
6-7-12   Action by the Council
6-7-13   General Requirements
6-7-14   Improvements Required
6-7-15   Inspection of Improvements
6-7-16   Completion of Improvements
6-7-17   Performance Bond
6-7-18   Maintenance Bond
6-7-19   Variances
6-7-20   Changes and Amendments
6-7-1   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the design,
development and improvement of all new subdivisions and resubdivisions so that
existing developments will be protected and so that adequate provisions are
made for public services and to promote the health, safety and general welfare
in the City.
6-7-2    DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms or works are defined.
   1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, twenty (20)
feet or less in width affording secondary means of access to abutting property.
   2.   “Block” means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely
bounded by streets or highways, and/or the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision.
   3.   “Building Lines” means a line on a plat between which line and public
right-of-way no buildings or structures may be erected.
   4.   “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
   5.   “Cul-de-sac” means a minor street having one end open to traffic and
terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
   6.    “Easement” means a grant of the right to use a strip of land for
specific purposes by the general public, a corporation or certain persons.
   7.    “Flood” means an overflow of water onto lands not normally inundated.
   8.   “Flood plain” means a relatively flat area or low lands adjoining the
channel of a river, stream or water course, lake or other body of standing
water, which has been or may be covered by flood waters.
   9.   “Lot” means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for
building development.
   10.   “Major street” means a street which is used continuously connecting
various sections of the City.
   11.   “Minor street” means a street which is used primarily for access to
the abutting properties.
   12.   “Performance bond” means a surety bond or cash deposit made out to the
City, in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements which are
required by this chapter, said cost estimated by the City, and said surety bond
or cash bond being legally sufficient to secure to the City that the said
improvements will be constructed in accordance with this chapter.
   13.   “Plat” means a map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider’s plan of
the subdivision of land is presented and which the subdivider submits for
approval and intends, in final form, to record.
   14.   “Public Right-of-Way” means the area between property lines dedicated
to and accepted by the City for public use, providing access to abutting
properties, and providing routes for public utilites.
   15.   “Subdivider” means the person undertaking the subdivision or
resubdivision of a tract or parcel of land.
   16.   “Subdivision” means the division of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development. The
term, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or
to the land subdivided, or, the resubdivision of land heretofore divided or
platted into lots or other divisions of land or any division of land.
   17.   “Simple Subdivision” is defined as any subdivision in which no new
streets, public or private, are proposed, which does not require the
construction of any public improvements, and which contains fewer the three (3)
lots.
   18.   “Minor Subdivision” is defined as any subdivision in which no new
streets, public or private, are proposed, which does not require the
construction of any public improvements, and which contains three (3) or more
lots.
   19.   “Major Subdivision” is defined as any subdivision which is not a
simple plat or a minor subdivision.
   20.   A “Preliminary Plat” is a study, drawing, map, or chart indicating the
proposed manner or layout of the subdivision which is submitted to the Planning
and Zoning Commission and City Council for consideration.
   21.   A “Final Plat” is a map or drawing, on which the subdivision is
presented in the form which, if approved by the Zoning Administrator, Planning
and Zoning Commission, and/or City Council, will be filed and recorded with the
County Recorder.
6-7-3   PLATTING REQUIRED.
Every owner of any tract or parcel of land who has subdivided or shall
hereafter subdivide or plat the same for the purpose of laying out an addition,
subdivision, building lot or lots, acreage or suburban lots within the City or,
pursuant to Section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa, within two (2) miles from the
corporate limits shall cause plats of such area to be made in the form, and
containing the information, as hereinafter set forth before selling any lots
therein contained or placing the plat on record.
6-7-4   PROCEDURE.
In obtaining final approval of a proposed subdivision by the City of Cascade,
the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat or final plat to the City Clerk
in accordance with the zoning regulations of the City and the requirements
hereinafter set forth and install improvements or provide a performance bond.
Should any provisions of this chapter be in conflict with any other ordinance,
the more restrictive shall apply.
   1.   Simple subdivisions shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator to
determine compliance with the Code of Ordinance of the City of Cascade. The
Zoning Administrator shall require and enforce conditions to provide that the
simple subdivision meets the requirement of Code of Ordinance of the City of
Cascade. Review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall
not be required. No simple subdivision shall be recorded unless the Zoning
Administrator has approved the plat. Fees for the review of simple subdivision
shall be shall be set by resolution of the City Council from time to time.
   2.   Minor subdivisions shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning &
Zoning Commission and City Council per the requirements hereinafter set forth.
A preliminary plat is not required for a minor subdivision. However, the
Planning & Zoning Commission may, in special circumstances where the Commission
feels that the final plat does not convey enough information to adequately
review the subdivision, move to require additional information or a complete
preliminary plat. A minor subdivision may also be approved by the Zoning
Administrator provided that such subdivision has been previously reviewed and
approved as part of larger minor or major subdivision by the Planning & Zoning
Commission and City Council. Fees for the review of a minor subdivisions shall
be set by resolution of the City Council from time-to-time.
   3   Major subdivisions shall require a preliminary plat and final plat as
prescribed in Sections 6-7-5 and 6-7-10 of this Chapter and review and approval
of Planning & Zoning Commission and City Council per the requirements
hereinafter set forth. In addition, a pre-application conference with a
committee of the City Council shall be required to acquaint the affected
parties with the proposed subdivision, the City’s subdivision requirements, and
to outline the subdivision review and approval process. Fees for the review of
a major subdivision shall be set by resolution of the City Council from time-
to-time.
6-7-5   REQUIREMENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
The subdivider shall first prepare and file with the Clerk five (5) copies of a
preliminary plat of adequate scale and size showing the following:
   1.   Title, scale, north point and date.
   2.   Subdivision boundary lines, showing dimensions, bearings, angles, and
references to section, townships and range lines or corners.
   3.   Present and proposed streets, alleys and sidewalks, with their right-
of-way, in or adjoining the subdivision, including dedicated widths,
approximate gradients, types and widths of surfaces, curbs, and planting
strips, and location of street lights.
   4.   Proposed layout of lots, showing numbers, dimensions, radii, chords and
the square foot areas of lots that are not rectangular.
   5.   Building setback or front yard lines.
   6.   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds, or other public, semi-public or community purposes.
   7.   Present and proposed easements, showing locations, widths, purposes and
limitations.
   8.   Present and proposed utility systems, including sanitary and storm
sewers, other drainage facilities, water lines, gas mains, electric utilities,
and other facilities, with the size, capacity, invert elevation and location of
each.
   9.   Proposed name of the subdivision which shall not duplicate or resemble
existing subdivision names in the County.
   10.   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, builder, and engineer,
surveyor or architect who prepared the preliminary plat, and the engineer,
surveyor or architect who will prepare the final plat.
   11.   A general summary description of any protective covenants or private
restrictions to be incorporated in the final plat.
   12.   Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two (2) feet if the
general slope of the site is less than ten percent (10%) and at vertical
intervals of not more than five (5) feet if the general slope is ten percent
(10%) or greater, unless the Council waives this requirement.
   13.   Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed subdivision and adjoining
property.
N
6-7-6   REFERRAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
The Clerk shall forthwith refer five (5) copies of the preliminary plat to the
Commission.
6-7-7   ACTION BY THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall, as soon as possible, but not more than thirty (30) days
thereafter, negotiate with the subdivider or changes deemed advisable and the
kind and extent of improvements to be made by the subdivider, and pass upon the
preliminary plat as originally submitted or modified. If the Commission does
not act within thirty (30) days, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be
approved; provided, however, that the subdivider may agree to an extension of
the time for a period not to exceed an additional sixty (60) days. It shall
then set forth its recommendations in writing, whether of approval,
modification, or disapproval.
   1.   In the event that substantial changes or modifications are made by the
Commission or disapproval of the plat, it shall give its reasons therefore and
it may request and cause the revised preliminary plat to be resubmitted in the
same manner as the original plat.
   2.   The action of the Commission shall be noted on five (5) copies of the
preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One (1)
copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other copies retained by the
City.
   3.   The “Conditional Approval” by the Commission shall not constitute final
acceptance of the addition or subdivision by the City but an authorization to
proceed with preparation of the final plat.
6-7-8   FINAL PLAT.
The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved,
and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the
approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop
at the time, provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements
of these regulations.
6-7-9   REFERRAL OF FINAL PLAT.
The subdivider shall, within twelve (12) months of the “Conditional Approval”
of the preliminary plat by the Commission, prepare and file seven (7) copies of
the final plat and other required documents with the Clerk as hereinafter set
forth, and upon failure to do so within the time specified, the “Conditional
Approval” of the preliminary plat shall be null and void unless an extension of
time is applied for and granted by the Commission. Upon receipt of the final
plat and other required documents, the Clerk shall transmit five (5) copies of
the final plat to the Commission for its recommendations and approval.
6-7-10   REQUIREMENTS OF THE FINAL PLAT.
The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of not more than
one hundred (100) feet to one inch with India ink on a reproducible tracing
linen. It shall show:
   1.   The title under which the subdivision is to be recorded.
   2.   The linear dimensions in feet and decimals of a foot of the subdivision
boundary, lot lines, streets and alleys. These should be exact and complete to
include all distances, radii, arc, chords, points of tangency and central
angles.
   3.   Street names and clear designations of public alleys. Streets that are
continuations of present streets should bear the same name. If new names are
needed, they should be distinctive. Street names may be required to conform to
the City plan.
   4.   Location, type, materials, and size of all monuments and markers
including all U.S., county or other official bench marks.
   5.   The plat should be signed and acknowledged by the subdivision land
owner and his or her spouse.
   6.   A sealed certification of the accuracy of the plat by the professional
engineer or land surveyor who drew the final plat.
6-7-11   FINAL PLAT ATTACHMENTS.
The final plat shall have the following attached to it:
   1.   A correct description of the subdivision land.
   2.   A certificate by the owner and spouse, if any, that the subdivision is
with the free consent, and is in accordance with the desire of the owner and
spouse. This certificate must be signed and acknowledged by the owner and
spouse before some officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of deeds.
   3.   A complete abstract of title and an attorney’s opinion showing that the
fee title to the subdivision land is in the owner and that the land is free
from encumbrances other than those secured by an encumbrance bond.
   4.   A certificate from the Clerk of the District Court that the subdivision
land is free from all judgments, attachments, mechanics or other liens of
record in that office.
   5.   A certificate from the County Recorder that the title in fee is in the
owner and that it is free from encumbrances other than those secured by an
encumbrance bond.
   6.   A certificate of the County Treasurer that the land is free from
certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free from
certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are secured by bond
in compliance with Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa.
   7.   A certificate of dedication of streets and other public property.
   8.   A statement of restrictions of all types that run with the land and
become covenants in the deeds of lots.
   9.   Resolution and certificate for approval by the Council and for
signatures of the Mayor and Clerk.
   10.   Profiles, typical cross sections, and specifications of street
improvements and utility systems, to show the location, size and grade. These
should be shown on a fifty (50) foot horizontal scale and a five (5) foot
vertical scale with west or south at the left.
   11.   A certificate by the Clerk that all required improvements and
installations have been completed, or that a performance bond guaranteeing
completion has been approved by the City Attorney and filed with the Clerk, or
that the Council has agreed that the City will provide the necessary
improvements and installations and assess the costs against the subdivider or
future property owners in the subdivision.
   12.   The encumbrance bond, if any. Within thirty (30) days after
application for approval of the final plat, the Commission shall approve or
disapprove it. If the Commission approves, it shall fix its seal upon the plat
together with the certified signature of its Chairperson and Secretary. If it
disapproves, it shall set forth its reasons in its own records and provide the
applicant with a copy. After approval of the final plat by the Commission, and
the fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations, one copy shall be
submitted to the Clerk for approval by the Council.
6-7-12   ACTION BY THE COUNCIL.
Upon receipt of the certification by the Clerk the Council shall, within a
reasonable time, either approve or disapprove the final plat.
   1.   In the event that said plat is disapproved by the Council, such
disapproval shall be expressed in writing and shall point out wherein said
proposed plat is objectionable.
   2.   In the event that said plat is found to be acceptable and in accordance
with this chapter, the Council shall accept the same.
   3.   The passage of a resolution by the Council accepting the plat shall
constitute final approval of the platting of the area shown on the final plat,
but the subdivider or owner shall cause such plat to be recorded in the office
of the County Recorder of the County where the land to be subdivided is
located, and shall file satisfactory evidence of such recording in the office
of the Clerk before the City shall recognize the plat as being in full force
and effect.
6-7-13   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
The following general requirements shall be followed by all subdividers:
   1.   Land Suitability. No land shall be subdivided which is held unsuitable
for its intended use by the Commission for reasons of flooding, inadequate
drainage, soil, and rock formations with severe limitations for development,
susceptibility to mud slides or earth slides, severe erosion, potential,
unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or sewage disposal
capabilities, or any other feature harmful to the health, safety or welfare of
the future residents or property owners of the proposed subdivision or the
community at large. However, the Commission may approve preliminary and final
plats if subdividers improve lands consistent with the standards of this and
other applicable ordinances to make subdivision areas, in the opinion of the
Commission, suitable for their intended uses. The Commission may also approve
the preliminary and final plats if subdividers agree to make suitable
improvements and place a sum in escrow pursuant to Section 6-7-16 of this
chapter to guarantee performance. In determining the appropriateness of land
subdivision at a site, the Commission shall consider the objectives of this
chapter and:
      a.   The danger to life and property due to the increased flood heights,
or velocities caused by subdivision fill, roads, and intended uses.
      b.   The danger that intended uses may be swept on to other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.
      c.   The adequacy of proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions under flood conditions.
      d.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
      e.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
      f.   The requirements of the subdivision for a water-front location.
      g.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed subdivision and land uses.
      h.   The compatibility of the proposed uses with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
      i.   The relationship of the proposed subdivision to the comprehensive
plan and flood plain management program for the area.
      j.   The safety of access to the property for emergency vehicles in times
of flood.
      k.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
      l.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
   2.   Relation to Existing Streets.
      a.   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets,
to topographic conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such
streets.
      b.   The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either provide for
the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in
surrounding areas or conform to a plat for the neighborhood approved by the
Council to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions
made continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable.
    3.   Acreage Subdivisions.
      a.   Where the plat submitted covers only a part of the subdivider’s
plat, a sketch of the prospective future system of the unsubmitted part shall
be furnished and the street system of the part submitted shall be considered in
the light of adjustments in connection with the street system of the part not
submitted.
      b.   Where the parcel is subdivided into larger tracts than for building
lots such parcels shall be divided so as to allow for the opening of major
streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent minor streets.
      c.   Subdivisions showing unplatted strips or private streets controlling
access to public ways will not receive approval.
   4.   Minor Streets. Minor streets shall be so planned as to discourage
through traffic. Cul-de-sac streets are permitted where topography and other
conditions justify their use. Such streets shall not be longer than five
hundred (500) feet and shall terminate with a turnaround, having an outside
roadway diameter of at least ninety (90) feet and a street property line
diameter of at least one hundred-ten (110) feet. The right-of-way width of the
straight portion of such streets shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet. The
property line at the intersection of the turnaround and the straight portion of
the street shall be rounded at a radius of not less than fifty (50) feet.
   5.   Frontage Streets.
      a.   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the City of Cascade may require marginal access streets,
reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation
along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other
treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties
and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
      b.   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a rail-road right-of-way
or limited access highway right-of-way, the City may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes
in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in
appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard
for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
   6.   Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential
to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations, and where the City finds it will be
practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be
subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract.
   7.   Street Geometrics.
      a.   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-
five (125) feet shall be avoided.
      b.   A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be introduced
between reverse curves on arterial and collection streets.
      c.   When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one
point by more than ten (10) degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a
radius adequate to insure a sight distance of not less than two hundred (200)
feet for minor and collector streets, and of such greater radii as the City
shall determine for special cases.
   8.   Street and Alley Widths.
      a.   Major streets shall have a minimum width of sixty-six (66) feet with
a minimum of forty-one (41) foot roadway.
      b.   Minor streets shall have a minimum width of sixty-six (66) feet with
a minimum of thirty-seven (37) foot roadway.
      c.   Minimum Construction Standards. Streets within any subdivision shall
be constructed, repaired or replaced in accordance with industry standards,
including but not limited to at least the minimum standards set forth in
Section 6-6-6.
(Ord. 9-17, Passed August 28, 2017)
   9.   Intersections.
      a.   Insofar as is practical, acute angles between streets at their
intersection are to be avoided.
      b.   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less than
sixty (60) degrees.
      c.   Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a
radius of ten (10) feet, or of a greater radius where the Commission may deem
it necessary. The Commission may permit comparable cutoffs or chords in place
of rounded corners.
   10.   Street Names. In general, streets running east and west shall be named
“avenues”. Streets running north and south shall be named “streets”. Streets
that loop around and exit in the same direction as they enter shall be named
“courts”. Streets that end in a cul-de-sac shall be named “lanes”. Streets that
are in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the name of
the existing streets. The proposed names of new streets shall not duplicate or
sound similar to existing street names. Street names shall be subject to the
approval of the Commission.
   11.   Street Grades. Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed five
percent (5%), with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves. No street
grade shall be less than one-half (1/2) of one percent.
   12.   Alleys.
      a.   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts,
except that the Commission may waive this requirement where other definite and
assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
      b.   The width of an alley shall be twenty (20) feet.
      c.   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided,
but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe
vehicular movement.
      d.   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable,
shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as
determined by the Commission.
   13.   Blocks.
      a.   No block may be more than one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320)
feet or less than five hundred (500) feet in length between the centerlines of
intersecting streets, except where, in the opinion of the Council,
extraordinary conditions unquestionably justify a departure from these limits.
      b.   In blocks over seven hundred (700) feet in length, the Council may
require at or near the middle of the block a public way or easement of not less
than ten (10) feet in width for use by pedestrians and/or as an easement for
public utilities.
   14.   Lots.
      a.   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientations shall be
appropriate for the location of the subdivision, for the type of development
and use contemplated, and shall conform to the zoning regulations of the City.
      b.   Minimum lot dimensions and sizes shall conform to the following:
         (1)   Minimum lot size shall not be less than 80' x 120'.
         (2)   Residential lots where not served by public sewer shall not be
less than eighty (80) feet wide or less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet
in area.
         (3)   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for
commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-
street parking facilities required by the type and use and development
contemplated.
         (4)   Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra ten (10)
feet of width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to
both streets.
      c.   The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide, by means of
a public street, each lot with satisfactory access to an existing public
street.
      d.   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A
planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet and across which there shall
be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a
traffic artery or other disadvantageous use.
      e.   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight
street lines or radial to curved street lines.
   15.   Building Lines. Building lines shall be shown on all lots within the
platted area. The Commission may require building lines in accordance with the
needs of each subdivision.
   16.   Easements.
      a.   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lines shall be
provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least ten (10) feet
wide.
      b.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such water course, and
further width for construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose.
   17.   Plat Markers. Markers shall be placed at all block corners, angle
points, points of curves in streets, and all such intermediate points as shall
be required by the City. The markers shall be of such material, size and length
as may be approved by the City.
   18.   Because of the unconventional platting requirements of zero-lot line
developments as allowed by the Cascade Zoning Ordinance in the R-2 and R-
4 zoning districts, the City Council may waive specific requirements of this
section as applicable after receiving recommendation from the Planning and
Zoning Commission prior to creation of the preliminary plat and/or the final
plat. The request for specific waiver shall be made by the subdivider and shall
be presented to the Zoning Administrator preceding any formal plat submitted.
6-7-14   IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
The subdivider shall install and construct all improvements required by this
chapter. All required improvements shall be installed and constructed in
accordance with the specifications and under the supervision of the Commission
and to its satisfaction.
   1.   Streets and Alleys. All streets and alleys within the platted area
which are dedicated for public use shall be brought to the grade approved by
the Commission.
   2.   Roadways. All roadways shall be surfaced with portland cement concrete
or with asphaltic concrete over a crushed stone base as the Commission may
require.
   3.   Curb and Gutter. Curb and gutter shall be required on all streets. All
curb and gutter shall be constructed to the grade approved by the Commission.
   4.   Sidewalks. Sidewalks may be required by the Commission if they are
considered necessary for the general welfare and safety of the community.
Sidewalks shall be constructed to the grade approved by the Commission.
   5.   Water Lines. Where a public water main is reasonably accessible, the
subdivider shall connect with such water main and provide a water connection
for each lot with service pipe installed to the property line in accordance
with the Water Department standards, procedure and supervision.
   6.   Sewers.
   7.   Underground Utilities Required. Electric and telecommunications lines
shall be underground in designed utility easements and/or public right-of-ways
in accordance with applicable electrical and safety codes and no less than a
minimum depth of eighteen (18) inches from finished grade.
      a.   Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the
subdivider shall connect or provide for the connection with such sanitary sewer
and shall provide within the subdivision the sanitary sewer system required to
make the sewer accessible to each lot in the subdivision. Sanitary sewers shall
be stubbed into each lot. Sewer systems shall be approved by the Commission and
the State Department of Health.
      b.   Where sanitary sewers are not available, other facilities, as
approved by the Commission and the State Department of Health, must be provided
for the adequate disposal of sanitary wastes.
      c.   Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of storm waters,
subject to the approval of the Commission.
6-7-15   INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
The Council shall provide for the inspection of required improvements during
construction and insure their satisfactory completion. The subdivider shall pay
to the City an inspection fee equal to the actual cost of inspection. These
fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the City and no building permits
shall be issued until all fees are paid. The subdivder shall furnish the City
with a construction schedule prior to the commencement of any and all
construction, and notify the City not less than forty-eight (48) hours in
advance of readiness for required inspection.
6-7-16   COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
Before the Council will approve the final plat, all of the foregoing
improvements shall be constructed and accepted by formal resolution of the
Council. Before passage of said resolution of acceptance, the subdivider shall
provide the City with detailed record drawings or as-built drawings prepared by
a licensed engineer for the required public improvements. The City
Administrator shall report that said improvements meet all City specifications
and ordinances or other City requirements, and the agreements between
subdivider and the City.
6-7-17   PERFORMANCE BOND.
The completion requirement may be waived in whole or in part if the subdivider
will post a performance bond with the Council guaranteeing that improvements
not completed will be constructed within a period of one (1) year from final
acceptance of the plat; but final acceptance of the plat will not constitute
final acceptance by the City of any improvements to be constructed.
Improvements will be accepted only after their construction has been completed,
and no public funds will be expended in the subdivision until such improvements
have been completed and accepted by the City.
6-7-18   MAINTENANCE BOND.
The subdivider shall also warrantee the materials and labor on the required
public improvements for a period of two (2) year after completion and
acceptance by resolution of the Council. Said warrantee shall be in the form of
a maintenance bond issued by a responsible surety company and approved by the
City of Cascade.
6-7-19   VARIANCES.
Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that
strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter would result in
extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography or other
conditions, the Council may, upon recommendation from the Commission, vary,
modify or waive the requirements so that substantial justice may be done and
the public interest secured. Provided, however, such variance, modification or
waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this
chapter. In no case shall any variance or modification be more than minimum
easing of the requirements and in no instance, shall it be in conflict with any
zoning ordinance and such variances and waivers may be granted only by the
affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the Council.
6-7-20   CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
Upon recommendation from the Commission, any regulations or provisions of this
regulation may be changed and amended from time to time by the Council,
provided however, that such changes or amendments shall not become effective
until after a public hearing has been held, public notice of which shall have
been published at least once, not less than four (4) or more than twenty (20)
days before the date of the hearing.
CHAPTER 8
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
6-8-1   Purpose
6-8-2   Definitions
6-8-3   Designated Areas
6-8-4   Cleaning Snow, Ice, and Accumulations
6-8-5   Maintenance Responsibility
6-8-6   Liability of Abutting Owner
6-8-7   Ordering Sidewalk Improvements
6-8-8   Repairing Defective Sidewalks
6-8-9   Notice of Inability to Repair or Barricade
6-8-10   Standard Sidewalk Specifications
6-8-11   Permits for Construction or Removal
6-8-12   Failure to Obtain Permit; Remedies
6-8-13   Inspection and Approval
6-8-14   Barricades and Warning Lights
6-8-15   Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
6-8-16   Special Assessments for Construction and Repair
6-8-17   Notice of Assessment for Repair or Cleaning Costs
6-8-18   Hearing and Assessment
6-8-19   Billing and Certifying to County
6-8-20   ADAAG Compliance
6-8-1   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to improve and maintain sidewalks in a safe
condition, to require owners of abutting property to maintain, repair, replace,
construct or reconstruct sidewalks.
6-8-2   DEFINITIONS.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have these meanings:
   1.   Defective Sidewalk. Any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more of the
following characteristics:
      a.   vertical separations equal to three-fourths (3/4) inch or more.
      b.   horizontal separations equal to three-fourths (3/4) inch or more.
      c.   holes or depressions equal to three-fourths (3/4) inch or more and
at least four (4) inches in diameter.
      d.   spalling over fifty (50) percent of the surface of a single square
of the sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to one-half (1/2) inch or
more.
      e.   spalling over less than fifty (50) percent of a single square of the
sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to three-fourths (3/4) inch or
more.
      f.   a single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that no part
thereof has a piece greater than one square foot.
      g.   a sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth.
      h.   a change from design or construction grade equal to or greater than
three-fourths (3/4) inch per foot.
   2.   Sidewalk Improvements. The construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement, or removal of a public sidewalk or the excavating, filling, or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
   3.   Owner. The person owning the fee title or the contract purchaser for
purposes of notification required herein. For all other purposes, "owner" shall
include the lessee, or person in possession.
6-8-3   DESIGNATED AREAS.
Sidewalks shall be installed and maintained in designated areas. The City
Council shall determine the designated areas and the City shall maintain a map
of the designated areas.
(Ord. 29.16, Passed December 12, 2016)
6-8-4   CLEANING SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS.
It shall be the duty of the owner to keep sidewalks abutting the owner's
property clear of the natural accumulations of snow or ice. If the owner fails
to do so within twenty-four (24) hours after deposit of accumulation, the Mayor
may have the natural accumulations of snow or ice removed without notice to the
property owner. The Mayor shall give the Council an itemized and verified
statement of the removal costs and a legal description of the property at the
next regular Council meeting. The costs shall be reviewed by the Council, and
if found correct, shall be assessed against the property as taxes. The City
Clerk shall be directed to certify the costs to the County Treasurer for
collection as provided in Section 364.12 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2b) and (2e))
In addition, the City may issue a municipal infraction for violators as follows
per year:
   1.   First Offense – Written warning
   2.   Second Offense - $125.00
   3.   Third and Each Repeat Offense - $250.00
(Ord. 7-16, Passed March 14, 2016)
6-8-5   MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
The owner of any lot or parcel thereof abutting upon any sidewalk and the City
streets in the City shall maintain said sidewalk in a state of good repair,
free from cracks, holes and unevenness so that the sidewalk does not constitute
a safety hazard. A state of sidewalk disrepair is hereby declared a public
nuisance. The owner of any lot or parcel who fails to repair said sidewalk
shall be liable to any person injured as a result of such failure and shall
further save, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city of Cascade from and
against any claim arising out of the failure to maintain said sidewalk.
(Ord. 31-16, Passed December 12, 2016)
6-8-6   LIABILITY OF ABUTTING OWNER.
As provided in Section 364.14, Code of Iowa, in the event the owner of property
abutting any public sidewalk fails or refuses to perform any act required of
them by this Ordinance and in the event an action is brought against the City
for personal injuries alleged to have been caused by a defect in or the
condition of said sidewalk, the City may notify in writing the said abutting
owner that it claims the injury was caused by their negligence and/or their
failure to repair the defect or eliminate the condition complained of. The
notice shall state the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the
name and location of the court where the action is pending, a brief statement
of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the City believes that
the person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City,
and asking the person to appear and defend.
A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any action by the City against
any person so notified, as to the existence of the defect or condition or other
cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City to the plaintiff
in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage or injury. The
City may maintain an action against the person notified to recover the amount
of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by the City in the
suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
6-8-7   ORDERING SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
The City Council may order the construction, reconstruction, repair, or
replacement of permanent sidewalks upon any street or court. Notice of this
order shall be sent to the owner by certified mail. The notice shall include
the fact that the owner may request a hearing by the Council within fifteen
(15) days or receipt of the notice.
6-8-8   REPAIRING DEFECTIVE SIDEWALKS.
It shall be the duty of the abutting property owner at any time, or upon
receipt of thirty (30) days' notice from the City, to repair, replace, or
reconstruct all broken or defective sidewalks in the abutting street right-of-
way. If, after the expiration of the thirty (30) days as provided in the
notice, the required work has not been done or is not in the process of
completion, the Mayor shall order the work to proceed to repair, replace, or
reconstruct the sidewalk. Upon completion of the work, the Mayor shall submit
to the Council an itemized and verified statement of expenditures for material
and labor, and the legal description of the property abutting the sidewalk on
which work has been performed. These costs shall be assessed to the property as
taxes. The City Clerk shall be directed to certify the costs to the County
Treasurer for collection as provided in Section 364.12 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(e))
6-8-9   NOTICE OF INABILITY TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.
It shall be the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or of
the contractor or agent of the owner, to notify the City immediately in the
event the owner is unable to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install
or erect warnings and barricades as required by this chapter.
6-8-10   STANDARD SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS.
Sidewalks constructed, repaired, or replaced under the provisions of this
chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards:
   1.   Portland cement concrete shall be the only material used in the
construction and repair of sidewalks unless otherwise authorized by the City
Council.
   2.   Sidewalks shall be on one-course construction.
   3.   Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-drained soil. Where
soil is not well drained, a three (3) inch sub-base of compact, clean, coarse
gravel, sand, or cinders shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil drainage is to
be determined by the Superintendent of Public Works.
   4.   The sidewalk bed shall be graded to the established grade.
   5.   Residential sidewalks shall be at least four (4) feet wide, or match
existing sidewalks, and four (4) inches thick, and each section shall be no
more than four (4) feet in length. In the central business district, sidewalks
shall extend from the property line to the curb unless the Council shall
establish a different distance due to the circumstances. Each section shall be
four (4) inches thick and no more than six (6) feet in length and width. All
driveway areas shall not be less than six (6) inches in thickness.
   6.   Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge (edge
nearest the abutting private property) one (1) foot from the property line,
unless the Council shall establish a different distance due to the
circumstances.
   7.   The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation even with the
curb at the curb or not less than one-half (1/2) inch above the curb for each
foot between the curb and the sidewalk.
   8.   All sidewalks shall slope at least one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot
toward the curb.
   9.   All sidewalks shall have a steel trowel finish followed by a "broom" or
a "wood float" finish.
   10.   Ramps for the disabled. There shall not be less than two (2) curb cuts
or ramps per lineal block which shall be located on or near the cross-walks at
intersections. Each curb cut or ramp shall be at last thirty (30) inches wide,
shall be sloped at not greater than one inch of rise per twelve (12) inches
lineal distance, except that a slope no greater than one inch of rise per eight
(8) inches lineal distance may be used where necessary, shall have a nonskid
surface, and shall otherwise by so constructed as to allow reasonable access to
the crosswalk for physically disabled persons using the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)
   11.   All sidewalk improvements on public property, whether performed by the
owner of the abutting property or by the City, shall be performed under the
supervision and inspection of the City Superintendent of Public Works, and in
accordance with the standard sidewalk specifications set forth in this chapter.
6-8-11   PERMITS FOR CONSTRUCTION OR REMOVAL.
No person shall make any sidewalk improvements unless such person shall obtain
a permit from the City Clerk. The permit shall state that the person will
comply with the Ordinances of the City and with the specifications for
sidewalks adopted by the City. The permit also shall state that the work will
be done under the direction and approval of the City Superintendent of Public
Works.
6-8-12   FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMIT; REMEDIES.
Whenever any sidewalk improvements are made that do not conform to the
provisions of this chapter and with the specifications, or when any sidewalk
improvements are made without a permit, the Mayor shall serve notice to obtain
a permit upon the property owner and upon the contractor doing the work. If the
sidewalk is in the course of construction, the notice shall order the work to
stop until a permit is obtained and the work is corrected to comply with the
specifications. If the sidewalk work has been completed, the owner shall obtain
a permit immediately and perform any needed corrections within five (5) days
from receipt of the permit. If the owner fails to comply with this notice, the
Mayor shall have the work completed and the costs assessed to the property
owner as provided in this chapter.
6-8-13   INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
Upon final completion, the Superintendent of Public Works shall inspect the
work and may order corrections if the work does not meet specifications. When
the work does meet all requirements of this chapter, the specifications, and
the permit, the Superintendent of Public Works shall indicate this on both
copies of the permit.
6-8-14   BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
Proper warning lights and barricades shall be placed to protect persons from
materials, equipment, and dangerous conditions. Placement and maintenance of
adequate warnings is the responsibility of the constructor, the owner, and the
lessee of the property.
6-8-15   INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any sidewalk or approach thereto while it is in the process of being improved,
or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall
remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall
remove, destroy, mar, or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar,
remove, or deface any notice or warning device provided by this chapter.
6-8-16   SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR.
The City Council may assess the cost of initial construction, improvements,
and/or repair of sidewalks in the City according to the special assessment
procedures established in Chapter 384, division IV, Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
6-8-17   NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT FOR REPAIR OR CLEANING COSTS.
When the Mayor submits a bill for sidewalk improvements or for removal of
accumulations as provided in this chapter, the City Clerk shall send a notice
of such facts to the owner of the abutting property. The notice may be given
either by personal service or by certified mail to the last known address of
the owner. The notice shall contain a statement of the work performed, the cost
of the work that is being assessed, a description of the property affected, and
the fact that the person may pay the amount assessed within thirty (30) days
without interest or penalty. The notice also shall indicate that the person may
object to such assessment and given the place and time at which Council will
hear such objections. The time set for hearing shall be at least fifteen (15)
days after the service or mailing of the notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.50)
6-8-18   HEARING AND ASSESSMENT.
At the time and place designed in the Notice, the Council shall consider all
objections to the assessment, correct all errors or omissions, and adopt a
corrected list as the amounts to be assessed against the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.51)
6-8-19   BILLING AND CERTIFYING TO COUNTY.
Thirty (30) days after the Council's decision, the City Clerk shall certify any
unpaid amounts to the County Treasurer. The unpaid assessments shall constitute
a lien against the property and shall be collected by the County Treasurer in
the same manner as other taxes. Any assessment that exceeds $100 may be paid in
installments as set by Council, not exceeding ten, in the same manner and at
the same interest rates as for special assessments under Chapter 384, division
IV, Code of Iowa. No interest shall be charged for assessments, or parts
thereof, paid within thirty (30) days of the time the Council determined the
final amounts.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.60)
6-8-20   ADAAG COMPLIANCE.
All construction, repair, and maintenance of sidewalks shall comply with
Americans with Disabilities Guidelines (ADAAG).
AWNINGS.It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any
sidewalk unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight (8) feet
above the surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck
canvas or other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets securely
fastened to the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct
the sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians.
ENCROACHING STEPS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs
or steps to any building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by
resolution of the council.
OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES. It is unlawful for a person to:
    1.   Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any cellar or basement
by occupying any part of the sidewalk or to enclose any portion of a sidewalk
with a railing without permission by resolution of the council.
   2.   Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault on any
sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public.
   3.   Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on or within six
(6) feet of any sidewalk.
FIRES OR FUELS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any
kind on any sidewalk or to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
DEFACING. It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint or
writing on any sidewalk.
DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any
sidewalk glass, nails, glass bottles, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage,
rubbish, litter, offal or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure
any person, animal or vehicle.
MERCHANDISE DISPLAY. It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any
sidewalk, goods or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to
interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the
sidewalk; in no case shall more than three (3) feet of the sidewalk next to the
building be occupied for such purposes.
SALES STANDS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine
or stand for the sale of fruit, vegetables, or other substances or commodities
on any sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the council.
DAMAGE TO SIDEWALKS. Persons who damage a sidewalk shall be held responsible
for the cost of repair.
CHAPTER 9
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
6-9-1   Purpose
6-9-2   Definitions
6-9-3   Lands to Which Chapter Applies
6-9-4   Establishment of Official Flood Plain Zoning Map
6-9-5   Rules for Interpretation of Flood Hazard Boundaries
6-9-6   Compliance
6-9-7   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
6-9-8   Interpretation
6-9-9   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
6-9-10   Establishment of Zoning Districts
6-9-11   Floodway (Overlay) District (FW)
6-9-12   Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District(FF)
6-9-13   General Flood Plain (Overlay)District (FP)
6-9-14   Reserved
6-9-15   Administration
6-9-16   Flood Plain Development Permit Required
6-9-17   Application for Permit
6-9-18   Action on Permit Application
6-9-19   Construction and Use to be as Provided in Application and Plans
6-9-20   Appointment and Duties of Board of Adjustment
6-9-21   Conditional Uses
6-9-22   Appeals
6-9-23   Variances
6-9-24   Hearing by Board of Adjustment
6-9-25   Decisions of Board of Adjustment
6-9-26   Factors Upon Which the Decision to Grant Variances is Based
6-9-27   Conditions Attached to Conditional Uses or Variances
6-9-28   Nonconforming Uses
6-9-29   Amendments
6-9-30   Power to Cities
6-9-31   Violations
6-9-32   Severability
6-9-1   PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare by minimizing flood losses, with provisions designed to:
   1.   Reserve sufficient flood plain area for the conveyance of flood flows
so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
   2.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
   3.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public utilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of the
initial construction.
   4.   Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuited for intended
purposes because of flood hazard.
   5.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
6-9-2   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Appurtenant Structures” means a structure which is on the same parcel
of the property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which
is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
   2.   “Base flood” means the flood having one (1) percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. (See 100-year flood.)
   2.   “Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or
lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see “lowest
floor.”
   3.   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials. “Development” does not include “minor
projects” or “routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities” as
defined in this section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and
similar practices that do not involve filling or grading.
   4.   “Existing construction” means any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced before the effective date of the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map. May also be referred to as “existing structure.”
   5.   “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the flood plain management regulations adopted by the
community.
   6.   “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means
the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   7.   “Factory-built home” means any structure designed for residential use
which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a
building site. For the purpose of this chapter, factory built homes include
mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular homes and also includes
“recreational vehicles” which are placed on a site for greater than 180
consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
   8.   “Factory-built home park” means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land
divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.
   9.   “Five Hundred (500) Year Flood” means a flood, magnitude of which has a
two-tenths (0.2) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
of which, on average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every five
hundred (500) years.
   9.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or
rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
   10.   “Flood elevation” means the elevation floodwaters would reach at a
particular site during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the
100-year flood elevation is the elevation of floodwaters related to the
occurrence of the 100-year flood.
   11.   “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map prepared as
part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which
delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
   12.   “Flood Insurance Study” means a study initiated, funded and published
by the Federal Insurance Administration for the purpose of evaluating in detail
the existence and severity of flood hazards; providing the community with the
necessary information for adopting a floodplain management program; and
establishing actuarial flood insurance rates.
   13.   “Flood plain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water as a result of a flood.
   14.   “Flood plain management” means an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
flood plains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing and flood plain management regulations.
   15.   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such
structures.
   16.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions
of the flood plains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to
carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood
flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot.
   17.   “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the Special Flood Hazard
Area outside the floodway.
   18.   “Highest Adjacent Grade” means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
      a.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing in
the National Register;
      b.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      c.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or,
      d.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by
either (i) an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   19.   “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building including a basement except when all the following criteria are met:
      a.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of
Section 167.12(4)(A); and
      b.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage; and
      c.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one (1)
foot above the 100-year flood level; and
      d.   The enclosed area is not a “basement” as defined in this section. In
cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria A, B, C and D above,
the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that does not
satisfy the criteria above.
   20.   “Maximum Damage Potential Development” means hospitals and like
institutions; buildings or building complexes containing documents, data, or
instruments of great public value; buildings or building complexes containing
materials dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; power
installations needed in emergency other buildings or building complexes similar
in nature or use.
   “Minor Projects” means small development activities (except for filling,
grading and excavating) valued at less than $500.
   21.   “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home parks) means
those structures or development for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
   22.   “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after
the effective date of the flood plain management regulations adopted by the
community.
   23.   “100-Year Flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which has a one
percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on
the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every one hundred (100)
years.
   24.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
      a.   Built on a single chassis;
      b.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      c.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
      d.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   25.   “Routine Maintenance” means repairs necessary to keep a structure in a
safe and habitable condition that do not trigger a building permit, provided
they are not associated with a general improvement of the structure or repair
of a damaged structure. Such repairs include:
      a.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing
roofing tiles and replacing siding;
      b.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting,
cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work;
      c.   Basement sealing;
      d.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
      e.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or air
conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
   26.   “Special flood hazard area” means the land within a community subject
to the “base flood”. This land is identified on the community’s Flood Insurance
Rate Map as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, and/or A99.
   27.   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
   28.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories,
sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities and
other similar uses.
   29. “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition
would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
   30.   “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
      a.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the
structure either (i) before the “start of construction” of the improvement, or
(ii) if the structure has been “substantially damaged” and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe conditions for the existing use. The term also does not include any
alteration of an “historic structure,” provided the alteration will not
preclude the structure’s designation as an “historic structure.”
      b.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building
by twenty-five (25) percent or more. All additions constructed after the
effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map shall be added to any proposed
addition in determining whether the total increase in original floor space
would exceed twenty-five percent.
   31.   “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of
the flood plain management regulations.
   32.   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
6-9-3   LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
The provisions of this chapter apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of
the City shown on the Official Zoning Map as being within the boundaries of the
Floodway, Floodway Fringe, General Flood Plain, and Shallow Flooding Districts.
6-9-4   ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL FLOOD PLAIN ZONING MAP.
The Official Flood Plain Zoning Map, together with all explanatory matter
thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be
a part of this chapter. The Official Zoning Map bears the signature of the
Mayor attested by the City Clerk and shall be on file in the office of the City
Clerk. The Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) for Dubuque County and Incorporated
Areas, the City of Cascade, Panels 19061C0467F and 0468F, dated August 10,
2021, which were prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Dubuque
County, is (are) hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material
contained with the Flood Insurance Study are also declared to be part of this
ordinance.
6-9-5   RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARIES.
The boundaries of the Flood Hazard areas shall be determined by scaling
distances on the official Flood Plain Zoning Map. When an interpretation is
needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the Zoning Administrator shall
make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the
district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his or her
case and submit technical evidence.
6-9-6   COMPLIANCE.
No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located,
extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses
within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
6-9-7   ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes
greater restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall prevail. Any
ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only.
6-9-8   INTERPRETATION.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of
the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other
powers granted by State statutes.
6-9-9   WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
The standards required by this chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes. This chapter does not imply that areas outside the designated special
flood hazard areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
6-9-10   ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
The flood plain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby
divided into the following districts: (i) Floodway District (FW); (ii) Floodway
Fringe District (FF); (iii) General Flood Plain District (FP); and (iv) Shallow
Flooding District (SF). The boundaries are shown on the Official Flood Plain
Zoning Map. Within these districts all uses not allowed as Permitted Uses or
permissible as Conditional Uses are prohibited unless a variance to the terms
of this chapter is granted after due consideration by the Board of Adjustment.
6-9-11   FLOODWAY (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FW).
The following regulations shall be applicable in the Floodway (Overlay)
District (FW):
   1.   Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the
Floodway District to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance
(or underlying zoning district) and provided they do no include placement of
structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstruction, the storage of
materials or equipment, excavation, or alteration of a watercourse.
      a.   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor
plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod
farming, and wild crop harvesting.
      b.   Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas,
airport landing strips.
      c.   Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis
courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting
and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
      d.   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play
areas.
      e.   Such other open-space uses similar in nature to the above uses.
   2.   Conditional Uses. The following uses which involve structures
(temporary or permanent), fill, storage of materials or equipment may be
permitted only upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of
Adjustment as provided for in Section 167.21. Such uses must also meet the
applicable provisions of the Floodway District Performance Standards.
      a.   Uses or structures accessory to open-space uses.
      b.   Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement enterprises.
      c.   Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands, signs,
and billboards.
      d.   Extraction of sands, gravel, and other materials.
      e.   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, and wharves.
      f.   Utility transmission lines, underground pipelines.
      g.   Other uses similar in nature to uses described in Subsection 1 and
in this subsection which are consistent with the provisions of Subsection 3 and
the general spirit and purpose of this chapter.
   3.   Performance Standards. All Floodway District uses allowed as a
Permitted or Conditional Development shall meet the following standards.
      a.   No development shall be permitted in the Floodway District that
would result in any increase in the 100 year flood level. Consideration of the
effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption
that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated
lands.
      b.   All development within the Floodway District shall:
         (1)   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
         (2)   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
         (3)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage.
      c.   No development shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the
channel or floodway or any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or any
other facility or system.
      d.   Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if
permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the Floodway
Fringe District and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum
possible resistance to flood flows.
      e.   Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and
shall not be for human habitation.
      f.   Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of
other material may be allowed if readily removable from the Floodway District
within the time available after flood warning.
      g.   Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and
modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within
the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations
must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
      h.   Any fill allowed in floodway must be shown to have some beneficial
purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
      i.   Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the stream bed
and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows.
6-9-12   FLOODWAY FRINGE (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FF).
All development within the Floodway Fringe District shall be permitted to the
extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying
zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance standards of the
Floodway Fringe District. All development must be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and shall meet the following applicable performance
standards.
   1.   All structures shall i) be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure, ii) be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage, and iii) be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   2.   Residential Structures. All new or substantially improved residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basements, elevated a minimum
of 1.0 feet above the 100 year flood level. Construction shall be upon
compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than 1.0 feet above the
100 year flood level and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the
limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such
as piers) may be allowed, subject to favorable consideration by the Board of
Adjustment and issuance of a Conditional Use Permit, where existing topography,
street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such case, the
methods used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the
various forces and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential
buildings shall be provided with a means of access which will be passable by
wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.
   3.   Nonresidential Structures. All new or substantially improved
nonresidential buildings shall have the first floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of 1.0 feet above the 100 year flood level, or together with
attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such level. When
floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of
Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with the 100 year flood; and that the structure, below
the 100 year flood level, is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water.
A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to
North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are floodproofed
shall be maintained by the Administrator.
(Ord. 17-16, Passed August 8, 2016)
   4.   All new and substantially improved structures:
      a.   Fully enclosed areas below the “lowest floor” (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
         (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
         (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      b.   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
      c.   New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
      d. New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with
plumbing, gas lines, water/gas meters and other similar service utilities
either elevated (or in the case of non-residential structures, optionally
floodproofed to a minimum of one (1) foot base elevation or designed to be
watertight and withstand inundation to such a level.
   5.   Factory-built homes:
      a.   All factory-built homes including those placed in existing factory-
built home parks or subdivisions shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one foot above the
100-year flood level.
      b.   All factory-built homes including those placed in existing factory-
built home parks or subdivisions shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. The following specific requirements (or their
equivalent) shall be met:
         (1)   Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners
of the factory-built home, with two (2) additional ties per side at
intermediate locations and factory-built homes less than fifty (50) feet long
requiring one (1) additional tie per side;
         (2)   Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home with
five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points and factory-built
homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four (4) additional ties per
side;
         (3)   All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4800 pounds.
         (4)   Any additions to factory-built homes shall be similarly
anchored.
   6.   Utility and Sanitary Systems.
      a.   All new and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities
shall be provided with a level of flood protection equal to or greater than one
(1) foot above the 100 year flood elevation.
      b.   On site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or
designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
      c.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water
supply treatment facilities shall be provided with a level of protection equal
to or greater than one (1) foot above the 100 year flood elevation.
      d.   Utilities such as gas and electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
   7.   Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or
injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a
minimum of one (1) foot above the 100 year flood level. Other material and
equipment must either be similarly elevated or (i) not be subject to major
flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to flood waters or (ii) be
readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
   8.   Flood control structural works such as levees, flood-walls, etc. shall
provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100 year flood with a minimum of 3
feet of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage. In
addition, structural flood control works shall be approved by the Department of
Natural Resources.
   9.   No development shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel
or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or other
drainage facility or system.
   10.   Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and subdivisions)
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development
associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation of public
utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this Ordinance.
Subdivision proposals intended for residential development shall provide all
lots with a means of vehicular access that will be passable by wheeled vehicles
during occurrence of the 100 year flood.
(Ord. 17-16, Passed August 8, 2016)
   11.   Accessory Structures to Residential Uses.
      a.   Detached garages, sheds and similar structures that are incidental
to a residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation requirements
where the following criteria are satisfied.
         (1)   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential. Its size shall not exceed 600 sq. ft. in size. Those portions of the
structure located less than 1 foot above the BFE must be constructed of flood-
resistant materials.
         (2)   The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage
potential purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure
shall not be used for human habitation.
         (3)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
         (4)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist floatation,
collapse and lateral movement.
         (5)   The structure’s service facilities such as electrical and
heating equipment shall be elevated or flood proofed to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation.
         (6)   The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of section 6-9-12(11)(a) of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 17-16, Passed August 8, 2016)
   12.   Recreational Vehicles.
      a.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of Section 6-
9-12(5) of this chapter regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built
homes when the following criteria are satisfied.
         (1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less
than 180 consecutive days, and,
         (2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
      b.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180
consecutive days and are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements of
Section 6-9-12(5) of this chapter regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-
built homes.
   13.   Maximum Damage Potential Development
All new or substantially improved maximum damage potential development shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of one (1) Foot
above the elevation of the 500-year flood, or together with attendant utility
and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is
utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify
that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the 0.2% annual chance flood; and that the structure, below the 0.2%
annual chance flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating
the specific elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to
which any structures are flood proofed shall be maintained by the
Administrator. Where 0.2% chance flood elevation data has not been provided in
the Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be
contacted to compute such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing
the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to
make such determinations.
6-9-13   GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FP).
   1.   Permitted Development. The following development shall be permitted
within the General Flood Plain District to the extent that they are not
prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided
they do not require placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other
obstruction; the storage of materials or equipment; excavation; or alteration
of a watercourse.
      a.   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor
plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod
farming, and wild crop harvesting.
      b.   Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, and
airport landing strips.
      c.   Private and public recreation uses such as golf courses, tennis
courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting
and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
      d.   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play
areas.
   2.   Conditional Development. Any development which involves placement of
structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions; the storage of
materials or equipment; excavation; or alteration of a watercourse may be
allowed only upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of
Adjustment as provided for in Section 6-9-21. All such development shall be
reviewed by the Department of Natural Resources to determine (i) whether the
land involved is either wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe
and (ii) the 100 year flood level. The applicant shall be responsible for
providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical
information to make the determination.
   3.   Performance Standards
      a.   All conditional development, or portions thereof, to be located in
the floodway as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet
the applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway District (Section 6-9-
11).
      b.   All conditional development, or portions thereof, to be located in
the floodway fringe as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall
meet the applicable standards of the Floodway Fringe District (Section 6-9-12).
      c.   Review by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources is not required
for the proposed construction of new or replacement bridges or culverts where:
         1) The bridge or culvert is located on a stream that drains less than
two (2) square miles, and
         2)    The bridge or culver is not associated with a channel
modification that Constitutes a channel change as specified in 567-71.2(2),
Iowa Administrative Code
6-9-14   RESERVED.
(Ord. 17-16, Passed August 8, 2016)
6-9-15   ADMINISTRATION.
The Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce this chapter and will
herein be referred to as the Administrator. The duties and responsibilities of
the Administrator include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
   1.   Review for Compliance. Review all flood plain development permit
applications to insure that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
   2.   Required Permits. Review all flood plain development permit
applications to insure that all necessary permits have been obtained from
federal, state or local governmental agencies.
   3.   Record Floor Elevation. Verify and maintain a record of (i) the
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of the lowest
floor of all new or substantially improved buildings or (ii) the elevation to
which new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
(Ord. 17-16, Passed August 8, 2016)
   4.   Notify Agencies. Notify adjacent communities and/or countries and the
Department of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation
of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal
Insurance Administrator.
   5.   Records. Keep a record of all permits, appeals, variances and such
other transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this
chapter.
   6.   Annual Report. Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual
report concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report
form supplied by the Federal Insurance Administration.
   7.   Annexation. Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any
annexations or modifications to the community’s boundaries.
   8.   Subdivision Proposals. Review subdivision proposals to insure such
proposals are consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the
Council of potential conflicts.
   9.   Maintain the accuracy of the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps
when:
      A.    Development placed within the Floodway (Overlay) District results
in any of the following:
         (i)   An increase in the Base Flood Elevations, or
         (ii)   Alteration to the floodway boundary
      B.   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not
include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base elevation; or
      C.   Development relocates or alters the channel.
Within 6 months of the completion of the development, the applicant shall
submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for a Letter of Map
Revision.
      10.    Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the standards
of this ordinance.
      11.   Forward all requests to Variances to the Board of Adjustment for
consideration.
Ensure all requests include the information ordinarily submitted with
applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary to the
Board of Adjustment.
6-9-16   FLOOD PLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.
A Flood Plain Development Permit issued by the Administrator shall be secured
prior to initiation of any flood plain development (any manmade change to
improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or
other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations) including the placement of factory-built homes.
6-9-17   APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
Application for a Flood Plain Development Permit shall be made on forms
supplied by the Administrator and shall include the following information.
   1.   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
   2.   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done (i.e.,
lot, block, tract, street address or similar description) that will readily
identify and locate the work to be done.
   3.   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.
   4.   Elevation of the 100 year flood.
   5.   Elevation (in relation North American Vertical Datum 1988) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a
building is to be floodproofed.
   6.   For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
   7.   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably necessary
for the purpose of this chapter.
6-9-18   ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION.
The Administrator shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination as to
whether the proposed flood plain development meets the applicable provisions
and standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove the application.
For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in writing, of the specific
reasons therefor. The Administrator shall not issue permits for Conditional
Uses or variances except as directed by the Board of Adjustment.
6-9-19   CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATION AND PLANS.
Flood Plain Development Permits issued on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or
construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be
required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor,
as appropriate, registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished fill,
building floor elevations, floodproofing or other flood protection measures
were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to
the use or occupancy of any structure.
6-9-20   APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
A Board of Adjustment is hereby established which shall hear and decide (i)
applications for Conditional Uses upon which the Board is authorized to pass
under this chapter; (ii) appeals, and (iii) requests for Variances to the
provisions of this chapter; and shall take any other action which is required
of the Board.
6-9-21   CONDITIONAL USES.
Requests for Conditional Uses shall be submitted to the Administrator, who
shall forward such to the Board of Adjustment for consideration. Such requests
shall include information ordinarily submitted with applications as well as any
additional information deemed necessary by the Board of Adjustment.
6-9-22   APPEALS.
Where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter, the aggrieved party may appeal such action. The
notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment and with the
official from whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason
for the appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to
the Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.
6-9-23   VARIANCES.
The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request in specific cases such
variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to the
public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. Variances
granted must meet the following applicable standards:
   1.   Prohibited. No variance shall be granted for any development within the
Floodway District which would result in any increase in the 100-year flood
level. Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be
based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed
for similarly situated lands.
   2.   Cause. Variances shall only be granted upon (i) a showing of good and
sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the Variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that
the granting of the Variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public.
   3.   Required To Afford Relief. Variances shall only be granted upon a
determination that the Variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
   4.   Notice To Applicant. In cases where the Variance involves a lower level
of flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this
chapter, the applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the
Administrator that (i) the issuance of a Variance will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage and (ii) such
construction increases risks to life and property.
   5.   Department of Natural Resources Approval. All Variances granted shall
have the concurrence or approval of the Department of Natural Resources.
6-9-24   HEARINGS BY BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
Upon the filing with the Board of Adjustment of an appeal, an application for a
Conditional Use or a request for a Variance, the Board shall hold a public
hearing. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing and give public
notice thereof, as well as due notice to parties in interest. At the hearing,
any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney and present written or
oral evidence. The Board may require the appellant or applicant to provide such
information as is reasonably deemed necessary and may request the technical
assistance and/or evaluation of a professional engineer or other expert person
or agency, including the Department of Natural Resources.
6-9-25   DECISIONS OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
The Board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal, Conditional Use or Variance
within a reasonable time. In passing upon an appeal, the Board may, so long as
such action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in writing,
setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decision. In
granting a Conditional Use or Variance, the Board shall consider such factors
as contained in this section and all other relevant sections of this chapter
and may prescribe such conditions as contained in Section 6-9-27.
6-9-26   FACTORS UPON WHICH THE DECISION TO GRANT VARIANCES IS BASED.
In passing upon applications for conditional uses or requests for Variances,
the Board shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of
this chapter and
   1.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
   2.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream
to the injury of others.
   3.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
   4.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
   5.   The importance of the service provided by the proposed facility to the
community.
   6.   The requirements of the facility for a flood plain location.
   7.   The availability of alternate locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
   8.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
   9.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
flood plain management program for the area.
   10.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
   11.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood water expected at the site.
   12.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this chapter.
6-9-27   CONDITIONS ATTACHED TO CONDITIONAL USES OR VARIANCES.
Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of Conditional Uses or Variances as it deems
necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such conditions may include,
but not necessarily be limited to:
   1.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
   2.   Limitation on periods of use and operation.
   3.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
   4.   Requirements for construction of channel modification, dikes, levees,
and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the Department of
Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to achieving
the purposes of this chapter.
   5.   Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood
protection elevation or the particular area, flood velocities, durations, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and forces, and other factors associated with the
regulatory flood. The Board of Adjustment shall require that the applicant
submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that
the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area. Such
floodproofing may include, but is not necessarily limited to the following:
      a.   Anchorage to resist floatation and lateral movement.
      b.   Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads, and shutters, or
similar methods of construction.
      c.   Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressure.
      d.   Use of paints, membranes, or mortars to reduce seepage of water
through walls.
      e.   Addition of mass or weight structures to resist floatation.
      f.   Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures.
      g.   Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to
prevent the entrance of flood waters.
      h.   Pumping facilities or comparable practices for subsurface drainage
systems for building to relieve external foundation wall and basement flood
pressures.
      i.   Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure
or floating debris.
      j.   Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains
which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of sewage and storm
waters into the buildings or structures.
      k.   Location of all electrical equipment, circuits, and installed
electrical appliances in a manner which will assure they are not subject to
flooding.
   6.   Appeals to the Court. Any person or persons, jointly or severally,
aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may present to a Court of
record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal,
in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality. Such petition shall
be presented to the Court within thirty days after the filing of the decision
in the office of the Board.
6-9-28   NONCONFORMING USES.
A structure or the use of a structure on land which was lawful before the
passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following
conditions:
   1.   Value. No structural alteration, addition, or repair to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall exceed 50 percent
of its value at the time of its becoming a nonconforming use, unless the
structure is permanently changed to a conforming use.
   2.   Use Discontinued. If such use is discontinued for eighteen (18)
consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to
this chapter. The assessor shall notify the Administrator in writing of
instances of nonconforming uses which have been discontinued for eighteen (18)
months.
   3.   Destroyed. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including floods, to an extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its
value prior to destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
   4.   Nuisances. Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall
not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
   5.   Conditional Use. Except as provided in subsection 4 of this section,
any use which has been permitted as a Conditional Use or Variance shall be
considered a conforming use.
6-9-29   AMENDMENTS.
The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this chapter may from
time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment,
supplement, change, or modification to this chapter shall be undertaken without
prior approval from the Department of Natural Resources.
6-9-30   POWER TO CITIES.
The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, as
amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to secure
safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.
(Ord. 17-16, Passed August 8, 2016)
6-9-31   VIOLATIONS.
Violations of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of
the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of Conditional Uses or Variances) shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this Ordinance or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500
(FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS) or imprisoned for not more than 30 (THIRTY) days. Each
day such a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing
herein contained prevents the City of Cascade from taking such lawful action as
is necessary to prevent or remedy violation.
(Ord. 17-16, Passed August 8, 2016)
6-9-32   SERVERABILITY.
If any section, or part of the ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the
ordinance as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 17-16, Passed August 8, 2016)
CHAPTER 10
VACANT BUILDING REGISTRATION
6-10-1   Purpose
6-10-2   Definitions
6-10-3   Permit required
6-10-4   Vacant building maintenance requirements
6-10-5   Enforcement and penalties
6-10-1   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to identify and register vacant commercial and
industrial buildings that may present a fire hazard, become an attractive
nuisance, detract from private or public efforts to rehabilitate or maintain
surrounding buildings, or present a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare
of the public; to set forth the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings
and structures; and to encourage the rehabilitation of vacant buildings.
(Ord. 08-23, Passed August 14, 2023)
6-10-2   DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage
clearly indicates a different meaning. All other terms defined elsewhere in
this code shall be as defined therein.
   1.   "Accessory building or structure," a subordinate building or structure
located on the same lot as an existing principal building, which is incidental
and subordinate to the principal building.
   2.   "Actively marketed," a vacant commercial or industrial building that
displays a "For Sale" sign prominently visible to the public, and the property
is listed for sale for a reasonable price on the local multiple listing service
by a licensed realtor. An asking price not greater than one hundred and fifty
percent (150%) of the total assessed value, as determined by the county
assessor, is presumptively a "reasonable price."
   3.   "Boarding or boarded," the act of securing a building from unauthorized
entry by attaching boards or similar rigid materials to doors and windows, for
the purpose of preventing unauthorized entry (boarding), or the result thereof
(boarded).
   4.   "Commercial building," a building constructed for or intended to be
used by one or more property users or employees engaged in work, for which
compensation is intended to be received for goods, services, entertainment, or
other fungible activities, or a building where commercial or personal storage
is the principal use.
   5.   "Form of display," installation and display of goods, artifacts,
historic photos, items of local interest, or other items arranged in and
visible through first floor display windows, to avoid the appearance of
vacancy.
   6.   "Industrial building," a building constructed for or intended to be
used for transforming materials or substances into new products, such as
assembly of component parts, manufacturing of products, or blending of
materials, and including such ancillary functions such as (but not limited to)
administration, storage, and showrooms.
   7.   "Mixed-use building," a commercial building that also contains a
residential function, where at least thirty (30) percent of the ground floor
area is dedicated to commercial functions. A mixed-use building shall be
considered the same as a commercial building for the purposes of this chapter.
   8.   "Owner," any person, in whose name a property is titled, and any person
with a recorded contract interest in the property, and any person, agent,
servicing company, firm, third party, or financial institution that has an
interest in the property as a result of an assignment, sale, mortgage, transfer
of a mortgage, or similar instrument, or having an agreement with any one of
the above for the purpose of securing and/or managing the property.
   9.   "Principal building," a building within which is conducted the
principal function of the lot on which the building is located.
   10.   "Properly maintained," A vacant building that is maintained in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
   11.   "Secured," all accessible means of ingress and egress to a vacant
structure, including but not limited to all exterior doorways and windows, are
locked, boarded, or otherwise obstructed so as to prevent unauthorized entry.
   12.   "Vacant," a building or structure that is unoccupied or unused, or a
building that does not contain a lawful commercial or industrial function that
is open for business or is actively operated, with the exception of holidays
and seasonal businesses, and also meets one or more of the following:
      a.   The building is unsecured or is secured by means other than those
used in the design of the building.
      b.   The building is declared a dangerous building or otherwise unfit for
occupancy, as determined by the City Administrator.
      c.   The building is not in compliance with the building code, fire code,
or property maintenance code adopted by the City.
      d.   The building has or contains nuisance, property maintenance, health
and safety, or zoning violations; or
      e.   The building is not receiving all public utilities necessary for
occupancy.
A building that is being used strictly for storage that otherwise meets the
above requirements shall be considered to be vacant, unless storage is the
principal function of the building and premises and if such storage is
permitted under applicable zoning.
(Ord. 08-23, Passed August 14, 2023)
6-10-3   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   1.   Applicability. The owner of any principal building or structure that is
vacant shall apply for a vacant building permit within one hundred and twenty
(120) days of the building becoming vacant. Any accessory building or structure
on the same lot with a vacant principal building is also considered to be
vacant, regardless of any use or occupancy of the accessory building or
structure.
   2.   Exemptions. The owner of a vacant building may, in writing and prior to
expiration of the one hundred and twenty (120)-day registration period, request
an exemption from the requirements of this chapter, provided that the one or
more of the following conditions exists:
      a.   The building is under active construction/renovation and has a valid
building permit, until the expiration of the longest running active building
permit.
      b.   The building has suffered fire damage, flood damage, damage caused
by extreme weather conditions, or weakening of the structural integrity of the
building resulting from an accident or other cause not of the owner's own
making; provided that the owner will initiate renovation or demolition within
one (1) year of the date the damage occurred and has provided a commitment to
do so in writing.
      c.   The building is actively marketed, as defined in this chapter; in
which case the building may be exempted for a period of up to twelve (12)
months from the start of vacancy, subject to the following:
         (1)   The owner shall present proof of listing the property for sale
to the City Administrator, according to the definitional requirements of
"actively marketed" in section 6-10-2-2, above. The City Administrator or his/
her designee may request proof of continued compliance with this requirement at
any time during the twelve (12) month period and may rescind the exemption if
such proof is not provided.
         (2)   If the property is offered for sale, the City Administrator may
deny this exemption if the listing price is one hundred fifty percent (150%) or
greater than the assessed value of the real estate as determined by the County
Assessor. However, if the owner provides either a certified appraisal or a
licensed realtor's opinion of cost justifying the listing price, the exemption
may be granted.
      d.   The owner of the building provides proof of imminent sale,
rehabilitation, or otherwise lawful renovation or occupation of the building,
which may occur during or after the ninety (90)-day registration period;
however, to qualify for the exemption, the owner must also show that the sale,
construction, or occupation will occur within one (1) year of becoming vacant.
Proof shall be in the form of an executed real estate purchase agreement,
construction contract, or other legally enforceable agreement or contract, any
of which must remain in force until the sale, occupation, or project is
complete.
      e.   Any commercial or industrial building or structure determined to be
vital for purpose of economic development by the City Administrator.
      f.   Any vacant building owned by the City of Cascade.
      g.   An owner of a vacant building that does not qualify for an exemption
under the above may request an exemption for a period of up to twelve (12)
months from the provisions of this chapter by filing a written application with
the City Administrator. The applicant shall present justification for the
exemption and shall show proof that the need for the exemption is not due to
action or inaction by the applicant or by any other party with control of the
property. In determining whether a request for exemption should be granted, the
City Administrator shall consider all of the following:
         (1)   The applicant's prior record as it pertains to the city's
building code, fire code, property maintenance code, nuisance regulations, or
other relevant city code violations;
         (2)   the amount of vacant property the applicant currently owns or
controls within the City; and
         (3)   the length of time that the building for which the exception is
sought has been vacant.
   3.   Application. The owner of a vacant building shall apply for a vacant
building permit. A complete application shall include the following:
      a.   Name of the Owner and means of contacting the owner during business
and non-business hours.
      b.   Name and contact information for any manager or other party
responsible for the property other than the owner.
      c.   The names and addresses of all known contract and lien holders and
any other party with an ownership interest in the vacant building.
      d.   Proof of insurance: one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) in
general liability coverage, and fire and casualty coverage equal to no less
than replacement value as determined by the insurance provider, or a minimum of
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000).
      e.   A Vacant Building Plan, as outlined below.
   4.   Vacant Building Plan. A plan for maintenance, disposal, or removal of
the vacant building, in accordance with this chapter, shall accompany the
permit application. The applicant shall select a Vacant Building Plan from one
of the following three categories:
      a.   Demolition. If the vacant commercial or industrial building is to be
demolished, the Vacant Building Plan shall include a proposed time frame for
demolition, which shall not exceed nine (9) months in duration.
      b.   Secured Structure. If the vacant commercial or industrial building
is expected to remain vacant, the Vacant Building Plan shall contain all of the
following:
         (1)   A plan for fire alarm and fire protection, if required by the
Fire Marshal.
         (2)   A plan of action to remedy any public nuisance existing in the
building or on the property, within thirty (30) days of permit issuance.
         (3)   A lighting plan for the exterior of the building and property,
walkways adjacent thereto, parking or loading areas, and nighttime illumination
of areas and walkways of the building and property that may be vulnerable to
vandalism or vagrancy, including a regular maintenance plan for all exterior
lighting and illumination fixtures.
         (4)   A plan to secure the building. Boarding or other covering of
windows and doors must comply with section 6-10-4-1 of this chapter.
         (5)   A plan to maintain the vacant commercial or industrial building
and property in compliance with the Vacant Building Maintenance Standards set
forth in section 6-10-4 of this chapter.
      c.   Rehabilitation. If the owner of the vacant building intends to
return it to lawful occupancy or function, the Vacant Building Plan shall
include a rehabilitation time frame for the building and property, which shall
not exceed twelve (12) months. A valid building permit, or a written waiver
from the City Administrator that a permit is not required, shall be obtained
within three (3) months of the issuance of the Vacant Building Permit. The City
Administrator may grant an extension of time upon receipt of a written
statement from the owner detailing any unavoidable delays causing the need for
the extension. The rehabilitation shall conform to all applicable laws and the
owner shall obtain all required permits. The owner shall keep the building
secured and in compliance with the Vacant Building Maintenance Standards as
provided in section
6-10-4 of this chapter at all times during rehabilitation.
   5.   Fees. The City Council shall pass a resolution stating the amount of
all fees and costs of all penalties.
      a.   Initial Fee. The initial fee is due at the time of initial
registration of the vacant building.
      b.   Renewal Fee. The renewal fee is due one (1) year after issuance of
the initial registration of the vacant building. The Resolution setting fees
shall establish the renewal fee in an amount higher than the initial fee and
shall require that the amount of the renewal fee increase each additional year
a renewal is required, provided that the resolution may determine a maximum fee
after a specified number of years have passed.
      c.   Refund.
         (1)   If the vacant building is occupied or otherwise brought into
lawful use within three (3) months after issuance of the permit, eighty (80)
percent of the fees paid for that year shall be refunded to the owner.
         (2)   If the vacant building is occupied or otherwise brought into
lawful use more than three (3) months but less than six (6) months after
issuance of the permit, fifty (50) percent of the fees paid for that year shall
be refunded to the owner.
         (3)   No refund shall be granted if the vacant building is occupied or
otherwise brought into lawful use six (6) months or more after issuance of the
vacant building permit.
   6.   Requirements.
      a.   Length of Registration. A registration permit shall be valid for one
(1) year.
      b.   Renewal.
         (1)   If the building remains vacant on the date of expiration of the
permit, the owner shall be granted a thirty (30) day grace period to renew the
permit and pay required fees; however, the renewal year shall commence one day
after expiration of the prior registration.
         (2)   The owner shall submit a new Vacant Building Plan at the time of
renewal, unless the owner certifies in writing that there will be no change to
the Vacant Building Plan already on file.
      c.   Consent to Entry. An applicant for a permit or for a renewal shall
consent to the entry of the City Administrator, or his/her designee, at all
reasonable hours and upon reasonable notice for the purpose of inspection.
Refusal to consent to entry shall be a violation of this chapter. In addition
to issuing a municipal infraction citation in the event of refusal, the City
may file a complaint under oath to a court of competent jurisdiction requesting
a warrant and shall complete the inspection upon issuance of a warrant by the
court.
      d.   Consent to Emergency Inspections or Emergency Repairs. An applicant
for a permit or for a renewal shall consent to the entry of the City
Administrator, or his/her designee, if the City Administrator has reason to
believe that an emergency exists with respect to the building or structure that
creates, or tends to create, an imminent hazard to health, welfare, or safety
of the public. If the City Administrator believes that such an emergency
exists, then the City Administrator may enter the building to inspect the
premises, without notifying the responsible party or obtaining a warrant. If
the City Administrator finds an emergency situation exists that presents an
imminent hazard to the health, welfare or safety of the general public, then
the City Administrator may cause any reasonable action, including the
employment of necessary labor and materials, to perform emergency repairs to
alleviate the hazard. The owner shall pay costs incurred in the performance of
emergency repairs; and if not paid by the owner, the City may place a lien
against the property to recover the costs.
      e.   Cooperation by the Owner or Responsible Person. All owners holding a
permit and responsible persons identified in a permit application shall
cooperate with and facilitate inspections of the premises at reasonable times
pursuant to reasonable notice. Obstructing a duly authorized inspection,
including refusing entry or access to portions of the building subject to the
permit, shall be a violation of this chapter. The owner shall notify the City
Administrator within thirty (30) business days of any changes to the contact
information of the owner or responsible person.
      f.   Continued Compliance. For the Vacant Building Permit to remain
valid, the building or structure shall continuously comply with the filed
Vacant Building Plan and the Vacant Building Maintenance Requirements of this
chapter, below. Failure to maintain the building in accordance with this
chapter shall be a violation of the City Code.
   7.   Process.
      a.   Inspections.
         (1)   Upon receipt of a complete initial application or renewal
application, including payment of required fees, the City Administrator or his/
her designee shall schedule an inspection.
         (2)   The City Administrator or his/her designee shall prepare an
inspection report, noting the condition of the property and any deficiencies
from the requirements of this chapter. The owner shall receive a copy of the
inspection report.
      b.   Vacant Building Permit. Upon a finding by the City Administrator
that the vacant building is secure, is not hazardous, and does not present a
public nuisance, the City Administrator shall issue a Vacant Building Permit.
      c.   If the Vacant Building Permit is denied, the City Administrator
shall notify the applicant in writing of the deficiencies. The applicant shall
be given a reasonable amount of time to correct deficiencies, which shall in no
case extend beyond thirty (30) days, unless extended by the City Administrator.
Failure to secure a valid permit shall be a violation of this chapter.
   8.   Appeals. Any determination of the City Administrator may be appealed to
the City Council. A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered
to the City Administrator within seven (7) working days from the date the
determinations being appealed is communicated to the owner. If an appeal is not
filed as set forth herein, it will be conclusively presumed that the City
Administrator's determination is correct. The findings of the Council shall be
conclusive.
   9.   Sale or Transfer. The owner may sell or transfer the permit to a new
owner, who shall be subject to the Vacant Building Plan and any other
conditions imposed on the permit. The new owner shall notify the City of the
transfer and provide contact information for the new owner and any new
management or other person responsible for maintaining or operating the
property within 30 days of the transfer. Failure to notify the City of a
transfer as required shall be a violation of the City Code.
(Ord. 08-23, Passed August 14, 2023)
6-10-4   VACANT BUILDING MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   Maintenance Requirements. All buildings or structures subject to the
application shall be adequately protected from intrusion by trespassers and
pests, and from deterioration by the weather. The building must also comply
with the approved Vacant Building Plan and the following Vacant Building
Maintenance Standards:
      a.   Building Openings. Except for downtown buildings in the Z5, Central
Business zoning district, all doors, windows, areaways, and other openings
shall be weathertight and secured against entry by birds, vermin, and
trespassers.
      b.   Waste Removal. All waste, debris, rubbish, and garbage shall be
removed from the interior of the building or structure and surrounding
premises, on an ongoing basis.
      c.   Roofs. The roof and flashings shall be sound and tight, not admit
moisture, or have defects that could admit moisture, rain, or roof draining,
and shall allow for sufficient drainage to prevent dampness or deterioration in
the interior of the building. Where present, parapets shall be structurally
sound and kept in good repair.
      d.   Drainage. The building storm drainage system shall be functional and
installed in an approved manner and shall allow discharge in an approved
manner.
      e.   Building Structure. The building shall be maintained in good repair
and structurally sound. The building shall be maintained in a manner that does
not pose a threat to public health, safety, or welfare.
      f.   Structural Members. The structural members shall be free of
deterioration and capable of safely bearing imposed dead and live loads.
      g.   Foundation Walls. The foundation walls shall be maintained
structurally sound so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety, and
welfare. The foundation shall be capable of supporting the load that normal use
places upon it, and shall be free from open cracks and breaks, free from leaks,
and be secure from entry and infiltration by vermin.
      h.   Exterior Walls. The exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks,
and loose or rotting materials. Exposed metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic applications
of weather-coating materials, such as paint, stain, or similar surface
treatment. Brick, stone, or other materials shall be maintained to be
structurally secure.
      i.   Decorative Features and Appurtenances. The cornices, belt courses,
corbels, terra cotta trim, decorative metal façade, wall facings and similar
decorative features and appurtenances shall be safe, anchored, and in good
repair. Exposed metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic applications of weather coating
materials, such as paint, stain, or similar surface treatment.
      j.   Overhanging Extensions. All balconies, canopies, marquees, signs,
awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts, and similar
features shall be in good repair, anchored, safe and sound. Exposed metal,
wood, or other surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay
or rust by periodic applications of weather coating materials, such as paint or
similar surface treatment.
      k.   Chimneys and Towers. Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and
similar features shall be structurally safe and in good repair. Exposed metal,
wood, brick, stone, or other surfaces shall be protected from the elements and
against decay or rust by periodic applications of weather-coating materials.
      l.   Walkways. Public walkways shall be in good repair, shall be safe for
pedestrian travel, and shall be free of snow and ice. Snow and ice removal
shall be completed in accordance with the requirements of this City Code.
      m.   Accessory Building/Structures. Accessory buildings or structures
such as garages, sheds, and fences shall be free from safety, health, and fire
hazards, and shall be kept in good repair.
      n.   Exterior Premises. The surrounding premises upon which the structure
or building is located shall be clean, safe, sanitary, free from waste,
rubbish, garbage, excessive vegetation, and other nuisances; shall not be used
for exterior storage; and shall not pose a threat to public health, safety, or
welfare.
(Ord. 08-23, Passed August 14, 2023)
6-10-5   ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   1.   Any violation of a provision of this chapter is a municipal infraction,
as provided in section
1-3-2 of this City Code, for which the City may issue a citation. Each day that
the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   2.   Abatement of Violations. The issuance of a municipal infraction
citation shall not preclude the City from instituting appropriate action to
restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct business, or
utilization of the structure or premises.
(Ord. 08-23, Passed August 14, 2023)
CHAPTER 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
EDITOR’S NOTE:
Ordinance No. 260-92 entitled “Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cascade, Iowa”
adopted August 24, 1992, and amendments thereto have not been included as a
part of this Code of Ordinances, but have been specifically saved from repeal
and are in full force and effect. The following ordinances have been adopted
amending Ordinance No. 260-92.
Ordinance # Date Ordinance
Ordinance Date Ordinance
#
265-93    3-8- M-2 District Regulations
          93
266-93    3-8- Zoning Map
          93
          9-
273-93    13-  Zoning Map
          93
          10-
274-93    11-  Zoning Map
          93
          12-
277-93    13-  Zoning Map
          93
          10-
295-95    23-  Lot-1, Shady Knoll Estates, R-1 to R-4.
          95
          11-
296-95    27-  Lots 97 thru 102 Railroad Add., R-1 t0 C-1.
          95
          2-
298-96    12-  Lots 1 thru 12, Blk-13, 2nd Union Add., C-1 to R-4.
          96
          5-
303-96    28-  Special Exceptions in R-2 Zoning District.
          96
          10-
306-96    28-  Lots 2 & 3, Kauder Add., R-1 to M-2.
          96
          8-
312-97    11-  Lots 339 thru 346 Union Add., C-1 to M-1.
          97
          11-
317-97    10-  Lot 2-1-1 Leibold Place, C-1 to C-2.
          97
          11-
318-97    24-  Parcel 97-113, A-1 to R-1 & Parcel 98-114, A-1 to C-1.
          97
1-99      2-8- Lot-1, Beck Industrial Park & Lots 1,2, & 2-7, Kringle 2nd Industrial Park, A-
          99   1 to C-1.
2-99      2-8- Lot-2, Beck Industrial Park & Lot 2-1 Kringle Industrial Park, A-1 to M-1.
          99
          2-
4-99      22-  Lots 1-1-7, 2-1-7, 3-1-7, & 4-1-7 Kringle 2nd Industrial Park, A-1 to M-2.
          99
          11-
336-99    22-  Lots 1 thru 5, Block 20, West Cascade, R-1 to C-1.
          99
          11-
337-99    22-  Limited Private Garages to 10’ Sidewalls in R-1 District.
          99
          5-   Lot-3 Claddagh Ct., R-4 to R-2; Lots 4, 5, 6, 33, & 34, Claddagh Ct., A-1 to R-
2-00      22-  2; and Lots 7-12, 27-32, 35-39, 48- 53, and Lot-D Claddagh Ct., A-1 to R-1.
          00
          6-
8-00      12-  Decreased Board of Adjustment Members from 7 to 5.
          00
          9-   Lot 2-3-4, E½, SE¼, Section 36, A-1 to R-1, and Lot 1-1-1-3, N½, Section 36, A-
11-00     25-  1 to C-1.
          00
          9-
12-00     25-  Lot 2-1-3, N½, Section 36 & Lot 1-3-4, NE¼, SE¼, Section 36, A-1 to R-1.
          00
          9-
13-00     25-  Lot 2-3, N ½, Section 36 and Lot 2-2-4, E½, SE¼, Section 36, A-1 to R-1 .
          00
          12-
14-00     27-  Lots 55 & 56, East Cascade, R-1 to C-2.
          00
          12-
15-00     27-  Lot 1-2, Benham Subdivision, A-1 to M-2.
          00
          12-
16-00     27-  Lots 2-1-6, 2-1-4, 2-1-1-4, & 2-6 Benham Sub., M-1 to M-2.
          00
          12-
17-00     27-  Lots 1, 2-2, 3, & 5, Benham Subdivision, A-1 to M-2.
          00
          12-
18-00     27-  Lots 1-1-1-1-4 & 1-1-1-6, Benham Subdivision, M-1 to M-2.
          00
22-01     4-9- Special Exception in R-1 Zoning District to Allow Commercial Business in
          01   Existing Nonconforming Structure.
          5-
23-01     29-  Set P&Z Meetings for 3rd Thursday of Month at 7:00 PM.
          01
          3-
27-02     25-  Lot 1-1-2-A, Railroad Addition, R-1 to M-2.
          02
          3-
28-02     25-  Lots 62 thru 69, Railroad Addition, C-1 to M-2.
          02
          4-
29-02     22-  Lots 2-1-1-1 & 3-1-1-1, Mill Reserve, A-1 to C-2.
          02
39-03     5-5- Lots 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, and 23 thru 67, Sunny
          03   Side Addition, R-1 to A-1.
          8-   75-foot High Business ID Signs by Special Exception in C-1, M-1, & M-2 Zoning
40-03     25-  Districts.
          03
          8-
45-03     11-  Lot-1, American Legion Place & Lot 2-1-2-1, Railroad Addition, R-1 to C-1.
          03
          8-   Apartment Buildings with more than 12-Units by Special Exception in R-4 Zoning
46-03     11-  District.
          03
          10-  Lots 7-18, 28-30, 46-48, & 57-61, Railroad Addition; Lots C, D, E, H, I, & K,
47-03     13-  Railroad Addition, 663-feet of Lot-2, American Legion Place; and a Portion of
          03   Vacated Market Street, R-1 to C-1.
          10-
56-04     11-  Reduction of Principal Structure Setbacks in R-1 District.
          04
               Lot-1 Garryowen Pl. #3 & Lot-A Oak Hill, A-1; Lots B, C, & D Oak Hill Sub., R-
          3-   1; Lots 1-4 Block 1, Lots 1-4 Block 2, Lots 20-33 Block 33, Lots 1-27 Block 4,
60-05     14-  Lots 1-13 Block 5, & Lots 1-12 Block 6, Oak Hill Sub., R-1; Lots 5-14 Block 2
          05   and Lots 1-9 Block 3, Oak Hill Sub., R-2; Lots 3 and 2-4 Kringle 2nd Industrial
               Park, C-1; and Lots A, 1, 2, 3, 4, & 5 Koppes Industrial Park, M-1.
          5-
62-05     23-  Lots 7 & 8 Block 10, West Cascade R-2 to R-3.
          05
          9-   Lots 1-13, 36-45, 47-49, 50-51, & Lot-C River Bend Subdivision, R-1; and Lot-46
63-05     12-  River Bend Sub., R-4.
          05
          10-
65-05     24-  Lots 1-1, 2-1, & E 1/3 Lot-3 Block 5, West Cascade, R-1 to C-2.
          05
          3-   Lot 1 & 2 of Oak Hill No. 2, A-1 to M-1; and Lots 3, 4 & 5 of Oak Hill No. 2,
69-06     22-  A-1 to R-1
          06
          4-
70-06     24-  Lot 1-1-2-1-1-2, Section 31, T87N, R1W, R-1 to C-1
          06
          4-   Lots 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20 and Lots 23-67 of Sunny
71-06     24-  Side Addition increasing the number of allowable animals to “12-animal units
          06   consisting of cattle, horses, and sheep in any combination thereof and one
               season’s lambs.”
          6-
108-08    23-  Lot 1 & 2, Beck Brothers Industrial Subdivision No. 2, M-2 to C-1
          08
          7-   Shady Rest Care Center, R-1 to R-4 120-09 10-12-09 Lot 1 Gadient Place, R-1 to
118-09    27-  C-1
          09
          10-
120-09    12-  Lot 1 Gadient Place, R-1 to C-1
          09
          12-
125-09    14-  Lot 1, RA Enterprises Place, A-1 to C-1 Lot 2, RA Enterprises Place, A-1 to R-2
          09
          12-  Allowing Zero Lot Line Buildings in the C-1, M-1 and M-2 Zoning Districts &
126-09    14-  Defining Zero Lot Line Buildings
          09
          12-  Defining Livestock & Stables, Limiting the Number of Animal Units Allowed in
127-09    14-  the Agricultural District, and Allowing Stables in the M-1 & M-2 Districts
          09
          5-
5-10      24-  Rezoning 43 properties from R-2 to R-1
          10
          7-
9-10      26-  Lot 1-2-1-1 of the NW1/4 of the NW1/4 of Section 32, T87N, R1W from M-2 to C-1
          10
          7-
10-10     26-  Lot 2 Schwager’s Subdivision from M-2 to C-1
          10
          12-
16-10     13-  Lot 2 Home View Estates Plat No. 3 from A-1 to R-1
          10
          4-
22-11     25-  Lots 2,4,5 & 6 of RA Enterprises Place No. 2 from C-1 to M-2
          11
          1-   Increasing the number of allowed animal units on Lots 1-67 of Sunny Side
28-12     23-  Addition excluding Lots 3, 4, 9, 10, 15, 16, 21 & 22 (only as long as
          12   properties are owned by & Marty Gadient and Leo & Tammy Moriarity and they own
               animals pasturing the properties)
          4-
31-12     23-  Lots 1-5, 9 & 10 of Block 14, Second Union Addition from R-1 to R-2
          12
          4-
32-12     23-  Lots 7-12 of Block 13, Second Union Addition from R-4 to R-2
          12
          1-   Vacating Lot 1A, block 14 of second union addition, in the City of Cascade,
39-13     14-  Iowa, according to the recorded plat thereof consisting of 17,067 square feet
          13
          3-   Providing for residential dwelling space on the ground floor of buildings in
37-12     11-  the C-2 general retail district
          13
          4-8- Rezoning Lot 480 and the East ½ of Lot 481, Union addition and Lot 1, Lounge
39-13A    13   Place located on 6th Ave SE near Maquoketa Drive to R-2 mixed family
               residential from R-1 single family residential
          8-   Rezoning Lot 68 and 69 and part of Lot 67, Railroad Addition, from M-2 Heavy
50-14     11-  Industrial to C-1 Highway Commercial District.
          14
               An applicant requesting a Limited Commercial Residential Permit must provide
               the names and addresses of the owners of all property within three hundred
               (300) feet of the property for which the change is requested. Also, the
          2-   applicant must provide a plat showing the location, dimensions, and the use of
01-15     09-  the applicant’s property and all property within three hundred (300) feet
          15   thereof, including streets, alleys, railroads, and other physical features.

               The applicant must also get approval from a simple majority of his or her
               neighbors approving the proposed Limited Commercial Residential Business prior
               to a permit being issued.
03-15     3-9- Rezoning Lots 13-26 and 40-47, Claddagh Court, No. 2, from A-1 Agricultural to
          15   R-1 Single Family Residential and R-2 Mixed Residential
          2-   Rezoning Lots 138 & 139, Union Add to East Cascade, from R-3 Multiple/Mobile
4-16      22-  Residential District to R-1 Single Family Residential
          16
          02-  Rezoning Lots 3-6 West Cascade from R-1 Single Residential to R-2 Mixed
06-16     22-  Residential
          16
          07-
11-16     25-  Please see Ordinance 11-16 in Mobile Home Regulation for full content.
          16
          6-   Rezoning all of Lot 2 and the East 50’ of Lot 2 near Thomas Street and 1st Ave
12-16     03-  E from M-1 Light Industrial to C-2 General Retail District.
          16
          7-   The Board of Adjustment shall meet the 3rd Tuesday of each month, as needed, at
16-16     11-  6:00 p.m. at the Cascade City Council Chambers.
          16
05-21     8- - Amending R-1 District Regulations
          21
          11-  Rezoning Lots 309 & 310, Union Add to East Cascade, from C-1 Highway Commercial
08-21     22-  to M-1 Light Industrial
          21
          10-
05-22     10-  Amending C-1, C2, M-1, and M-2 District Regulations
          22
          11-  Rezoning Lot 2, Takes Places, Previously 304 2nd Ave NW, from R-1 Single Family
06-22     14-  to C-2 General Retail
          22
          1-   Rezoning Lot 1 Cascade Industrial Park 6th Addition from M-2 Heavy Industrial
02-23     23-  to C-1 Highway Commercial
          23
          3-   Rezoning two lots on First Ave East from M-2 Heavy Industrial to C-1 Highway
03-23     27-  Commercial
          23
          3-   Rezoning all lots in Parkridge Subdivision Phases 1, 2 and 3 from the current
04-23     27-  zoning district classification A-1 Agricultural to R-1 Single Family
          23   Residential
          6-
06-23     12-  Amending R-2, R-3, and R-4 regulations
          23
          3-
06-24     25-  Amending the zoning ordinance to amend solar energy systems
          24
08-24     4-8- Rezoning Parcels 1931351014 and 1931351013 from R-1 Single Family to C-
          24   2 General Retail
          5-
12-24     28-  Rezoning Parcel 1931426012 from R-1 Single Family to M-1 Light Manufacturing
          24
          7-   Establishing special exceptions for encroaching unenclosed front porch
18-24     25-  additions in the R-1 and R-2 districts
          24
19-24     9-9- Amending hedge and fence regulations
          24
 
CHAPTER 12
BUILDING PERMITS
6-12-1   Purpose
6-12-2   Structure Defined
6-12-3   Permit Required
6-12-4   Application
6-12-5   Fees
6-12-6   Plans Required
6-12-7   Location of Structure
6-12-8   Building Code Adopted
6-12-9   Fences
6-12-10   Curb Cuts
6-12-11   Authority of City Council
6-12-12   Permit Issued
6-12-13   Limitations on Permit
6-12-1   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide the City Council notice of the type
of structure, the kind of construction, the location of any structure to be
erected or added within the corporation, the location of any structure on any
specific lot within the corporation and to provide reasonable rules for the
erection, reconstruction, altering and repair of all kinds of structures. This
chapter also covers permits for newly installed or replacement of concrete on
walkways, sidewalks, stairs, driveways, driveway approaches and patios, and
fences and signage.
(Ord. 12-23, passed 8-28-23)
6-12-2   STRUCTURE DEFINED.
Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground that
protrudes above the ground or surface level of a parcel of property. Structures
include, but are not limited to, buildings, walls, fences, billboards,
aboveground storage tanks, and similar uses.
(Ord. 12-23, passed 8-28-23)
6-12-3   PERMIT REQUIRED.
No structure shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or added to without first
securing a permit from the City Council. No fence, sign or concrete may be
installed, constructed or reconstructed without a permit.
(Ord. 12-23, passed 8-28-23)
6-12-4   APPLICATION.
All requests for a building permit shall be submitted to the City Clerk on
forms supplied by the City and accompanied with the appropriate fee for such
permit. All fees are set by Resolution.
(Ord. 12-23, passed 8-28-23)
6-12-5   FEES.
A fee, in an amount established by resolution of the Council, for each building
permit shall be paid to the Zoning Administrator at the time the application
for the building permit is submitted to the City.
6-12-6   PLANS REQUIRED.
Plans and specifications of any proposed structure shall be filed with the
application for the permit.
6-12-7   LOCATION OF STRUCTURE.
A complete showing and description of the real estate involved and the location
of the structure on the real estate shall be filed with the application. The
perimeter of the structure shall be staked prior to submitting an application.
6-12-8   BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
There is hereby adopted by reference as the "Cascade Building Code" the current
State of Iowa Building Code. The "Cascade Building Code" shall be controlling
in the construction of buildings and other structures in all matters covered by
such building code within the corporate limits of the City. Inspections shall
be as set forth by resolution of the Council.
(Ord. 02-22, passed 8-22-22)
6-12-9   FENCES.
No setback requirements shall be applicable to the construction of a fence.
(Ord. 02-22, passed 8-22-22)
6-12-10   CURB CUTS.
No curb cut shall be constructed or permitted without first obtaining a
building permit.
(Ord. 02-22, passed 8-22-22)
6-12-11   AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL.
The City Council shall have full authority to accept or reject any plans and
specifications submitted.
(Ord. 02-22, passed 8-22-22)
6-12-12   PERMIT ISSUED.
Permits shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator and/or staff delegated to
and hired via a contract for services entered into with City Council approval,
in duplicate, one copy for the applicant and one copy to be retained in the
City records.
(Ord. 02-22, passed 8-22-22)
6-12-13   LIMITATIONS ON PERMIT.
   1.   Time Limits. Any permit or approval not exercised within one (1) year
of approval shall expire and become void, except where an extension of time has
been approved.
If a project is to be developed in approved phases, each subsequent phase shall
be exercised within one (1) year from the date that the previous phase was
exercised, except where an extension of time has been approved.
An approved building permit project shall commence construction within six (6)
months of the approval. If the construction has not commenced within the six
(6) months, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the owner, as listed on the
building permit application and inquire as to the status of the project.
   2.   Time Extensions. Upon written request by the applicant, the Zoning
Administrator may extend the time for the permit to be exercised by six (6)
months. Prior to the approval of an extension, the applicant must provide
evidence that he or she has made a good faith effort to exercise the permit. If
no work on the project has been started and there is no circumstance exists
that prevented the applicant to exercise the permit, the extension will be
denied. Only one extension of a six (6) month period will be granted.
   3.   Expiration. After the expiration of a planning permit, no further work
shall be done on the site until a new building permit has been applied for and
approved.
(Ord. 07-15, Passed, June 22, 2015; Ord. 02-22, passed 8-22-22)
Editor's Note: If this Ordinance is adopted be sure that the provisions of this
Ordinance are consistent with the provisions of the Restricted Residence
Ordinance if the City has one. Specifically, the set back and permit fee
requirements should be reviewed.
CHAPTER 13
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
6-13-1   Purpose
6-13-2   Definitions
6-13-3   Areas Requiring Storm Water Management Plan
6-13-4   Storm Water Management Requirement
6-13-5   Management Plan Design Requirements
6-13-6   Submission and Approval of Plan
6-13-7   Ownership by City
6-13-8   Private Ownership
6-13-9   Further Requirements
6-13-1   PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this Ordinance to establish policies to manage and control
Storm Water Runoff occurring from new Development of residential, commercial,
and industrial areas. The goal is to reduce peak runoff caused by Development
of the land. This will result in cost savings to the overall storm sewer
collection system by reducing the size of improvements required. In addition,
increased public safety and sediment and erosion control are the expected
benefits.
6-13-2   DEFINITIONS.
Wherever used in this Ordinance and printed with an initial capital letter, the
terms listed below will have the meanings indicated. Words using the present
tense shall include the future; the singular shall include the plural; the
plural shall always include the singular. The term ‘shall’ is always mandatory,
and the term ‘may’ is permissive.
   1.   “Capacity (of a Storm Water Facility)” means the maximum volume or rate
of conveyance available in a storm water management facility, including
freeboard, to store or convey storm water without damage to public or private
property.
   2.   “City” means the City of Cascade, Iowa.
   3.   “City Administrator” means the City Administrator of the City of
Cascade, Iowa.
   4.   “City Council” means the City Council of the City of Cascade, Iowa.
   5.   “Civil Engineer” means a professional engineer licensed in the State of
Iowa to practice in the field of civil works.
   6.   “Control Structure” means part of a Storm Water Management Facility
designed to regulate the Storm Water Runoff Release Rate.
   7.   “Design Storm” means a storm with characteristics of the average storm
for the desired Return Frequency.
   8.   “Detention Basin” means a Storm Water Management Facility designed,
constructed or modified to provide short term storage of storm water runoff,
which reduces the peak outflow to a rate less than the peak inflow.
   9.   “Development” means the changing of land from its existing state or an
area of land use change, usually involving the building of infrastructure,
housing, commercial, and/or industrial structures.
   10.   “Developed Condition” means the hydraulic and hydrologic site
characteristics that occur upon completion of a Development.
   11.   “Drainage Area” means an area of land contributing to Storm Water
Runoff.
   12.   “Green Infrastructure” means natural drainage ways, wet lands,
infiltration systems, open green space, etc.
   13.   “Green Space” that area in and around a development which is covered
with grass, trees, shrubs, and other natural plantings that naturally absorbs
storm water.
   14.   “Ordinance” means the portion of the City Municipal Code entitled
‘Storm Water Management Ordinance’.
   15.   “Overflow Path” means the path taken by storm water runoff as a result
of flows exceeding the capacity of the underground drainage system or Detention
Basin. The path may include streets, channels, drainage ways, or areas of sheet
flows, and be located on public property or private property within an
easement.
   16.   “Pre-developed Condition” means the hydraulic and hydrologic site
characteristics that occur prior to a proposed Development, including natural
storage areas, drainage ways, drainage tiles, and highway drainage structures.
   17.   “Regional Storm Water Management Facilities” means those facilities
designed to handle Storm Water Runoff from several lots which may include the
entire subdivision, or multiple subdivisions, and may include existing
developed areas.
   18.   “Return Frequency” means the statistic parameter that defines the
average occurrence time for a storm of a given magnitude.
   19.   “Site” means a lot, parcel, or tract of land, or portion thereof,
where Development is occurring, or has occurred, and may, or may not, require
additional permits.
   20.   “Site Plan” means an overall plan of the area to be developed
including, but not limited to: proposed building location(s), proposed parking
and drive locations, proposed utilities including storm sewer components and
subsurface drain tile, proposed ground elevations with drainage patterns
highlighted, roof drainage outlet locations, other underground utilities, and
property boundaries.
   21.   “Storm Sewer System” means facilities for the conveyance of Storm
Water Runoff, a series of conduits and appurtenances, to accommodate frequent
storms not generating large peak discharges. These facilities usually include
conduits, street gutters, and swales.
   22.   “Storm Water Management Facilities” means a Detention Basin and the
associated appurtenances to make the system functional.
   23.   “Storm Water Management Plan” means a Site Plan, certified by a Civil
Engineer, including materials, construction phasing, grading activities, and
methods used for mitigation of increased Storm Water Runoff from the Site.
   24.   “Storm Water Runoff” means the flow of water resulting from
precipitation upon a surface area, not absorbed by the soil or plant material.
   25.   “Subdivision” means the division of land for the purpose of transfer
of ownership or building development, whether immediate or future.
6-13-3   AREAS REQUIRING STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
A Storm Water Management Plan shall be required for the following:
   1.   All new residential, commercial, industrial developments and
subdivision 4-acres in size and larger. Phased residential, commercial, and
industrial developments whose combined total is 4-acres and larger.
Residential, commercial, and industrial developments under 4-acres in size
shall maintain a minimum of 20% green space.
   2.   In Developments where the natural drainage is divided into more than
one watershed, the individual watershed Drainage Areas must meet the criteria
mentioned above before storm water management is required.
   3.   Other Developments may be required to submit a Storm Water Management
Plan at the discretion of the City Council. No subdivision or development plan
will be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an appropriate
storm sewer, drainage watercourse, or Storm Water Management Facility.
   4.   At the discretion of the City Council, a fee may be charged the
developer in lieu of providing Storm Water Management Facilities. This may be
utilized when the City is constructing a larger Regional Storm Water Management
Facility to handle multiple existing or proposed Developments.
6-13-4   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
The Storm Water Management Plan shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:
   1.   Peak discharges for Pre-Developed and Developed conditions based upon
the design storms.
   2.   Individual parameters used for determining discharges shall be listed.
   3.   Hydraulic capacity of storm sewer inlets, pipes, open channels, or
other means of conveying water.
   4.   Green Space calculations to meet the 20% minimum requirement.
   5.   Detention Basin design with Capacity listed.
   6.   Control Structure/outlet design.
   7.   Review of existing or proposed downstream conveyance capacities.
   8.   The SCS TR-55 computerized runoff volume program or other technically
proven method shall be utilized for runoff calculations.
6-13-5   MANAGEMENT PLAN DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
The design requirements of the Storm Water Management Plan shall include:
   1.   Developments requiring storm water management shall be required to
detain the difference between the 10-year Pre-Developed storm and the 100-year
Developed storm.
   2.   The maximum release rate for storms up to an expected Return Frequency
of 100-years shall be the 10-year Pre-Developed storm. A safe overflow path
shall be designed for storms exceeding the capacity of the Detention Basin.
   3.   Regional Storm Water Management Facilities are encouraged. Wet basins
are also encouraged because they enhance water quality, add aesthetic value,
and increase property value.
   4.   For residential developments, storm water detention is not allowed
within any front or side yard setbacks required by zoning code, or within 25
feet from the estimated rear building line.
   5.   Dry-bottomed Detention Basins shall be oversized by 10% to help offset
anticipated sedimentation. An alternative to oversizing, is the construction of
a series of sediment trapping forebays in the basin with firm bottoms which
allow routine remove of sediment.
   6.   Maximum side slopes of Detention Basins shall not exceed 3.5:1.
   7.   Provisions shall be made to keep the bottom of the Detention Basin dry
unless a permanent pond or lake is being utilized for detention.
6-13-6   SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF PLAN.
A Site Plan shall be a required attachment to a proposed Storm Water Management
Plan, all of which is to be submitted to the City Administrator for review. The
Storm Water Management Plan, including proposed storm water detention
facilities, shall be reviewed and approved by the City Administrator (or those
chosen by the City Administrator) prior to the issuance of any building permit
for the proposed Development. The City may inspect the site at any time to
determine compliance with this Ordinance. Upon determination that a site is not
in compliance with this Ordinance, the City may issue a stop work order until
compliance is achieved. The order shall describe the problem, specify a
completion date, and indicate the penalties to be assessed for further
noncompliance.
6-13-7   OWNERSHIP BY CITY.
Regional Storm Water Management Facilities which are of sufficient size may be
deeded to and be maintained by the City. The conditions for City ownership will
be reviewed on a case by case basis. The City is under no obligation to accept
ownership of the facility. If the City elects to obtain ownership of the
facility, the property owner shall dedicate to the City any property on which
public storm sewer Detention Basins will be located with a 50-foot perimeter to
establish and maintain a vegetative buffer. Ingress-egress easements for
maintenance of public facilities shall be provided prior to final approval.
6-13-8   PRIVATE OWNERSHIP.
For sites on which privately owned storm water detention facilities are
located, the property owner will be responsible for the following:
   1.   All future grading, repairs, and maintenance.
   2.   Maintenance of the minimum storm water detention Capacity, as
originally designed.
   3.   Maintenance of the Detention Basin Control Structure(s) and discharge
pipe(s) to insure the maximum theoretical design release rate is not increased.
   4.   The property owner shall not place fill material, or erect any
buildings, obstructions, or other improvements on the area reserved for storm
water detention purposes, unless approved in writing by the City.
6-13-9   FURTHER REQUIREMENTS.
Compliance with this ordinance does not relieve the developer or property owner
of other responsibilities relating to storm water discharge. This includes, but
is not limited to NPDES storm water discharge permits regulated by Iowa
Department of Natural Resources, and other State of Iowa and federal
requirements.
TITLE VII
SPECIAL ORDINANCES
CHAPTER 1
UTILITY EASEMENTS
7-1-1   Obstruction of Easement Prohibited
7-1-2   Penalty
7-1-1   OBSTRUCTION OF EASEMENT PROHIBITED.
All persons and land owners are prohibited from causing or allowing the real
estate encumbered by an easement granted by the City to the provider of a
utility service to be obstructed by anything that interferes with the providing
of that utility service, including, but not limited to, the existence of or
planting of trees or shrubs, the erection of any structure, the accumulation of
brush or rubbish or the placing of any object on a utility easement that
interferes with the use and maintenance of the utility easement.
7-1-2   PENALTY.
A violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00 or a
term in jail not to exceed thirty (30) days for each day that a person violates
the prohibition set forth above. In addition, a violation of this chapter shall
constitute a municipal infraction pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Code of
Ordinances.
CHAPTER 2
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE (VIDEO) FRANCHISE
7-2-1   Defined Terms
7-2-2   Regulatory Authority
7-2-3   Grant of Franchise
7-2-4   Term and Renewal
7-2-5   Franchise Fee
7-2-6   PEG Capital Support Fee
7-2-7   PEG Capital Grant
7-2-8   PEG Access Equipment and Capacity
7-2-9   Institutional Network
7-2-10   Bonding Requirements
7-2-11   Customer Service Standards
7-2-12   Technical Standards
7-2-13   Nonexclusive Franchise; Equal Protection
7-2-14   Construction and Installation
7-2-15   Service Extensions
7-2-16   Ownership and Removal
7-2-17   Confidentiality of Protected Information
7-2-18   Legal Compliance; Severability
7-2-19   Force Majeure
7-2-20   Assignment or Transfer
7-2-21   Third Party Liability
7-2-22   Notices
7-2-23   Emergency Alert System
7-2-24   Legal Effect; Other Ordinances
7-2-1   DEFINED TERMS.
For purposes of this Chapter, certain capitalized terms have the meanings
provided in this Section. Other capitalized terms used in this Chapter are
defined in the context in which they are used and shall have the meanings
ascribed therein. Capitalized terms used in this Chapter shall have the meaning
ascribed to them at the point where defined, irrespective of where their use
occurs, with the same effect as if the definitions of said terms were set forth
in full and at length every time such terms are used. All terms defined in this
Chapter in the singular form will have comparable meanings when used in the
plural form and vice versa.
   1.   “Affiliate” means as to any Person, any Person directly or indirectly
controlling, controlled by or under common control with such Person. For
purposes of this definition, the terms “control”, “controlling”, “controlled
by” or “under common control with” means having the right to elect or appoint,
directly or indirectly, a majority of the board of directors, managers,
managing members, general partners or other comparable body or entity
responsible for the management or direction of a Person, whether by contract,
equity ownership or otherwise.
   2.   “Cable Act” means, collectively, the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992,
each as amended.
   3.   “Cable Franchise Ordinance” is defined in the introductory paragraphs
of this Chapter.
   4.   “Cable Service” means (a) the one-way transmission to subscribers of
(i) Video Programming, or (ii) other information that the Company makes
available to all subscribers generally, and (b) subscriber interaction, if any,
which is required for the selection or use of such Video Programming or other
information.
   5.   “Communications Act” means the Communications Act of 1934, as amended.
   6.   “Company” is defined in the introductory paragraphs of this Chapter.
   7.   “Customer Proprietary Information” means any and all information or
data that is provided to the City by, through or on behalf of the Company under
this Chapter or the Cable Regulatory Ordinance that relates to any: (a) lists
of current, prospective or former customers of the Company or its Affiliates;
(ii) nonpublic personal information of any Person who is a current, prospective
or former customer of the Company or its Affiliates, including information
about any customer’s network or business operations; (iii) customer proprietary
network information (“CPNI”) of any party or its Affiliates, within the meaning
of Telecommunications Act and implementing FCC Rules, or any similar provision
under any other applicable Legal and Regulatory Requirements; or (iv) other
sensitive personal or personally identifiable information of a party’s
customers required to be safeguarded as confidential under applicable Legal and
Regulatory Requirements.
   8.   “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.
   9.   “FCC Rules” means the rules and published policies of the FCC as in
effect from time to time.
   10.   “Franchise” means the franchise authorization issued by the City under
this Chapter which authorizes the construction, operation and maintenance of a
Video System within the Public Right-of-Way.
   11.   “Franchise Area” means the geographic area within the corporate
boundaries of the City, including any areas lawfully annexed to the City in the
future.
   12.   “Governmental or Regulatory Authority” means the FCC, the IUB, and any
other Federal, state, local, foreign or other governmental or quasi-
governmental authority and any governmental, quasi-governmental or other
department, commission, body, board, bureau, agency, association, subdivision,
court, tribunal or other instrumentality exercising any executive, judicial,
legislative, regulatory or administrative function.
   13.   “Gross Revenues” means all consideration of any kind or nature,
including but not limited to cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions
received from subscribers for the provision of Service within the Franchise
Area.
      a.   “Gross Revenues” are limited to the following:
         (1)   Recurring charges for Service.
         (2)   Event-based charges for Service, including but not limited to
pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges.
         (3)   Rental of set-top boxes and other Service equipment.
         (4)   Service charges related to the provision of Service, including
but not limited to activation, installation, and repair charges.
         (5)   Administrative charges related to the provision of Service,
including but not limited to service order and service termination charges.
      b.   For avoidance of doubt, “Gross Revenues” do not include:
         (1)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, including bad
debt.
         (2)   Revenues received by any Affiliate or any other Person in
exchange for supplying goods or services used by the Company to provide Video
Service.
         (3)   Refunds, rebates, or discounts made to third parties, including
subscribers, leased access providers, advertisers, or the City or any other
unit of local government.
         (4)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with Video Service, any revenues derived by the Company
from services not classified as Video Service, including, without limitation,
revenue received from telecommunications services, revenue received from data
communications services, revenue received in connection with home-shopping
services, or any other revenues attributed by Company to other noncable or non-
video service in accordance with the Company’s books and records kept in the
regular course of business and any applicable Legal and Regulatory
Requirements.
         (5)   Revenues paid by subscribers to home-shopping programmers
directly from the sale of merchandise through any home shopping channel offered
as part of Video Service.
         (6)   Revenues from the sale of Video Service for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the franchise fee from the purchaser's
customer.
         (7)   Revenues from any tax of general applicability imposed upon the
Company or upon subscribers by a Governmental or Regulatory Authority and
required to be collected by the Company and remitted to the taxing entity,
including but not limited to sales or use tax, gross receipts tax, excise tax,
utility users tax, public service tax, and communication taxes, and including
any franchise fee imposed under this Chapter or the Regulatory Ordinance.
         (8)   Revenues forgone from the provision of Video Service to public
institutions, public schools, or civic or governmental entities at no charge.
         (9)   Revenues forgone from the Company’s provision of free or
reduced-cost Video Service to any Person, including, without limitation, any
Governmental or Regulatory Authority.
         (10)   Revenues from sales of capital assets or sales of surplus
equipment.
         (11)   Revenues from reimbursements by programmers of marketing costs
incurred by the Company for the introduction or promotion of new programming.
         (12)   Directory or Internet advertising revenues including but not
limited to yellow page, white page, banner advertisement, and electronic
publishing.
         (13)   Copyright fees paid to the United States Copyright Office.
         (14)   Late payment charges.
         (15)   Maintenance charges.
   14.   “IUB” means the Iowa Utilities Board.
   15.   “IUB Rules” means the rules and published policies of the IUB as in
effect from time to time.    
   16.   “Institutional Network” means any facilities within or services
provided using the System reserved and dedicated by the City for noncommercial
purposes, including service outlets for the provision of Video Service to
public institutions, public or parochial schools, or civic or governmental
entities at no charge.
   17.   “Legal and Regulatory Requirements” means any provision of the
Communications Act, Cable Act, Telecommunications Act, the FCC Rules, IUB
Rules, and any other Federal, state, local, foreign or other constitution,
statute, treaty, ordinance, rule, regulation, regulatory or administrative
guidance, principle of common law or equity, order, award, decision,
injunction, judgment, ruling, decree, charge, writ, subpoena or verdict
entered, issued, made or rendered by any Governmental or Regulatory Authority.
To the extent not repealed or preempted by the provisions of this Chapter, the
provisions of the Regulatory Ordinance are “Legal and Regulatory Requirements”
within this meaning.
   18.   “Person” means any individual, corporation (including any nonprofit
corporation), general or limited partnership, limited liability company, joint
venture, estate, trust, association, organization, labor union or other entity
or Governmental or Regulatory Authority.
   19.   “Protected Information” means any and all trade secrets, discoveries,
ideas, concepts, know-how, techniques, designs, specifications, drawings, maps,
blueprints, diagrams, and other technical, financial and business information
concerning the Company or its Affiliates, including all intellectual property
rights therein and derivatives thereof or improvements thereto, or any other
information relating to any research project, work in process, future
development, scientific, engineering, service, manufacturing, marketing or
business plans or financial or personnel matters relating to the Company or its
Affiliates, or their present or future services, products, sales, suppliers,
vendors, customers, employees, lenders or investors, and disclosed to or
otherwise received by the City pursuant to this Chapter or the Cable Regulatory
Ordinance.
For avoidance of doubt, Protected Information includes:
      a.   information disclosed in a written or other tangible form which is
clearly marked with a “confidential” or “proprietary” legend or other
comparable legend;
      b.   information disclosed orally or visually which is identified as
confidential at the time of disclosure and confirmed in writing within a
reasonable time;
      c.   any personnel records or employee health data, including genetic
information;
      d.   any Customer Proprietary Information; and
      e.   any other information which a reasonable person would deem
confidential under the context of disclosure or due to the nature of the
information. Except for Customer Proprietary Information (which will always
continue as Protected Information without exception). “Protected Information”
will not include information to the extent that:
         (1)   such information is or becomes publicly available other than
through any act or omission of the City or its Representatives;
         (2)   such information was received by the City, other than under an
obligation of confidentiality from a third party, which third party had no
obligation of confidentiality to the Company; or
         (3)   such information was in the possession of the City at the time
of the disclosure, or was independently developed by the City without reference
to the Company’s Protected Information.
   20.   “Public Right of Way” means the area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, bridge, cart way, bicycle lane, or public sidewalk in
which the City has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for
travel purposes and utility easements. “Public Right of Way” does not include
airwaves above any public right-of-way with regard to wireless facilities or
services. “Public Right of Way” does not include utility poles owned by the
City or its municipal utility.
   21.   “Regulatory Ordinance” is defined in the introductory paragraphs of
this Chapter.
   22.   “Representative” means, as to any Person, any director, officer,
member, manager, general partner, shareholder, employee, agent, consultant,
advisor or other representative of such Person or its Affiliates, including
legal counsel, accountants and financial advisors.
   23.   “Telecommunications Act” means the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as
amended.
   24.   “Video Programming” means programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast
station.
   25.   “Video Service” means Cable Service or any other Video Programming
provided by the Company, without regard to delivery technology, including Video
Programming provided utilizing Internet protocol television (IPTV)
technologies. “Video Service” does not include any Video Programming service or
other service provided solely as part of, and via, a data communications
service that enables users to access or stream content, information, electronic
mail, or other services offered over the public Internet.
   26.   “Video System” means the Company’s wireline communications facilities
located at least in part in the Public Right of Way and designed to provide
Video Service to multiple customers within the Franchise Area.
7-2-2   REGULATORY AUTHORITY.
The Company’s operation of its Video System shall be governed by this Chapter
only to the extent that the City is permitted to exercise its power as a local
franchising authority with respect to the Company’s Video Service under
applicable Legal and Regulatory Requirements. Without limiting the City’s
otherwise lawful authority under other applicable City codes and ordinances,
this Chapter shall authorize and regulate the Company’s use and occupancy of
the Public Right of Way within the City for the purpose of providing Video
Service over its Video System. The provisions of this Ordinance are intended
and shall be applied and construed in such a manner as to govern the Company’s
use and occupancy of public rights of-way in competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory manner as compared to other public and private utilities
using and occupying such rights-of-way, including any municipal utility.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted or construed to impose any
requirement that has the purpose or effect of prohibiting, limiting,
restricting or conditioning the provision of telecommunications services or
other communications or data services by the Company or any of its Affiliates.
7-2-3   GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
The Company is hereby granted a renewal of its Franchise, conferring upon the
Company, its successors and assigns, a nonexclusive right, license and
authority to construct, operate and maintain a Video System for the purpose of
providing Video Service to end user customers located in the Franchise Area.
The Franchise includes the right of the Company to construct, install,
maintain, operate, repair replace and remove facilities and equipment
comprising the Video System in the Public Right of Way throughout the Franchise
Area.
7-2-4   TERM AND RENEWAL.
The renewal term of the Franchise shall commence upon expiration of the Cable
Franchise Ordinance (December 10, 2012) and shall continue for a period of ten
(10) years. At the end of this renewal term and any subsequent renewal term(s),
the Company may apply for a subsequent renewal of the Franchise by giving
written notice to the City not less than ninety (90) days prior to the
expiration of the Franchise. In determining whether to grant any subsequent
renewals, the City shall consider those factors prescribed by Federal law,
including (i) whether the Company has substantially complied with the material
terms of the Franchise and with applicable Legal and Regulatory Requirements;
(ii) the extent and quality of the Company’s Video Service; (iii) whether the
Company remains financially, legally and technically qualified to provide Video
Service; and (iv) whether renewal of the Franchise promotes the Video
Programming-related community needs and interests. The City may terminate the
Franchise for cause as provided in the Regulatory Ordinance. In the event the
Company elects to cease its operation of a Video System and to no longer
provide Video Service, the Company may terminate the Franchise by submitting
not less than ninety (90) days prior written notice to the City. The terms and
provisions of this Ordinance that can only be given proper effect if they
survive the termination of the Franchise will survive and remain enforceable
notwithstanding the termination, rescission, or expiration of the Franchise,
for any reason whatsoever. In addition, all provisions of this Ordinance will
remain valid as to any obligation incurred prior to termination of the
Franchise until such time as such obligations have been discharged. This
Section specifically preempts and supersedes any additional or different
franchise term or renewal conditions or requirements provided under the
Regulatory Ordinance.
7-2-5   FRANCHISE FEE.
For the term of the Franchise, the Company shall pay to the City an annual
franchise fee of five percent (5%) of the Company’s annual Gross Revenues
received from subscribers for the provision of Video Service within the
Franchise Area. The franchise fee shall be payable quarterly at the Clerk’s
office as provided in the Cable Regulatory Ordinance. Any franchise fees
collected and paid under this Section may be credited to the City’s general
fund and used for the City’s lawful general fund purposes. The Company may
identify the franchise fee collected and paid under this Section as a separate
line item on the regular bill of each subscriber. This Section specifically
preempts and supersedes any additional or different franchise fee requirements
provided under the Regulatory Ordinance.
7-2-6   PEG CAPITAL SUPPORT FEE.
For the term of the Franchise, the Company shall pay the City an annual PEG
capital support fee of fifteen cents ($0.15) per subscriber per month. The PEG
capital support fee shall be payable in the same manner as the franchise fee
payments. Any PEG capital support fee collected and paid pursuant to this
Section shall be used only for the support of public, educational and
governmental access equipment and facilities. The PEG capital support fee shall
not be deemed to be “franchise fees” and shall not be included in Gross
Revenues for purposes of this Chapter or applicable Legal and Regulatory
Requirements. The Company may identify the PEG capital support fee collected
and paid under this Section as a separate line item on the regular bill of each
subscriber. This Section specifically preempts and supersedes any additional or
different PEG capital support fee requirements provided under the Regulatory
Ordinance.
7-2-7   PEG CAPITAL GRANT.
For the term of the Franchise, the Company shall provide the City with an
annual capital grant in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The PEG
capital grant shall be payable on or before January 30 each year at the Clerk’s
office as provided in the Cable Regulatory Ordinance. Any PEG capital grant
paid pursuant to this Section shall be used solely for the acquisition and
maintenance of capital equipment and facilities in support of educational and
governmental programming. The PEG capital grant shall not be deemed to be
“franchise fees” for purposes of this Chapter or applicable Legal and
Regulatory Requirements. This Section specifically preempts and supersedes any
additional or different PEG capital grant requirements provided under the
Regulatory Ordinance.
7-2-8   PEG ACCESS EQUIPMENT AND CAPACITY.
The Company shall not be required to provide PEG access equipment as provided
under the Regulatory Ordinance. For the term of the Franchise, the Company
shall designate a sufficient amount of channel capacity on the Video System to
allow the provision of a comparable number of public, educational, and
governmental channels that the Company has activated and provided in the
Franchise Area under the terms of the Franchise Ordinance. If no such channels
are active, the City may during the term of the Franchise request a maximum of
two public, educational, and governmental channels in accordance with the
qualifications and limitations set forth in the Cable Regulatory Ordinance. The
public, educational, and governmental content to be provided pursuant to this
Section and the operation of the public, educational, and governmental channels
shall be the responsibility of the City, and the Company shall be responsible
only for the transmission of such content, subject to technological restraints.
The City shall ensure that all transmissions, content, or programming to be
transmitted by the Company pursuant to this Section are provided or submitted
to the Company in a manner or form that is capable of being accepted and
transmitted by the Company, without requirement for additional alteration or
change in the content, over the Video System, which is compatible with the
technology or protocol utilized by the Company to deliver Video Service. At its
election, the City may reasonably request the Company to make any necessary
change to the form of any programming, furnished for transmission, which shall
be charged to the City, not to exceed the Company’s incremental costs. In that
case, the City shall have up to twelve (12) months to reimburse the Company for
such costs. The provision of such transmissions, content, or programming to the
Company shall constitute authorization for the Company to carry such
transmissions, content, or programming, at the Company’s option, beyond the
jurisdictional boundaries of the Franchise Area. This Section specifically
preempts and supersedes any additional or different PEG access equipment and
capacity requirements provided under the Regulatory Ordinance.
7-2-9   INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK.
For the term of the Franchise, the Company shall provide an Institutional
Network comparable to the Institutional Network that the Company has provided
in the Franchise Area under the terms of the Franchise Ordinance, including
free service to the following locations within the City’s Institutional
Network:
City Hall
Fire Station
Cascade Public Library
Aquin System
Western Dubuque Community Senior and Junior High School
Western Dubuque Community Elementary School
The City may from time to time request reasonable additions or modifications to
the Institutional Network, provided that, (a) the total revenues forgone by the
Company from the provision of Video Service to public institutions, public or
parochial schools, or civic and governmental entities at no charge shall be
limited to an amount not to exceed the existing total of forgone revenues
associated with providing such services to such institutions and (b) the total
amount of direct or indirect financial support provided for an Institutional
Network shall be limited to ongoing maintenance and support of the existing
Institutional Network. For the purposes of this Section, maintenance and
support shall only include the reasonable incremental cost of moves, changes,
and restoring connectivity of the fiber or coaxial cable lines up to a
demarcation point at any location within the Institutional Network. This
Section specifically preempts and supersedes any additional or different
Institutional Network requirements provided under the Regulatory Ordinance.
7-2-10   BONDING REQUIREMENTS.
For the term of the Franchise and provided that the Company maintains its
principal place of business within the Franchise Area, the Company shall not be
required to provide any form of performance or surety bond as provided under
the Regulatory Ordinance.
7-2-11   CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.
The Company shall comply with customer service standards consistent with those
contained in applicable FCC Rules, and shall maintain a local toll-free
telephone number for customer service contacts. This Section specifically
preempts and supersedes any additional or different customer service standards
provided under the Regulatory Ordinance.
7-2-12   TECHNICAL STANDRDS.
The Company shall comply with technical standards consistent with those
contained in applicable FCC Rules. This Section specifically preempts and
supersedes any additional or different technical standards provided under the
Regulatory Ordinance.
7-2-13   NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE; EQUAL PROTECTION.
The Franchise is nonexclusive and shall in no way prevent the City from
granting or renewing any other franchise for Cable Service or Video Service in
accordance with applicable Iowa and Federal laws. In the event the City enters
into a franchise, permit, license authorization or other agreement of any kind
with any Person other than the Company, to use or occupy the Public Right of
Way for the purpose of constructing, operating or maintaining a system for
providing Cable Service or Video Service to any part of the Franchise Area, the
material provisions thereof shall be reasonably comparable to those contained
herein, in order that one service provider not be granted an unfair competitive
advantage or another service provider, and to provide all Persons equal
protection under the law.
7-2-14   CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION.
The Company shall construct, install, maintain, operate, repair, replace and
remove the Video System in a manner consistent with accepted technical and
engineering standards and in accordance with all applicable Legal and
Regulatory Requirements. All facilities and equipment comprising the Video
System and located in the Public Right of Way shall be located so as to cause
minimum interference with the proper use of the Public Right of Way and to
cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of
property owners who adjoin any Public Right of Way. In case of any facilities
or equipment causing interference with the Public Right of Way, the Company
shall, at its own cost and expense and in a commercially reasonable manner,
modify, remove or relocate such facilities or equipment. In the event that at
any time during the term of the Franchise the City lawfully elects to alter or
change any street, alley or other Public Right of Way, the Company shall, if
necessary and upon reasonable notice from the City, modify, remove or relocate
any facilities or equipment at its own cost an expense and in a commercially
reasonable manner, provided that where public funds are available to compensate
for such removal or relocation under applicable Legal and Regulatory
Requirements, the Company shall not be required to pay such costs. Decisions
concerning the need for relocation of facilities shall be made and applied to
all users of the affected Public Right of Way (including the City and any of
its Affiliates) in a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory manner. In
connection with any construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair
project, the City and the Company shall communicate and coordinate with each
other (and with other private and public utility companies utilizing the
affected Public Right of Way and any third party contractors involved with any
project) in a timely and open manner in order to limit the potential need for
relocation of facilities and to minimize costs and disruption of utility
services in connection with any required relocations. In case of any
disturbance or damage to a Public Right of Way, the Company shall, at its own
cost and expense and in a commercially reasonable manner approved by the City,
replace and restore such right of way to as good a condition as before the
Company’s activities were commenced. This Section specifically preempts and
supersedes any additional or different construction and installation
requirements provided under the Regulatory Ordinance.
7-2-15   SERVICE EXTENSIONS.
The Company shall provide service to residents on a nondiscriminatory basis,
and shall not deny access to Video Service to any resident or neighborhood on
the basis of income. The Company shall serve all residents of the City, except
to the extent that density of homes, adverse terrain or other factors render
providing service commercially impracticable or technically infeasible. For
purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this Section, and to
provide for a commercially reasonable and non-discriminatory policy governing
extensions of video service within the City, the Company shall extend service
to new subscribers at the normal installation charge and monthly rate for
customers taking the same service, where there is an average of at least forty-
five (45) homes per each linear mile of new facilities construction. In the
event the requirements of this Section are not met, extensions of Video Service
shall be required only on a basis which is commercially reasonable. Nothing in
the preceding shall prohibit the Company from offering Video Service in any
area not meeting the preceding density requirements on terms acceptable to the
Company. This Section specifically preempts and supersedes any additional or
different service extension standards provided under the Regulatory Ordinance.
7-2-16   OWNERSHIP AND REMOVAL.
The Video System shall be and remain the exclusive property of the Company at
all times and for all purposes. Any costs, expenses, taxes or other assessments
arising from or related to the construction, installation, maintenance,
operation, repair, replacement and removal of the Video System shall be the
sole responsibility of the Company. Upon expiration or termination of the
Franchise in accordance with this Chapter, the Company shall, upon written
request of the City, at its own cost and expense and within a commercially
reasonable time under the circumstances, remove all facilities and equipment
comprising the Video System and restore the Public Right of Way to as good a
condition as before the Company’s activities were commenced. In the event the
Company fails to remove its facilities and equipment within a reasonable time
after the written request of the City, the City may accept bids for a contract
to remove the facilities and equipment. The Company shall have the right to bid
on such a contract. The City may award the contract to the appropriate bidder
and charge the costs of such contract to the Company. The provisions of this
Section shall not apply to facilities or equipment of the Company which are
buried; provided, however, the Company shall transfer ownership to the City of
any buried facilities and equipment which are not removed. Nothing in this
Section shall require the Company to remove or transfer ownership of any
facilities or equipment comprising the Video System so long as such facilities
or equipment are being utilized by the Company or an Affiliate to provide
telecommunications services or other communications or data services to
subscribers within the City.
7-2-17   CONFIDENTIALITY OF PROTECTED INFORMATION.
Any Protected Information of the Company, and the results derived in any way
from such information, is and will remain the sole and exclusive property of
the Company, and the City has no right or license in or to the Company’s
Protected Information. Protected Information of the Company that has been
disclosed to the City will be maintained in confidence by the City, which will
safeguard this information using the same degree of care as it uses to
safeguard its own Protected Information, but in no case less than a reasonable
degree of care. Without limiting the preceding, the City will (a) limit access
to the Company’s Protected Information to those of its Representatives with a
need to know such Protected Information for the performance of the City’s
responsibilities and obligations under this Chapter and the Regulatory
Ordinance and (b) limit use of the Company’s Protected Information for the
exclusive purpose of fulfilling its obligations and responsibilities under this
Chapter and the Regulatory Ordinance. The City has established and will
maintain commercially reasonable safeguards against the destruction, loss,
alteration of or unauthorized use of or access to the Company’s Protected
Information in the possession of the City or its Representatives, which
safeguards will include policies for the disposal/destruction of any such data
that are commensurate with the sensitivity of the materials to be disposed of
or destroyed. The City warrants that it will take all steps necessary to ensure
fulfillment of this obligation and will take all reasonable measures, including
court proceedings, to restrain its Representatives from unauthorized disclosure
or use of the Company’s Protected Information. In the event a subpoena or other
legal process is served upon the City that, pursuant to the requirement of a
Governmental or Regulatory Authority, requires the disclosure of the Company’s
Protected Information, the City will notify the Company promptly upon receipt
of such subpoena or other request for legal process (unless such notice is
prohibited by applicable Legal or Regulatory Requirements), and will cooperate
with the Company, at the Company’s expense, in any lawful effort by the Company
to contest the legal validity or scope of such subpoena or other legal process.
7-2-18   LEGAL COMPLIANCE; SEVERABILITY.
The rights and obligations of the Company and the City under this Chapter shall
be subject to, and are intended to comply in all respects with, all applicable
Legal and Regulatory Requirements. Each party agrees to take all such further
acts and execute all such further documents as the other party reasonably may
request to fulfill their respective obligations under this Chapter or to assist
the requesting party in complying with all Legal and Regulatory Requirements
applicable to such party’s rights and obligations under this Chapter. Every
provision of this Chapter is intended to be severable. If any provision hereof
is invalid or unenforceable for any reason whatsoever under the applicable
Legal and Regulatory Requirements of a particular jurisdiction, this Chapter
will be construed and enforced as if the invalid or unenforceable provision
were not a part of this Chapter for purposes of that jurisdiction, and the
remaining provisions of this Chapter will remain in full force and effect and
will not be affected by the invalid or unenforceable provision or by its
severance from this Chapter. Moreover, a provision as similar in terms to the
invalid or unenforceable provision as may be possible and be valid and
enforceable in the applicable jurisdiction will be substituted automatically as
part of this Chapter in lieu of the illegal, invalid or unenforceable
provision. If applicable Legal and Regulatory Requirements are subsequently
amended or interpreted by an appropriate Governmental or Regulatory Authority
in a way that causes any provision of this Chapter that was formerly invalid or
unenforceable to become valid or enforceable, that provision (to the extent
that it subsequently becomes valid and enforceable) will be considered to be
adopted as part of this Chapter as of the effective date of that amendment or
interpretation.
7-2-19   FORCE MAJEURE.
The Company shall not be liable for any delay or failure in performance of any
part of its obligations under this Chapter from any cause beyond its control
and without its fault or negligence, including acts of God, acts of civil or
military authority, government regulations, adverse judicial proceedings,
embargoes, epidemics, war, terrorist acts, riots, insurrections, fires,
explosions, earthquakes, nuclear accidents, floods, strikes, power blackouts,
major environmental disturbances, unusually severe weather conditions,
inability to secure products or services of other persons or transportation
facilities or acts or omissions of transportation common carriers.
7-2-20   ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER.
The Company shall not assign or transfer any right granted under this Chapter
to any other Person without the prior written consent of the City; provided
that such prior written consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed
if the proposed assignee or transferee agrees in writing to assume the
Company’s obligations under this Chapter, including compliance with the terms
and conditions of this Chapter and the applicable provisions of the Regulatory
Ordinance. Notwithstanding the preceding or anything in this Chapter or the
Regulatory Ordinance to the contrary, no restrictions or special rights with
respect to assignment or transfer of the Franchise or the Video System shall
apply to transfers from the Company to any Affiliate of the Company. This
Section specifically preempts and supersedes any additional or different
assignment or transfer restrictions or rights provided under the Regulatory
Ordinance.
7-2-21   THIRD PARTY LIABILITY.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to create civil liability by one party
for actions, omissions or negligence of the other party, or of the other
party’s agents, employees, officers or assigns. This Chapter shall not be
interpreted or construed to provide any third parties (including, but not
limited to the Company’s customers) with any remedy, claim, liability,
reimbursement, cause of action or any other right as against the Company or the
City. Each of the Company and the City shall bear responsibility for its own
actions, omissions and negligence. Without limiting the preceding, the Company
shall hold the City harmless from any claim, liability or damage arising from
or caused by the Company’s activities under the Franchise.
7-2-22   NOTICES.
All notices, consents, waivers, and other communications under this Chapter or
the Regulatory Ordinance must be in writing and will be deemed to have been
duly given when (a) delivered by hand (with confirmation of receipt), (b) sent
by email or facsimile (with confirmation of receipt), provided that a copy is
mailed by registered mail, return receipt requested or (c) when received by the
addressee, if sent by a nationally recognized overnight delivery service
(receipt requested), in each case to the address of the receiving party
designated below, as such address may be modified by notice given in accordance
herewith.
If to the City:
City of Cascade, Iowa
Cascade City Hall
320 First Avenue West, PO Box 400
Cascade, IA 52033
Fax: (563) 852-7554
Email: cascadecity@netins.net
   cascadeclerk@netins.net
If to the Company:
Cascade Communications Company
Attn: General Manager
106 Taylor Street SE, PO Box 250 Cascade, IA 52033
Fax: (563)-852-3710
Email: dave@cascadecomm.com
7-2-23   EMERGENCY ALERT SYSTEM.
The Company shall comply with all current and subsequent FCC Rules concerning
the maintenance, operation and testing of an Emergency Alert System.
7-2-24   LEGAL EFFECT; OTHER ORDINANCES.
This Chapter and applicable provisions of the Regulatory Ordinance contain the
entire agreement between the City and the Company regarding the Franchise. Any
ordinance or provision of any ordinance inconsistent with the provisions of
this Chapter is hereby repealed, including without limitation the following
provisions of the Regulatory Ordinance:
§ 113.03    § 113.11   § 113.19   § 113.27   § 113.35
§ 113.04   § 113.12   § 113.20   § 113.28   § 113.36
§ 113.05    § 113.13   § 113.21   § 113.29   § 113.42
§ 113.06    § 113.15   § 113.22   § 113.30   § 113.43
§ 113.08    § 113.16   § 113.23   § 113.31   § 113.51
§ 113.09    § 113.17   § 113.24   § 113.33
§ 113.10   § 113.18   § 113.26   § 113.34
The Company shall comply with the terms of any lawfully adopted or amended
generally applicable local ordinance (including the Regulatory Ordinance), to
the extent the provisions of such ordinance do have the effect of limiting the
benefits or expanding the obligations of the Company under this Chapter. In the
event of any conflict between this Chapter and any ordinance (including the
Regulatory Ordinance) this Chapter shall control. Neither party may
unilaterally alter the material rights nor obligations set forth in this
Chapter.
CHAPTER 3
REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION RATES
7-3-1   Administration of Rules and Regulations
7-3-2   Rate Regulation Proceedings
7-3-3   Certification to FCC and Cable Operator
7-3-4   Cable Programming Service Tier
7-3-5   Delegation of Powers Permitted
7-3-1   ADMINISTRATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The City has the legal authority to administer and shall enforce against any
non-municipally owned cable television system operator, as permitted therein,
the provisions of Part 76, Subpart N of the Rules and Regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), concerning Cable Rate Regulation, 47
C.F.R. §§76.900 et. seq., as they currently read and hereafter may be amended,
which are herewith incorporated by reference.
7-3-2   RATE REGULATION PROCEEDINGS.
Any rate regulation proceedings conducted hereunder shall provide a reasonable
opportunity for consideration of the views of any interested party, including
but not limited to, the City or its designee, the Cable Operator, subscribers,
and residents of the franchise area. In addition to all other provisions
required by the laws of the State of Iowa and by the City, and in order to
provide for such opportunity for consideration of the views of any interested
party, the City shall take the following actions:
   1.   The City shall publish notice as provided in Section 362 of the Code of
Iowa and shall mail, by certified mail, to the Cable Operator a notice of the
intent to conduct a public proceeding on basic service tier rates and/or
charges for equipment to receive such basic service tier, as defined by the
FCC.
   2.   The public notice shall state, among other things, that cable
television rates are subject to municipal review and explain the nature of the
rate review in question; that any interested party has a right to participate
in the proceeding; that public views may be submitted in the proceeding,
explaining how they are to be submitted and the deadline for submitting any
such views; that a decision concerning the reasonableness of the cable
television rates in question will be governed by the Rules and Regulations of
the FCC; and that the decision of the City is subject to review by the FCC.
   3.   The City shall conduct a public proceeding to determine whether or not
the rates or proposed rate increases are reasonable. The City may delegate the
responsibility to conduct the proceeding to any duly qualified and eligible
individual(s) or entity. If the City or its designee cannot determine the
reasonableness of a proposed rate increase within the time period permitted by
the FCC Rules and Regulations, it may announce the effective date of the
proposed rates for an additional period of time as permitted by the FCC Rules
and Regulations, and issue any other necessary or appropriate order and give
public notice accordingly.
   4.   In the course of the rate regulation proceeding, the City may require
additional information from the Cable Operator that is reasonably necessary to
determine the reasonableness of the basic service tier rates and equipment
charges. Any such additional information submitted to the City shall be
verified by an appropriate official of the cable television system supervising
the preparation of the response on behalf of the entity, and submitted by way
of affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating that the response is true and
accurate to the best of that person’s knowledge, information and belief formed
after reasonable inquiry.
   5.   The City may request proprietary information, provided that the City
shall consider a timely request from the Cable Operator that said proprietary
information shall not be made available for public information, consistent with
the procedures set forth in Section 0.459 of the FCC Rules and Regulations.
Furthermore, said proprietary information may be used only for the purpose of
determining the reasonableness of the rates and charges or the appropriate rate
level based on a cost-of-service showing submitted by the Cable Operator.
   6.   The City may exercise all powers under the laws of evidence applicable
to administrative proceedings under the laws of the State of Iowa and by this
Code of Ordinances to discover any information relevant to the rate regulation
proceeding, including, but not limited to, subpoena, interrogatories,
production of documents, and deposition.
   7.   Upon termination of the rate regulation proceeding, the City shall
adopt and release a written decision as to whether or not the rates or proposed
rate increase is reasonable or unreasonable, and, if unreasonable, its remedy,
including prospective rate reduction, rate prescription, and refunds.
   8.   The City may not impose any fines, penalties, forfeitures or other
sanctions, other than permitted by the FCC Rules and Regulations, for charging
an unreasonable rate or proposing an unreasonable rate increase.
   9.   Consistent with FCC Rules and Regulations, the City’s decision may be
reviewed only by the FCC.
   10.   The City shall be authorized, at any time, whether or not in the
course of a rate regulation proceeding, to gather information as necessary to
exercise its jurisdiction as authorized by the laws of the State of Iowa, the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and the FCC Rules and Regulations. Any
information submitted to the City shall be verified by an appropriate official
of the cable television system supervising the preparation of the response on
behalf of the entity, and submitted by way of affidavit or under penalty of
perjury, stating that the response is true and accurate to the best of that
person’s knowledge, information and belief formed after reasonable inquiry.
7-3-3   CERTIFICATION TO FCC AND CABLE OPERATOR.
The City shall file with the FCC the required certification form (FCC Form 328)
on September 1, 1993, or as soon thereafter as appropriate. Thirty days later,
or as soon thereafter as appropriate, the City shall notify the Cable Operator
that the City has been certified by the FCC and that it has adopted all
necessary regulations so as to begin regulating basic service tier cable
television rates and equipment charges.
7-3-4   CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE TIER.
With regard to the cable programming service tier, as defined by the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and the FCC Rules and Regulations, and
over which the City is not empowered to exercise rate regulation, the Cable
Operator shall give notice to the City of any change in rates for the cable
programming service tier or tiers, any change in the charge for equipment
required to receive the tier or tiers, and any changes in the nature of the
services provided, including the program services included in the tier or
tiers. Said notice shall be provided within five (5) business days after the
change becomes effective.
7-3-5   DELEGATION OF POWERS PERMITTED.
The City may delegate its powers to enforce this chapter to municipal employees
or officers (the “cable official”). The cable official will have the authority
to:
   1.   Administer oaths and affirmations;
   2.   Issue subpoenas;
   3.   Examine witnesses;
   4.   Rule upon questions of evidence;
   5.   Take or cause depositions to be taken;
   6.   Conduct proceedings in accordance with this chapter;
   7.   Exclude from the proceeding any person engaging in contemptuous conduct
or otherwise disrupting the proceedings;
   8.   Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues by
consent of the parties; and
   9.   Take actions and make decision or recommend decisions in conformity
with this chapter.
CHAPTER 4
CABLE TELEVISION CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
7-4-1   Enforcement of Customer Service Standards
7-4-2   Notification
7-4-3   Rules and Procedures
7-4-4   Penalty
7-4-1   ENFORCEMENT OF CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.
The City has the legal authority to adopt and enforce customer service
standards for the cable television system in the City as permitted by the Cable
Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992. Upon review of the
customer service standards adopted by the FCC on March 11, 1993, by MM Docket
No. 92-263 of the FCC, and deeming it in the best interests of the City, the
Council hereby adopts by reference the above mentioned customer service
standards for cable television service.
7-4-2   NOTIFICATION.
The Clerk shall notify the Cable Operator by registered mail with return
receipt that the City has adopted said customer service standards for cable
television service, to become effective upon written notification to cable
operator.
7-4-3   RULES AND PROCEDURES.
The Cable Commission appointed by the Council shall establish rules and
procedures regarding the process to remedy possible violations of the customer
service standards by the Cable Operator. The Commission shall provide for
notice and opportunity for hearing for both the customers and the Cable
Operator in such process.
7-4-4   PENALTY.
If after notice and opportunity for hearing, the City determines that the Cable
Operator is not in complete compliance with all the provisions of the customer
service standards, the Cable Operator shall reduce the rate for the basic tier
of cable service by twenty-five percent (25%) until such time that the City has
been satisfied that the Cable Operator is in compliance with all the provisions
of the customer service standards. In addition, the Cable Operator shall pay to
the City the sum of $100.00 for each day that the Cable Operator fails to be in
compliance with all the provisions of the standards after the date that the
Council has passed a resolution stipulating the sections where the Cable
Operator is in noncompliance.
CHAPTER 4A
UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION OF WIRE AND CABLE
4A.01   Purpose
4A.02   Cable Installation
4A.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for uniform standards for the
installation of all cable, wire and conduit curried underground to prevent the
cutting of cable and interruption of services provided to residents of the
community.
4A.02   CABLE INSTALLATION.
All cable, wire and conduit installed beneath the ground surface by all utility
and cable companies shall be at a depth of at least eighteen (18) inches
beneath the surface of the ground.
CHAPTER 4B
UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
4B.01   Purpose
4B.02   Definitions
4B.03   Burial Required
4B.04   Exception to Burial
4B.05   Condition of Occupancy
4B.01   PURPOSE.
The placement of electric and telecommunication lines underground is desirable
and improves the appearance of neighborhoods, business districts and industrial
areas and adds protection of the lines from the natural elements.
4B.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   Easement means a grant of the right to use a strip of land for specific
purposes by the general public, a corporation or certain persons.
   2.   Public right-of-way means the area between property lines dedicated to
and accepted by the city for public use providing access to abutting properties
and providing routes for public utilities.
   3.   Telecommunication line means a telephone, fiber optic or other like or
similar conductor.
4B.03   BURIAL REQUIRED.
All new utility conductors, extensions, feeders, loops or other means of
service or distribution of electric and telecommunications shall be placed
underground in designed utility easements and/or public right-of-way in
accordance with applicable electrical and safety codes and no less than a
minimum depth of eighteen (18) inches from finished grade.
4B.04   EXCEPTION TO BURIAL.
The following exceptions shall be allowed.
   1.   The repair and maintenance of existing overhead lines.
   2.   Electrical transmission lines in excess of 34 kilovolts.
   3.   Temporary service lines whose use shall not exceed twelve (12) months.
   4.   Poles used exclusively for street lighting
   5.   Antenna associated with supporting structures and associated equipment
used by a utility or person for furnishing or receiving communication services.
   6.   Equipment used to service underground utilities such as ground mounted
transformers, pedestals and cabinets.
   7.   Overhead conductors attached to the exterior service of a building by
means of a bracket or fixtures and extending from one location of the building
to another location on the same building or adjacent building without crossing
any public right-of-way.
   8.   Upon council approval following a Planning & Zoning Commission
recommendation when a utility provider has proven that underground placement is
impractical or not technically feasible due to topography, soil conditions or
other existing conditions that adversely affect underground placement.
4B.05   CONDITIONS OF OCCUPANCE.
Utility providers placing utilities in the city’s right-of-way and utility
easements shall install, operate and maintain those utilities at their own
expense. Following a utility providers disturbance of a city right-of-way or
utility easement the utility provider shall return the right-of-way or utility
easement to the same condition existing immediately prior to such disturbance
and in compliance with the city’s street excavation policy. If the location of
utilities are in physical conflict with city utilities or proposed utilities,
the utility provider shall relocate its utilities at its expense upon notice by
the city.
CHAPTER 5
HOUSE MOVERS
7-5-1   House Movers Defined
7-5-2   Permit Required
7-5-3   Application
7-5-4   Bond Required
7-5-5   Insurance Required
7-5-6   Permit Fee
7-5-7   Permit Issue
7-5-8   Public Safety
7-5-9   Time Limit
7-5-10   Removal by City
7-5-11   Protect Pavement
7-5-12   Above Ground Wires
7-5-1   HOUSE MOVERS DEFINED.
A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a building or similar
structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the building or
structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks, dollies or
any other specialized moving equipment.
7-5-2   PERMIT REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover as
herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building or
similar structure to be moved. Buildings of less than one hundred (100) square
feet are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
7-5-3   APPLICATION.
Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the Clerk.
The application shall include:
   1.   Name and Address. The applicant’s full name and address and if a
corporation the names and addresses of its principal officers.
   2.   Building Location. An accurate description of the present location and
future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
   3.   Routing Plan. A routing plan approved by the Police Chief, street
superintendent, and public utility officials. The route approved shall be the
shortest route compatible with the greatest public convenience and safety.
7-5-4   BOND REQUIRED.
The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the minimum sum of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) issued by a surety company authorized to issue
such bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for
any damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs
incurred by the City in the course of moving the building or structure.
7-5-5   INSURANCE REQUIRED.
Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the
applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration of
the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the
following minimum amounts:
   1.   Bodily Injury - $100,000 per person; $300,000 per accident.
   2.   Property Damage - $50,000 per accident.
7-5-6   PERMIT FEE.
A permit fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be payable at the time of
filing the application with the Clerk. A separate permit shall be required for
each house, building or similar structure to be moved.
7-5-7   PERMIT ISSUED.
Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate, and
payment of the required fee, the Clerk shall issue a permit.
7-5-8   PUBLIC SAFETY.
At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain flagmen at the
closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to the sides,
behind and ahead of the building or structure. At all times when the building
or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property the
permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights at the intersections
or channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or
structure.
7-5-9   TIME LIMIT.
No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to remain
upon any street or other public way for a period of more than twelve (12) hours
without having first secured the written approval of the City.
7-5-10   REMOVAL BY CITY.
In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation of
Section 123.09 the City is authorized to remove such building or structure and
assess the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the permit
holder’s bond.
7-5-11   PROTECT PAVEMENT.
It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement,
unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are at
least one (1) inch in width for each one thousand (1,000) pounds of weight of
such building. If there is any question as to the weight of a house or
building, the estimate of the City as to such weight shall be final.
7-5-12   ABOVE GROUND WIRES.
The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone, cable
television and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and replaced
in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same.
CHAPTER 6
ADULT ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
7-6-1   Purpose
7-6-2   Definitions
7-6-3   Location Restrictions
7-6-4   Development Design Standards
7-6-5   Responsibilities of Operator
7-6-6   Minors
7-6-7   Hours of Operation
7-6-1   PURPOSE.
The City of Cascade finds:
   1.   Adult-oriented establishments require special consideration in order to
protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such
establishments as well as the citizens of Cascade;
   2.   Adult-oriented establishments, because of their very nature, have a
detrimental effect on both existing establishments around them and surrounding
residential areas adjacent to them;
   3.   The concern over sexually-transmitted diseases is a legitimate health
concern of the City that demands reasonable regulation of adult-oriented
establishments in order to protect the health and well-being of the community;
   4.   Adult-oriented establishments, due to their very nature, have serious
objectionable operational characteristics, thereby contributing to blight and
downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent area;
   5.   The City of Cascade wants to minimize these adverse effects and thereby
protect the health, safety and welfare of its residents; protect residents from
increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the property values and
character of the surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the spread of blight;
   6.   It is not the intent of this ordinance to suppress any speech
activities protected by the First Amendment, but to enact content neutral
regulations that address the secondary effects of adult-oriented establishments
as well as the health problems associated with such establishments.
7-6-2   DEFINITIONS.
   1.   “Adult Bookstore”, an establishment that has a facility or facilities,
including but not limited to, booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls for the
presentation of “adult entertainment,” including adult-oriented films, movies
or live performances for observation by patrons therein; or an establishment
having a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in trade for sale,
rent, trade, lease, inspection, or viewing of books, films, video cassettes,
magazines, or other periodicals, which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities as defined below.
   2.   “Adult Entertainment”, any exhibition of any motion picture, live
performance, display or dance of any type, which has as its dominant theme or
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on any actual or simulated
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined below.
   3.   “Adult Motion Picture Theater”, an enclosed building used for
presenting material having as its dominant theme or distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as described below
for observation by patrons of the building.
   4.   “Adult-Oriented Establishment”, any premises including, without
limitation, “adult bookstores” or “adult motion picture theaters.” It further
means any premises to which public patrons or members are invited or admitted
and which are physically arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms,
compartments, or stalls separate from the common area of the premises for the
purposes of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer
provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron, or maintained
for profit, direct or indirect. “Adult-Oriented Establishment” further
includes, without limitation, any premises physically arranged and used as such
whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, exotic
dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, or any other term of like
import.
   5.   “Operators”, any person, partnership or corporation operating,
conducting, maintaining or owning any adult-oriented establishment.
   6.   “Specified Anatomical Areas”, less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, buttocks, female breasts below the areola; or, male genitalia.
   7.   “Specified Sexual Activities”, simulated or actual (a) showing of human
genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; (b) acts of sexual
activity, sodomy, or sado-masochism; or (c) fondling or erotic touching of
human genitals, buttocks or female breasts.
7-6-3   LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
An adult oriented establishment shall be permitted within the City of Cascade
only in the Heavy Industrial (M2) Zoning District upon receipt of a site plan
and special exception use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Section 165.33 of the Cascade Zoning Ordinance and only if it meets all of the
location requirements set forth below. Distances provided hereafter shall be
measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings,
from the nearest point of the property parcel upon which the proposed adult
entertainment business is to be located, to the nearest point of the parcel of
property or zoning district boundary line from which the proposed adult
entertainment business is to be separated.
   1.   Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited in or within sixteen
hundred (1,600) feet of the borders of a residential district.
   2.   Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within sixteen
hundred (1,600) feet of any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or other place of
religious worship.
   3.   Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within sixteen
hundred (1,600) feet of any public or private school offering general education
for students between the years of kindergarten and twelfth grade.
   4.   Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within sixteen
hundred (1,600) feet of any daycare home or daycare business.
   5.   Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within sixteen
hundred (1,600) feet of any public park or playground. For purposes of this
section, bike paths, trails, waterways and boat launches shall be deemed a
public park.
   6.   Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within sixteen
hundred (1,600) feet of any other adult entertainment establishment.
   7.   Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within sixteen
hundred (1,600) feet of any existing establishment selling alcoholic beverages
for consumption on premises.
7-6-4   DEVELOPMENT DESGIN STANDARDS.
   1.   Exterior. It shall be unlawful for an owner of an adult-oriented
establishment:
      a.   To allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be
visible from any point outside the establishment.
      b.   To allow the exterior portion of the adult-oriented establishment to
have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes,
drawings or pictorial representation of any manner depicting specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      c.   To allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted other
than a single color.
   2.   Signage. The operator shall comply with Section 165.11.M-2.F.2 of the
Cascade Zoning Ordinance. Additionally, the display surfaces of the sign shall
not contain any flashing lights or photographs, silhouettes, drawings or
pictorial representations of any manner, except for the name of the enterprise.
7-6-5   RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OPERATOR.
Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions
of this ordinance shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such
act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of
the operator, or as a result of the operator’s negligent failure to supervise
the employee’s conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or
omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the
omission.
7-6-6   MINORS.
It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than eighteen (18) years
of age to enter or be on the premises of an adult-oriented establishment at any
time that the establishment is open for business. The operator must ensure that
an attendant is stationed at each public entrance at all times during regular
business hours. The attendant shall prohibit any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years of age from entering the establishment. It shall be
presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of eighteen (18)
unless such attendant asked for and was furnished a valid drivers license
issued by a state reflecting that person’s age.
7-6-7   HOURS OF OPERATION.
An adult-oriented establishment may remain open for business no longer than the
hours from between 12:00 PM (Noon) to 2:00 AM, seven days a week.
CHAPTER 7
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
7-7-1   Power to Vacate
7-7-2   Planning and Zoning Commission
7-7-3   Notice of Vacation Hearing
7-7-4   Findings Required
7-7-5   Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys
7-7-6   Disposal by Gift Limited
7-7-1   POWER TO VACATE.
When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of the
City to vacate a street or alley or portion thereof, the Council may do so by
ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2a])
7-7-2   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
Any proposal to vacate a street or alley shall be referred by the Council to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for its study and recommendation prior to
further consideration by the Council. The Commission shall submit a written
report including recommendations to the Council within thirty (30) days after
the date the proposed vacation is referred to the Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
7-7-3   NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.
The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the time
at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.
7-7-4   FINDINGS REQUIRED.
No street or alley, or portion thereof, shall be vacated unless the Council
finds that:
   1.   Public Use. The street or alley proposed to be vacated is not needed
for the use of the public, and therefore, its maintenance at public expense is
no longer justified.
   2.   Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of
property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.15)
7-7-5   DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.
When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the
City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, or portion thereof, the Council
may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7, Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
7-7-6   DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.
The City may not dispose of a vacated street or alley, or portion thereof, by
gift except to a governmental body for a public purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7[3])
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets and/or alleys and remain
in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets and/or alleys and remain
in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED  ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
64            10-1-45  220-88        8-8-88
65            6-6-46   225-89        8-28-89
66            4-8-47   226-89        8-28-89
67            5-5-47   228-89        10-9-89
68            6-6-47   230-89        12-26-89
73            5-1-50   231-90        2-12-90
76            12-4-50  232-90        5-14-90
78            9-10-51  233-90        5-14-90
79            8-4-52   236-90        7-9-90
81            7-6-53   237-90        10-22-90
82            7-6-53   248-92        2-10-92
94            7-7-59   249-92        3-9-92
105           10-2-61  252-92        4-27-92
106           10-2-61  283-94        10-24-94
116           11-16-65 308-97        2-10-97
117           11-16-65 310-97        2-24-97
118           11-16-65 331-99        5-24-99
123           1-2-67   01-00         3-27-00
128           6-10-68  41-03         6-23-03
154           5-17-75  53-04         7-26-04
171           7-10-78  71-06A        3-27-06
202           4-22-85  72-06A        3-27-06
209-86        9-8-86   75-06         7-24-06
213-86        12-8-86  82-06         12-27-06
217-88        4-11-88  92-07         9-24-07
4-10          2-22-10
6-10          4-26-10
13-10         9-13-10
14-10         10-11-10
17-10         12-28-10
21-11         3-28-11
21-24         9-9-24
 
CHAPTER 8
STREET GRADES
7-8-1   Established Grades
7-8-2   Record Maintained
7-8-1   ESTABLISHED GRADES.
The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks, which have been heretofore
established by ordinance are hereby confirmed, ratified and established as
official grades.
7-8-2   RECORD MAINTAINED.
The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning such grades upon request.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
33            March 31, 1927
33A           February 24, 1958
108           April 10, 1962
251-92        March 23, 1992
281-94        June 13, 1994
26-01         November 26, 2001
51-04         May 24, 2004
68-06         January 9, 2006
76-06         August 28, 2006
 
CHAPTER 9
NAMING OF STREETS
7-9-1   Naming New Streets
7-9-2   Changing Name of Street
7-9-3   Recording Street Names
7-9-4   Official Street Name Map
7-9-5   Revision of Street Name Map
7-9-1   NAMING NEW STREETS.
New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:
   1.   Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are
natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the
existing street.
   2.   Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a
subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
   3.   Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred
to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
(Ord. 09-23, Passed August 14, 2023)
7-9-2   CHANGING NAME OF STREET.
The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street.
7-9-3   RECORDING STREET NAMES.
Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk
shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor and County
Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
7-9-4   OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP.
Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map
which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify
that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section 139.04 of the
Code of Ordinances of Cascade, Iowa.”
7-9-5   REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP.
If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in
street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map
promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry on the
Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the City
Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map:
(brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by
the Clerk.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted opening streets and remain in full force and
effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED STREET(S)
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted opening streets and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED  STREET(S)
25-01         1-8-01   4th Avenue SE, Bucknam Avenue SE; and Thomas Street SE.
42-03         6-3-03   176’ Portion of 2nd Ave., SE Alley
76-06         8-28-06  6th Avenue SE, between Adams St SE & Dillon St SE
93-07         9-24-07  Industrial Street SE, between 1st Ave E and 2nd Ave SE
130-09        12-14-19 7th Avenue SE between Adams St SE & Dillon St SE
 
CHAPTER 10
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
7-10-1   Exercise of Police Power
7-10-2   Definition
7-10-3   Right of Access Limited
7-10-4   Access Controls Imposed
7-10-5   Permitted Access Points
7-10-6   Parking Restricted
7-10-1   EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER.
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City under
Chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and for the promotion of the general welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1)
7-10-2   DEFINITION.
The term “controlled access facility” means a highway or street especially
designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or occupants of
abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only a controlled
right or easement of access, light, air or view by reason of the fact that
their property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for any other
reason.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2)
7-10-3   RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED.
No person has any right of ingress or egress to, from or across any controlled
access facility to or from abutting land, except at such designated points at
which access may be permitted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)
7-10-4   ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED.
There are hereby fixed and established controlled access facilities within the
City, described as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3)
   1.   Iowa Highway No. 136. On relocated route of Iowa No. 136 from the south
corporation line (Station 411 + 94) northerly to a point 165.7 feet north of
the center of National Street (Station 436 + 03) identified as Project No. F-
814 and in conformance with the plans therefor on file in the office of the
Clerk.
   2.   Iowa Highway No. 151. On Iowa No. 151 from First Street to the River
Bridge in East Cascade on National Street and from John Street to Pontiac
Street on National Street in West Cascade identified as Project No. FN-17 and
Project No. F-86(3) and in conformance with the plans therefor on file in the
office of the Clerk.
7-10-5   PERMITTED ACCESS POINTS.
Points of access are hereby permitted as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)
   1.   Iowa No. 136. Permitted access points on Iowa No. 136, Project No. F-
814 are:
STATION SIDE WIDTH USE
STATION  SIDE               WIDTH   USE
419+88   West               22 feet Farm
419+88   East               16 feet Farm
426+54   West               24 feet Commercial
427+25   East               24 feet Residential
430+35   West               16 feet Residential
432+17   West               18 feet Residential
433+11   East               34 feet Commercial
433+68   East               41 feet Commercial
433+88   West               35 feet Commercial
435+05.2 West               35 feet Commercial
435+59.2 West               35 feet Commercial
0+53     West (N. Side 151) 35 feet Commercial
 
   2.   Iowa No. 151. Permitted access points on Iowa No. 151, Project No. FN-
17 and F-86 (3) are:
STATION SIDE WIDTH USE
STATION  SIDE      WIDTH    USE
100-47   Right (N) 36 feet  Commercial
101-28   Right (N) 26 feet  Commercial
101-54.5 Right (N) 27 feet  Public
101-58   Left (S)  16 feet  Residential
102-35   Left (S)  16 feet  Residential
102-53   Right (N) 15 feet  Residential
103-35   Right (N) 15 feet  Residential
103-67   Left (S)  19 feet  Residential
104-38   Left (S)  19 feet  Residential
105-13.5 Left (S)  15 feet  Residential
105-30   Left (S)  13 feet  Residential
105-61   Right (N) 22 feet  Residential
106-17   Right (N) 9 feet   Residential
106-30   Right (N) 13 feet  Residential
107-32   Left (S)  15 feet  Residential
107-66   Left (S)  40 feet  Commercial
108-40   Left (S)  40 feet  Commercial
108-49   Right (N) 14 feet  Residential
109-11   Right (N) 16 feet  Residential
111-12   Right (N) 17 feet  Residential
111-84   Right (N) 16 feet  Residential
115-06   Right (N) 15 feet  Residential
115-24   Left (S)  14 feet  Residential
115-93   Right (N) 16 feet  Residential
116-54   Right (N) 13 feet  Residential
117-27   Right (N) 17 feet  Residential
118-00   Left (S)  18 feet  Residential
118-88   Right (N) 25 feet  Residential
119-25   Left (S)  21 feet  Commercial
120-81   Right (N) 16 feet  Residential
121-13   Left (S)  26 feet  Commercial
121-97   Right (N) 18 feet  Residential
0-44     Right (N) 59 feet  Commercial
0-65     Left (S)  101 feet Commercial
1-73     Left (S)  21 feet  Residential
2-14     Right (N) 17 feet  Residential
3-05     Left (S)  22 feet  Residential
4-87     Right (N) 25 feet  Residential
5-50     Right (N) 18 feet  Residential
6-61     Right (N) 16 feet  Residential
8-55     Right (N) 17 feet  Residential
9-54     Right (N) 16 feet  Residential
9-73     Right (N) 17 feet  Residential
10-16    Left (S)  15 feet  Residential
10-69    Right (N) 19 feet  Residential
10-89    Left (S)  17 feet  Residential
11-08    Left (S)  17 feet  Residential
11-32    Right (N) 18 feet  Residential
11-90    Left (S)  18 feet  Residential
13-72    Right (N) 12 feet  Residential
14-35    Left (S)  24 feet  Residential
15-58    Left (S)  39 feet  Commercial
16-87    Left (S)  37 feet  Commercial
1423-36  South     20 feet  Residential
1424-36  North     30 feet  Residential
 
7-10-6   PARKING RESTRICTED.
The parking of vehicles on or along controlled access facilities is restricted
as follows:
   1.   Minor Street Approaches. Parking is prohibited on all minor street
approaches for a distance of thirty-five (35) feet in advance of the stop sign.
   2.   Minor Street Exits. Parking is prohibited on the exit side of a minor
street for a distance of thirty-five (35) feet.
CHAPTER 11
TREES
7-11-1   Definition
7-11-2   Planting Prohibited
7-11-3   Duty to Trim Trees
7-11-4   Trimming Trees to be Supervised
7-11-5   Disease Control
7-11-6   Inspection and Removal
7-11-1   DEFINITION.
For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street, avenue or
highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and
the curb line; or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue or
highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually
traveled by vehicular traffic.
7-11-2   PLANTING PROHIBITED.
No person shall plant any tree or shrub in any parking or street.
7-11-3   DUTY TO TRIM TREES.
The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees currently on,
or overhanging the street, trimmed so that all branches will be at least
fifteen (15) feet above the surface of the street and eight (8) feet above the
sidewalks. If the abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may
serve notice on the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken
within five (5) days. If such action is not taken within that time, the City
may perform the required action and assess the costs against the abutting
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c, d & e])
7-11-4   TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED.
Except as allowed in Section 150.03, it is unlawful for any person to trim or
cut any tree in a street or public place unless the work is done under the
supervision of the City.
7-11-5   DISEASE CONTROL.
Any dead, diseased or damaged tree or shrub which may harbor serious insect or
disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
7-11-6   INSPECTION AND REMOVAL.
The Council shall inspect or cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in the
City reported or suspected to be infected with or damaged by any disease or
insect or disease pests, and such trees and shrubs shall be subject to removal
as follows:
   1.   Removal from City Property. If it is determined that any such condition
exists on any public property, including the strip between the curb and the lot
line of private property, and that danger to other trees, property, structures
or the general public in the City is imminent, the Council shall immediately
cause such condition to be corrected by treatment or removal so as to destroy
or prevent as fully as possible the spread of the disease or the insect or
disease pests. The Council may also order the removal of any trees on the
streets of the City which interfere with the making of improvements or with
travel thereon.
   2.   Removal from Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable
certainty that any such condition exists on private property and that the
danger to other trees, property, structures or the general public in the City
is imminent, the Council shall immediately notify by certified mail the owner,
occupant or person in charge of such property to correct such condition by
treatment or removal within sixty (60) days of said notification. An owner must
also show that a contract to remove the tree has been obtained within thirty
(30) days of the notification. If such owner, occupant or person in charge of
said property fails to comply within sixty (60) days of receipt of notice, the
Council may cause the nuisance to be removed and the cost assessed against the
property. A property owner may make a written request to the City Administrator
for a one-time extension to the 60-day removal requirement, for up to an
additional ninety (90) days or five months total, if they have a contract for
work approved and the contractor confirms that the work cannot be completed
within the 60-day timeframe.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b & h]) (Ord. 14-23, passed 9-11-23)
CHAPTER 12
DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS
7-12-1   Downtown District
7-12-2   Building Materials
7-12-3   Color of Materials
7-12-4   Foundation
7-12-5   Variance
7-12-6   Hearing
7-12-1   DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.
The area encompassed by this ordinance includes all buildings that front First
Avenue from Johnson Street to the First Avenue Bridge over the North Fork
Maquoketa River.
7-12-2   BUILDING MATERIALS.
The frontage of all new construction or remodeling/reconstruction in the
downtown district involving at least thirty percent (30%) of the total frontage
shall be constructed of brick, stone, or wood.
7-12-3   COLOR OF MATERIALS.
The City Administrator shall ensure the color of any materials to be stained,
painted, or dyed is compatible with the remainder of the downtown district
prior to the issuance of a building permit.
7-12-4   FOUNDATION.
All new construction in the downtown district shall have a permanent concrete
foundation.
7-12-5   VARIANCE.
Any person may apply to the City Council for a variance to the provisions of 7-
13-2 thru 7-13-4. Said application shall be in writing outlining the specific
materials to be used and filed with the City Clerk.
7-12-6   HEARING.
Upon application for a variance the City Council shall conduct a hearing upon
said application. The Council may grant or deny the requested variance.
CHAPTER 13
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
7-13-1   Numbering
7-13-2   Size
7-13-3   Color
7-13-4   Responsibility
7-13-5   Number Issuance
7-13-6   Numbering Method
7-13-7   Beginning Point
7-13-8   Splitting Numbers
7-13-9   Addresses
7-13-1   NUMBERING.
All buildings shall have the address numbers conspicuously displayed on that
part of the building or on a permanent sign or monument facing the street of
the numbered address.
7-13-2   SIZE.
All address numbers shall be visible and legible from the street. All address
numbers shall be not less than 3 inches in height and each numerical digit
shall be a minimum of one-half (1/2) in width.
7-13-3   COLOR.
The color of the numbers shall visually contrast with the color of the building
so as to be clearly visible from the street.
7-13-4   RESPONSIBILITY.
The owner of every building is responsible for ensuring compliance with this
Chapter.
7-13-5   NUMBER ISSUANCE.
The Cascade Zoning Administrator is responsible for assigning building numbers
in the City of Cascade.
7-13-6   NUMBERING METHOD.
Traveling from the beginning point, the center of town, even numbered building
numbers shall be on the right hand side of the street and odd numbered building
numbers shall be on the left hand side of the street. Building numbers shall
advance sequentially in 4 number increments beginning with 100. Each successive
block shall advance by 100 number increments. In general each 60 feet of
frontage shall constitute a building number.
7-13-7   BEGINNING POINT.
The North Fork Maquoketa River Bridge on 1st Avenue is the center of town and
the beginning point of the building number system. The North Fork Maquoketa
River is the East/West dividing line and 1st Avenue is the North/South dividing
line in the City of Cascade.
7-13-8   SPLITTING NUMBERS.
Where an existing building is subdivided, in an area that has already been
assigned building numbers, and each has its own entrance, the newly created
address shall be assigned a building number in two number sequential
increments.
7-13-9   ADDRESSES.
In writing an address, the building number shall be first given, followed by
the name of the street, and that followed by the suffix indicating its
direction from the beginning point, thus: 210 Harrison St., NW.
CHAPTER 14
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
7-14-1   Purpose
7-14-2   Definitions
7-14-3   Period of Partial Exemption
7-14-4   Amounts Eligible for Exemption
7-14-5   Limitations
7-14-6   Applications
7-14-7   Approval
7-14-8   Exemption Repealed
7-14-9   Dual Exemptions Prohibited
7-14-1   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from property
taxation of the actual value added to commercial and industrial real estate by
the new construction, research-service facilities, warehouses, distribution
centers and the acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment
assessed as real estate.
7-14-2   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year
for which the exemption is received, except that actual value added by
improvements to machinery and equipment means the actual value as determined by
the local assessor as of January 1 of each year for which the exemption is
received.
   2.   “Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for
the storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail
outlets. Distribution center does not mean a building or structure used
primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer
to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the
storage of petroleum products, or used for the retail sale of goods.
   3.   “New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes new
buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to existing
buildings and structures. New construction does not include reconstruction of
an existing building or structure which does not constitute complete
replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing
building or structure unless the reconstruction of an existing building or
structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is
necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and
processing of specific products and the reconstruction is required for the
owner of the building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or
process those products, which determination shall receive prior approval from
the City Council of the City upon the recommendation of the Iowa Department of
Economic Development.
   4.   “New machinery and equipment assessed as real estate” means new
machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to Section 427A.1,
Subsection 1, Paragraph “e”, Code of Iowa, unless the machinery or equipment is
part of the normal replacement or operating process to maintain or expand the
existing operational status.
   5.   “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings
devoted primarily to research and development activities, including, but not
limited to, the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for
experimental use, and corporate research services which do not have a primary
purpose of providing on-site services to the public.
   6.   “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse
for the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of
Iowa, except that it does not mean a building or structure used primarily to
store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail.
7-14-3   PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION.
The actual value added to industrial or commercial real estate by the new
construction of industrial real estate, research service facilities,
warehouses, distribution centers, and the acquisition of or improvement to
machinery and equipment assessed as real estate, is eligible to receive a
partial exemption from taxation for a period of five (5) years.
7-14-4   AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION.
The amount of actual value added which is eligible to be exempt from taxation
shall be as follows:
   1.   For the first year, seventy-five percent (75%)
   2.   For the second year, sixty percent (60%)
   3.   For the third year, forty-five percent (45%)
   4.   For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%)
   5.   For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%)
7-14-5   LIMITATIONS.
The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new construction
constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall
not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced
below the assessed value of the industrial or commercial real estate before the
start of the new construction added.
7-14-6   APPLICATIONS.
An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value added
for which an exemption is claimed.
   1.   The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the
property with the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which
the value added is first assessed for taxation.
   2.   Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the
Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of
the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the
Director of Revenue.
7-14-7   APPROVAL.
A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior approval
for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the City Council
resolves to consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public
hearing thereon. Thereafter, at least thirty days after such hearing the City
Council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new
construction if the new construction is in conformance with City zoning. Such
prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the
new construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate.
7-14-8   EXEMPTION REPEALED.
When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of the exemption granted
by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the City Council may
repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their
expiration.
7-14-9   DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED.
A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the
property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax
exemption authorized by law.
CHAPTER 15
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING
7-15-1   Purpose
7-15-2   Intent
7-15-3   Definitions
7-15-4   Urban Renewal Area
7-15-5   Provisions for Division of Taxes
7-15-6   Expiration Date
7-15-1   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the division of taxes levied on
the taxable property in the Cascade Urban Renewal Area and its additions, each
year by and for the benefit of the state, city, county school districts or
other taxing districts after the effective date of this ordinance in order to
create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys
advanced to or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be issued by the City
of Cascade to finance projects in such areas.
7-15-2   INTENT.
The intent of this Chapter is to use Tax Increment Financing as a financial
tool for assisting private enterprise and the construction of commercial and
industrial facilities as authorized by law, and to provide public improvements
and infrastructure to support development or site construction. A general scope
of the urban renewal activities is to eliminate and prevent the development and
spread of slums and blight and includes the designation and development of an
economic area to assist qualified commercial and industrial businesses through
the acquisition of property, construction of commercial and industrial
buildings, development or improvement of necessary access roads, acquisition of
machinery and equipment, provisions of public utilities, demolition and site
preparation, sale of land, and job training for development purposes.
7-15-3   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   1.   “City” shall mean the City of Cascade, Iowa.
   2.   “County” shall mean the Counties of Dubuque and Jones, Iowa.
   3.   “Urban Renewal Area” shall mean the geographical area designated the
City of Cascade as appropriated for the elimination of slum, blight, and/or
economic development.
   4.   “Tax Increment Financing” is the division of taxes levied on taxable
property in an urban renewal area for the benefit of the state, city, county,
school district, or other taxing districts.
7-15-4   URBAN RENEWAL AREA.
The Cascade Urban Renewal Area and its Amendments are hereafter identified and
set forth as follows:
Original Cascade Urban Renewal Area:
- Lots 1 & 2 of Beck Brothers Industrial Park Sub #2.
- Lot 1-1-1 NW NW, and buildings on leased land on Lot 1-1-1 NW NW; Lot 1 SW NW
all in Section 32, T87N, R1W.
- Lot 1-2-2-1-1 NW NW Section 32, T87N, R1W.
- Lot 1-2-1-1 NW NW Section 32, T87N, R1W.
- Lots 1-1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 2-1 Beck Brothers Industrial Park Sub #2.
- Lots 1 & 2 in Beck Brothers Industrial Sub #3.
- Lot 4-2-2-1-1 NW NW Section 32, T87N, R1W.
- Lot 1-1 NE NW and Lot 2 NW NW in Section 32, T87N, R1W.
- Lot 1-2-1 NE NW Section 32, T87N, R1W.
- All of Blocks 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 12, 13, 14, and 15 and the East ½ of Vacated
Dillon Street abutting Block 15, Second Union Addition, Cascade, Iowa.
- Kringle Industrial Park – Lot 1.
- Lot 1-2 SW NW Section 32, T87N, R1W.
- Freeman’s Addition Lots 35, 36, 37, 38, and 39; Lots 2-2-1-1 in Fangmann’s
Home Farm; Lot 2-1-1-1 NW Section 31, T87N, R1W.
- Lot 1 Fangmann Place.
- Lot 1 a/k/a Lot 2-1-1 NW NW Section 31 in Fangmann Northern Natural Gas Co.
Subdivision.
- Lots 1, 1-1-1-1-4, 1-1-1-6, 2, 2-1-1-1-4, 2-1-1-4, 2-1-1-6, 2-1-4, 2-1-6, 2-
4, 2-6, and 3 in Benham’s Subdivision.
- Lots 300, 301, 351, and 309 through 346 and vacated streets and alleys
abutting, all in Union Addition.
- Lots 1 & 2 in Martin Place #2.
- NE NE Section 31, T87N, R1W.
- Lots 1-1-1-1-1-1 SE NE, 2-1 SE NE, 2-1-1 SE NE, 2-1-1-1 SE NE, 2-1- 1-1-1 SE
NE, 2-1-1-1-1-1 SE NE all in Section 31, T87N, R1W.
- All of Blocks 3, 8, 9, 10, 11, 16, and 17 in Second Union Addition and
vacated streets and alley abutting.
1998 Amendment:
- Removal of Lots 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, and 8 of Block 10; Lots 3 & 4 of Block 17; and
that portion of vacated Langworthy Avenue abutting Lots 5 through 8 of Block
10, all in Union 2nd Addition Cascade, Iowa, Section 32, T87N, R1W, Dubuque
County, Iowa.
- Addition of Lot 1 (.95 acres), Lot 2 (1.23 acres), Lot 2-7 (2.51 acres), a
subdivision of Lot 1-7 of Kringle 2nd Industrial Park, Cascade, Iowa, in the
NW¼, Section 32, T87N, R1W – Mike Beck.
- Addition of Lot 1-1-7 (3.00 acres), Lot 2-1-7 (3.00 acres), Lot 3-1-7 (3.00
acres), and Lot 4-1-7 (3.00 acres) a subdivision of Lot 1-7 of Kringle 2nd
Industrial Park, Cascade, Iowa in the NW¼, Section 32, T87N, R1W – Cascade
Economic Development Corporation.
- Addition of the right-of-way of 1st Avenue East from its intersection with
Monroe Street SE to its intersection with Buchanan Street SW and the right-of-
way of Buchanan Street SW from its intersection with 1st Avenue East to Parcel
number 97-114.
- Addition of parcel numbers 97-114 in the Northerly 290 feet of Paul Dahlem
Place in Cascade, Iowa lying within the NE¼, Section 1, T86N, R1W Jones County,
Iowa – Sturm, Sturm, & Beecher, LC#3.
2003 Amendment:
- Lot D except W 36’, East Cascade – City of Cascade.
- Lot 1-2 & W 36’ Lot D, East Cascade – David Rhomberg.
- Lot 3-1, Frank Otting Place – City of Cascade.
- Lot 2, Frank Otting Place – City of Cascade.
- Lot 2-4, East Cascade – Reece Lopez.
- Lot 3-4, East Cascade – Marty Knapp.
- Lot 1-1-12, Block 1, West Cascade – Jeremie Miller.
- Lot 2-12, Block 1, West Cascade – Nick Casey.
- E 36’8” Lot 11, Block 1, West Cascade – Callahan/Kurt.
- E 20’8” of the W 23’2” Lot 11, Block 1, West Cascade – Joyce Donovan.
- E 1/3 Lot 10 & W 1’1” Lot 11, West Cascade – Ross & Stan Orr.
- Middle 1/3 Lot 10, Block 1, West Cascade – Carol Coyle.
- W 1/3 Lot 10, Block 1, West Cascade – Julie Ehrisman
- E 2/3 Lot 9, Block 1, West Cascade – Julie Ehrisman.
- Lot 2-8 & W1/3 Lot 9, Block 1, West Cascade – Julie Ehrisman.
- Lot 1-8, Block 1, West Cascade – Geoff Zoller.
- Lot 12, Block 2, West Cascade – Jason Rauen.
- Lots 10 & 11, Block 2, West Cascade – City of Cascade.
- Lot 2-9, Block 2, West Cascade – City of Cascade.
- Lot 1-9, Block 2, West Cascade – Ohnward Bank & Trust.
- Lot 2-8, Block 2, West Cascade – Ohnward Bank & Trust.
- Lot 1-8 & E 1/3 Lot 7, Block 2, West Cascade – Ohnward Bank & Trust.
- Lots 1A-B & 2-B, East Cascade – Bill Hosch.
- Lot 1-B, East Cascade – Ron Benke.
- Lots 1-A, 4-A, 3-B, & 5-B, East Cascade – Ivan Kurt.
- Lot 2-A & Lot 4-B, East Cascade – Cascade Senior Citizens.
- Lots 1-3-A & Lot 1-6, East Cascade – Deb Manternach.
- Lot 2-6 & Lot 2-3-A, East Cascade – Ross & Stan Orr.
- Lots 1-5, 3-5, & 3-6, East Cascade – Geoff Zoller.
- Lots 1-2-5, 4-6, & 5-6, East Cascade – John McGuire.
- Lot 2-2-5, East Cascade – City of Cascade.
- Lot 1-1 & Lot 2-1, Block 4, West Cascade – Tom Simon.
- Lot 2, Block 4, West Cascade – Jeremie Miller.
- E 1/3/ Lot 3, Block 4, West Cascade – Jerry Lampe.
- E 1/2 W2/3 Lot 3, Block 4, West Cascade – Herb Manternach.
- W 1/2 W 2/3 Lot 3, Block 4, West Cascade – Daren Manternach.
- Lot 1-4, Block 4, West Cascade – Darren Manternach.
- Lot 2-4 & Lot 3-4, Block 4, West Cascade – Mike McDonald.
- E 2/3 Lot 1, Block 3, West Cascade – City of Cascade.
- W 1/3 Lot 1 & E 1/3 Lot 2, Block 3, West Cascade – Beecher Mgt.
- E 16’ W 2/3 Lot 2, Block 3, West Cascade – Pat Moran.
- W 24’ W 2/3 Lot 2, Block 3, West Cascade – Tammy Kramer.
- E 1/3 Lot 3, Block 3, West Cascade – Tammy Kramer.
- W 2/3 Lot 3, Block 3, West Cascade – Pat Orr.
- Lot 3-4, Block 3, West Cascade – Pat Orr.
- Lots 2-4 & 1-4, Block 3, West Cascade – Clark Hagen.
- E 2/3 Lot 5, Block 3, West Cascade – Clark Hagen.
- W 1/3 Lot 5 and Lot 6, Block 3, West Cascade – Clark Hagen
- The right-of-way of 1st Avenue West from its intersection with Buchanan
Street to and including its intersection with Johnson Street.
- The right-of-way of Johnson Street NW from its intersection with 1st Avenue
West to the US Highway 151 intersection.
- Lot-1 of Breitbach Addition – Steve Sauser.
- Lot-2 of Breitbach Addition that portion West of the North Fork Maquoketa
River – Steve Sauser.
2004 Amendment:
- Lot A, Lot 1, Lot 2, Lot 3, Lot 4, and Lot 5, Koppes Industrial Park, City of
Cascade, Dubuque County, Iowa consisting of 84.40 acres and identified as
parcel numbers 19-32-176-007, 19-32-152-007, 19-32-152- 006,19-32-152-005, 19-
32-152-004, and 19-32-152-003 respectively and owed by Charles D. and Judith C.
Koppes.
- Lot 3 and Lot 2-4, Kringle Second Industrial Park, City of Cascade, Dubuque
County, Iowa consisting of 2.47 acres and identified as parcel numbers 19-32-
152-001 and 19-32-152-002 respectively and owned by William D. Jr. Kringle.
- The South ½ of the 1st Avenue East right-of-way from Nixon Street SE to east
quarter section line of Section 32, T87N, R1W.
2006 Amendment:
- The right-of-way of Tyler Street NE from its intersection with 1st Avenue
West, north to the intersection of US Highway 151.
- Lot 46, River Bend Subdivision, Parcel Number 18-36-227-003 – Callahan
Construction.
- Lot 47, River Bend Subdivision, Parcel Number 18-36-276-006 – City of Cascade
- Lot 48, River Bend Subdivision, Parcel Number 18-36-276-005 – City of
Cascade.
- Lot 50, River Bend Subdivision, Parcel Number 19-31-152-003 – City of Cascade
- The right-of-way of Pierce Street SW from 1st Avenue West to 2nd Avenue SW.
- Lot C of East Cascade, Parcel Number 19-31-360-001 – City of Cascade.
- Parcel east of Lot C and west of River, East Cascade, Parcel Number 19-31-
360-002 - City of Cascade.
- Lot 2-1, Mill Reserve, Parcel Number 19-31-360-003 - City of Cascade.
- Lots 2-1 & 2-2, Mill Reserve, Parcel Number 19-31-360-004 - City of Cascade.
- Lot 1-1-1-1, Mill Reserve, Parcel Number 19-31-352-004 - City of Cascade.
- The alley right-of-way between Pierce Street SW and Buchanan Street SW along
the north border of Lots 1-7, 8, 9, 10 & 11 East Cascade.
- Lot 1-7, East Cascade, Parcel Number 19-31-351-013 – Mary Schmidt.
- Lot 8, East Cascade, Parcel Number 19-31-351-012 – Bruce & Lisa Greenwood.
- Lot 9, East Cascade, Parcel Number 19-31-351-011 – Arlene Eisermann.
- Lots 10 & 11, East Cascade, Parcel Number 19-31-351-010 – Richard & Patricia
Moore.
- The right-of-way of 2nd Avenue SW from Pierce Street SW to Lincoln Street SW.
- The alley right-of-way between Buchanan Street SW and Lincoln Street SW along
the north boarder of Lot 1-5 and Lot 6, Block 4, West Cascade.
- Lot 6, Block 4, West Cascade, Parcel Number 18-36-486-010 – Geoffrey Zoller.
- Lot 2-5, Block 4, West Cascade, Parcel Number 18-36-486-009 – Amber Lopez.
- Lot 1-5, Block 4, West Cascade, parcel Number 18-36-486-008 – Merlin Koob.
- The right-of-way of Lincoln Street SW from 1st Avenue W to 2nd Avenue SW.
- The right-of-way of Lincoln Street SW from 1st Avenue W to 2nd Avenue SW.
- Lot 1-1 and 2-1, Block 5, West Cascade, Parcel Number 18-36-490-008
– Geoffrey Zoller.
- Lot 2, Block 5, West Cascade, parcel Number 18-36-490-007 – Geoffrey Zoller.
- East 1/3 of Lot 3, Block 5, West Cascade, Parcel Number 18-36-490- 006 –
Geoffrey Zoller.
- The right-of-way of Johnson Street SW from 1st Avenue W to 5th Avenue SW
(Dubuque/Jones County Line) in Dubuque County.
- The right-of-way of Johnson Street SW from 5th Avenue SW (Dubuque/Jones
County Line) 1,172-feet south.
- That part of the following described premises lying west of the west right-
of-way of State Highway No. 136: commencing at a point on the east line of
Section 1, Township 86, North, Range 2, west of the 5th PM, 8.89 chains south
of the northeast corner of the said Section, and running thence south 10.80
chains; thence west 4.29 chains; thence north 7.62 chains; thence east 11.29
chains to the place of beginning, except that portion contained in Lot-2 of the
Subdivision of Lot –2 of Alfred Smith Place; and Lot-17, Shaffer’s 1st Addition
to Cascade, Jones County, Iowa, except the portion thereof lying northerly of
the drainage ditch running through the north part of said Lot, said excepted
tract being approximately 75-feet north and south on the west line of said Lot
and approximately 40-feet on the east line of said Lot – City of Cascade.
- Lot 1, Oak Hill #2, Oak Hill, LLP.
- Lot 2, Oak Hill #2, Oak Hill, LLP.
- Lots 1 thru 5, Block 20, West Cascade, Parcel Number 18-36-431-001 – Bruce
Williams.
- The right-of-way of 4th Avenue NW between Lincoln Street NW and Johnson
Street NW.
- The alley right-of-way between Lincoln Street NW and Johnson Street NW along
the south border of Lots 1 thru 5, Block 20, West Cascade.
- Lot 1A, Frank Otting Place, 19-31-303-002 – City of Cascade.
- Lot 1B, Frank Otting Place, 19-31-303-003 – City of Cascade.
- Lot 1C, Frank Otting Place, 19-31-303-004 – City of Cascade.
- Lot 1-1, Frank Otting Place, 19-31-303-010 – City of Cascade.
- The alley right-of-way between Buchanan Street NW and Lincoln Street NW along
the south border of Lots 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 & 7, Block 1, West Cascade.
- Lots 1 & 2, Block 1, West Cascade, Parcel Number 18-36-481-007 – City of
Cascade.
- East ½ of Lot 3, Block 1, West Cascade Parcel Number 18-36-481-006 - City of
Cascade.
- West ½ of Lot 3, Block 1, West Cascade Parcel Number 18-36-481-005
- City of Cascade.
- East ½ of the East ½ of Lot 4, Block 1, West Cascade Parcel Number 18-36-481-
004 – City of Cascade.
- West ½ of the East ½ of Lot 4, Block 1, West Cascade Parcel Number 18-36-481-
003 - City of Cascade.
- West ½ of Lot 4, Block 1, West Cascade Parcel Number 18-36-481-002
– City of Cascade.
- Lots 5, 7, & 7, Block 1, West Cascade Parcel Number 18-36-481-001 - City of
Cascade.
- The right-of-way of 2nd Avenue NW from Lincoln Street NW, east to its dead
end.
- Lot 2-1-1-A, Railroad Addition, Parcel Number 19-31-326-001 – City of
Cascade.
- Lot 2-1-A, Railroad Addition, Parcel Number 19-31-326-002 - City of Cascade.
- The right-of-way of Pierce Street SW from 2nd Avenue SW to 5th Avenue SW.
- The right-of-way of 3rd Avenue SW from Pierce Street SW to Pierce Street SW.
- Lot 8, SW, Parcel Number 19-31-360-005 - City of Cascade.
- Lot 1-2-6, SW, Parcel Number 19-31-385-004 – Rich & Deb Kerper.
- Lot 1, Takes 1st Addition, Parcel Number 19-31-385-005 – Donald & Aileen
Takes.
- Lots 33 & 34, East Cascade, Parcel Number 19-31-359-001 - City of Cascade.
- Lots 35 & 36, East Cascade, Parcel Number 19-31-359-002 - City of Cascade.
- Vacated Alley North of Lot 36, East Cascade, Parcel Number 19-31- 359-003 -
City of Cascade.
- Vacated Fleet Street South of Lot 37, East Cascade, Parcel Number 19- 31-359-
004 - City of Cascade.
- Lots 37 & 48, East Cascade, Parcel Number 19-31-359-005 - City of Cascade.
- Lot 49, East Cascade, Parcel Number 19-31-359-006 - City of Cascade.
- Lot 1-G, East Cascade, Parcel Number 19-31-304-001 – Dubuque County.
- Part Reclaimed Slough Land, Parcel Number 18-36-426-018 - City of Cascade.
- Lot 2-3, East ½ of the SE, Parcel Number 18-36-426-017 - City of Cascade.
- Lot 2, Reclaimed Slough Land, Parcel Number 18-36-426-016 - City of Cascade.
- Lot 1-1-1, Leibold Place, parcel Number 18-36-426-015 – Western Dubuque
County Community School District.
- Lot 2-2, East ½ of the SE, Parcel Number 18-36-427-004 – Sauser Farms, Inc.
- Lot 1-1-4, East ½ of the SE, Parcel Number 18-36-426-011 – Western Dubuque
County Community School District.
- Lot 2-2, Leibold Place, Parcel Number 18-35-426-023 - City of Cascade.
- Lot 1-2, Leibold Place, Parcel Number 18-36-426-022 – Pete & Leo (Nick)
Sauser.
- Lot 2-1, Leibold Place, Parcel Number 18-36-426-013 – Mark & Barb Otting.
- Lot 2-1-1, Leibold Place, Parcel Number 18-36-426-012 – Dick & Linda Koppes.
- The alley right-of-way between Buchanan Street NW, east to its dead end along
north border of Lot 1C, Frank Otting Place.
- Lot 2-1, Frank Otting Place, 19-31-303-011 – City of Cascade.
- Lots 11 & 12, Block 15, West Cascade, 18-36-426-019 – City of Cascade.
- The right-of-way of Buchanan Street NW from 1st Avenue West, north to its
dead end.
- Lots 1 & 2, Block 11, West Cascade, Parcel Number 18-36-484-005 Patrick &
Betty Lyons.
- East 12’ 6” of Lot 2-1-2 SW and the West ½ of Lot 3-2 SW, Parcel Number 19-
31-333-002 – Richard Aitchison.
- The right-of-way of 1st Avenue East from Pat Street NE to its dead end at the
west border of Lot-D Oak Hill Subdivision.
- Lot A of 1st Avenue East, Parcel Number 19-32-176-008 – Cascade Economic
Development Corporation.
2009 Amendments
Deletion of the following parcels:
-Lot 47, River Bend Subdivision, City of Cascade, 18-36-276-006, South Storm
Water Detention Basin.
-Lot 48, River Bend Subdivision, City of Cascade, 18-36-276-005 Proposed
Playground Area.
-Lot 50 River Bend Subdivision, City of Cascade, 18-31-152-003, River Bend Lift
Station.
-Lots 1-5, Block 20, West Cascade, City of Cascade, 18-36-431-001, the Old
Cascade Country Foods Grocery Store.
-Lot 1A, Frank Otting Place, City of Cascade, 19-31-303-002, Old Herb Green
Ford Property.
-Lot 1B, Frank Otting Place, City of Cascade, 19-31-303-003, Old Herb Green
Ford Property.
-Lot 1-1 Frank Otting Place, City of Cascade, 13-31-303-010, Old Herb Green
Ford Property.
-Lot 10 & Lot 11, East Cascade, City of Cascade 19-31-351-010, Old Great Plains
Property.
-Lot 1-7, East Cascade, City of Cascade, 19-31-351-013, Mary Schmidt Property.
-Lot 2, Beck 2nd Industrial Park, City of Cascade, 19-32-151-015.
Creating a new district for the following parcel:
-Lot 2, Beck 2nd Industrial Park, City of Cascade, 19-32-151-015, Brothers
Market.
7-15-5   PROVISIONS FOR DIVISION OF TAXES.
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area each year by
and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, the City, the County and any school
district or other taxing district in which the Urban Renewal Area is located,
shall be divided as follows:
   1.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which
the tax is levied each year by or for each taxing district upon the total sum
of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area, as
shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the
first calendar year in which the City certifies to the County Auditor the
amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the special fund
referred to in paragraph 2, below, shall be allocated to and when collected be
paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for said
taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose
of allocation taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include
the territory in the Urban Renewal Area on the effective date of this
ordinance, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included
after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the
annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective
date of the ordinance which amends the plan for the Urban Renewal Area to
included the annexed area, shall be sued in determining the assessed valuation
of the taxable property in the annexed area.
   2.   That portion of taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay
the principal and interest on loans, moneys, advanced to or indebtedness,
whether funded, refunded assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the
authority of Section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to
finance or refinance in whole or in part, projects in the Urban Renewal Area,
except that the taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing
district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing
district without limitation by the provisions of this ordinance. Unless and
unit the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the Urban Renewal
Area exceeds the total assess value of the taxable property in such areas shown
by the assessment roll referred to in paragraph 1 of this section, all of the
taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area
shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or
for said taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When
such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon,
have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable
property in the Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
   3.   The portion of taxes mention on paragraph 2 of this section and the
special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged
by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances,
bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9(1) of the Code of Iowa, or
indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or refinance in whole or in part
projects in the Urban Renewal Area.
   4.   As used in this section the word “taxes” includes, but is not limited
to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property.
7-15-6   EXPERATION DATE.
For Urban Renewal Area shall be in effect until January 1, 2015, unless
repealed or amended prior to that date by the City Council.
CHAPTER 15A
SPECULATIVE SHELL BUILDINGS-TAX EXEMPTIONS
15A.01   Purpose
15A.02   Definitions
15A.03   Eligibility
15A.04   Application
15A.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a property tax exemption for shell
buildings constructed by community development organizations or for-profit
entities for speculative purpose in accordance with 427.1(27) of the Code of
Iowa.
15A.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this Chapter the following terms are defined as follows:
   1.   Community development organization means a City organization or a
multi-community group formed for one or more of the following purposes:
      A.   To promote, stimulate, develop and advance the business prosperity
and economic welfare of the community, area or region and its citizens.
      B.    To encourage and assist the location of new business and industry.
      C.   To rehabilitate and assist existing business and industry.
      D.   To stimulate and assist in the expansion of business activity.
For purposes of this definition, a community development organization must have
at least fifteen (15) members with representation from the government at the
level or levels corresponding to the community development organization’s area
of operation; a private sector lending institution; a community organization in
the area; a business in the area and private citizens in the community.
   2.   New Construction means new buildings or structures and includes new
buildings or structures which are constructed as additions to existing
buildings or structures. New construction also includes reconstruction or
renovation of an existing building or structure which constitutes complete
replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing
building or structure, if the reconstruction or renovation of the existing
building or structure is required due to economic obsolescence, if the
reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the
manufacturing or processing of products and the reconstruction or renovation is
required in order to competitively manufacture or process products or for
community development organizations or for-profit entities to market a building
or structure as a speculative shell building, which determination must receive
prior approval by city council.
   3.   Speculative shell building means a building or structure owned and
constructed or reconstructed by a community development organization or a for-
profit entity without a tenant or buyer for the purpose of attracting an
employer or user which will complete the building to the employer’s or user’s
specification for manufacturing, processing or warehousing the employer’s or
user’s product line.
15A.03   ELIGIBILITY.
The new construction of shell buildings or the portion of the value added to
the building being reconstructed or renovated in order to become speculative
shell building by the community development organization or for-profit entity
is eligible for property tax exemption commencing the assessment year in which
the building is first assessed or in which the reconstruction or renovation
first adds value. The exemption shall continue until the property is leased or
sold or until terminated by ordinance of the council. Eligibility for an
exemption as a speculative shell building shall be determined as of February 1
of the assessment year. However, an exception shall not be granted a
speculative shell building of a for-profit entity if the building is used by
the for-profit entity or a subsidiary or majority owners thereof for other than
as a speculative shell building. If the shell building or any portion of the
shell building is leased or sold, the portion of the shell building which is
leased or sold shall not be entitled to an exemption under this section for
subsequent years.
15A.04   APPLICATION.
An application shall be filed with the county assessor with a copy to the city
clerk for each project for which an exemption is claimed in accordance with
Section 427B.4 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 16
PARK REGULATIONS
7-16-1   Purpose
7-16-2   Motor Vehicles
7-16-3   Camping Prohibited
7-16-4   Animals
7-16-5   Parks Closed
7-16-6   Keg Beer Prohibited
7-16-7   Littering Prohibited
7-16-8   Glass Bottles Prohibited
7-16-9   Fires Prohibited
7-16-1   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of use of
municipal parks in the City.
7-16-2   MOTOR VEHICLES.
The maximum speed limit for all motor vehicles is ten (10) miles per hour in
all parks in the City. No motorized vehicles are permitted to drive or park on
the grass.
7-16-3   CAMPING PROHIBITED.
Camping in municipal parks is prohibited at all times.
7-16-4   ANIMALS.
Horses are prohibited at all times. Household pets are to be kept on leashes at
all times while in the park and shall not be permitted to bother or interfere
with the use and enjoyment of the parks by other persons.
7-16-5   PARKS CLOSED.
No person shall enter or remain within any park between the hours of eleven
o’clock (11:00) p.m. and daybreak.
7-16-6   KEG BEER PROHIBITED.
Keg beer is prohibited at all times.
7-16-7   LITTERING PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any garbage, trash
or litter of any matter in the parks except in containers or receptacles
specifically marked for such garbage, trash or litter.
7-16-8   GLASS BOTTLES PROHIBITED.
Glass beverage containers are prohibited.
7-16-9    FIRES AND CAMP FIRES PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly cause a fire to start in any
container or trash receptacle specifically used for garbage, trash, or litter
disposal. No person shall bring into the park any contained fire pit for the
use of burning or causing to burn any materials for use as a camp fire. It is
unlawful for any person to create a fire pit in the park for use as a camp fire
or burning any material. Park grills shall only be utilized for preparing to
cook food for consumption and only by using charcoal and shall not be used to
burn or cause to be burned any materials for use as a camp fire.
CHAPTER 17
YARD AND GARAGE SALES
7-17-1   Yard and garage sales
7-17-1 YARD AND GARAGE SALES.
   a.   DEFINITIONS: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
      (1)   Garage or Yard Sale: Means and includes all general sales open to
the public, conducted from or on a residential premises in any residential
zone, for the purpose of disposing of personal property, including, but not
limited to, all sales entitled garage, lawn, yard, attic, porch, room, back
yard, patio, rummage, or moving sale. This definition shall not include a
situation where more than five (5) specific items are held out for sale and may
include multi-family garage sales on one residential site.
      (2)   Personal Property: Property which is owned, utilized, and
maintained by an individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in
the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include
merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
   b.   HOURS OF OPERATION: Garage sales shall be limited in time to no more
than the daylight hours of three (3) consecutive days. Following display of
personal property for three consecutive days, said personal property shall no
longer be displayed and shall be stored in compliance with the Code of
Ordinances, outside the public view. A failure to observe the requirements of
this section, or any other portion of this Chapter, shall be a municipal
infraction. It shall further be considered a nuisance under Chapter 2, Section
3-2-1 of the Code of Ordinances.
   c.   DISPLAY OF SALE PROPERTY: Personal property offered for sale may be
displayed in a residential garage, driveway, carport, and a rear yard and/or
front yard, but only in such privately-owned areas. No personal property
offered for sale at a garage sale shall be displayed in any public right-of-
way. Only personal property shall be sold.
   d.   NUMBER OF GARAGE SALES: No residence shall be the site of more than
three (3) garage sales per calendar year. The owner and occupant of the
residences whereon a joint garage sale is located shall be deemed to jointly
control the property for purposes of this section and shall be responsible for
complying with this section.
   e.   It shall further be prohibited for any person to conduct sale of items
regulated by this Chapter by relocating merchandise from residential zoning to
property of any other zoning classification for the purpose of avoiding
application of this Chapter, unless said property to which the items are
transported is zoned for commercial sale of said items, and said items are sold
inside a licensed commercial business establishment under an agreement with the
premises owner for consignment sale of said items.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 9-25-23)
