CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF THE
CITY OF CLIVE, IOWA
Current through Ord. No. 1173, passed 12-11-25
Adopted April 25, 2024, by Ordinance No. 1145
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
The ordinances listed below have been passed, but they have not been
incorporated into the code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
SUPPLEMENT RECORD
SUPPLEMENT ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No.  Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No. Date Subject
SUPPLEMENT ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No.  Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No. Date     Subject
May-24     8-1B-2                  1142     5-2-24   Water Rates
           8-2D-2                  1143     5-2-24   Sewer Service Rates
           8-4-2(5);               1144     5-2-24   Stormwater Rates
           8-4A-3
                                   1145     4-25-24  Adopting Ordinance
           5-7A-1;
           5-7A-2;                                   Dangerous Dogs and Other
Jun-24     5-7A-5;                 1146     6-27-24  Dangerous Animals
           5-7A-6;
           5-7A-7
Oct-24     1-10-6                  1147     9-12-24  Electronic Meetings
           1-9A-3                  1148     9-12-24  Publication of Minutes
           5-6-18                  1149     9-12-24  Adult Establishment
                                                     Nuisances
           5-2-13                  1150     9-12-24  Fire Officials Authority
                                                     ot Cite Violations
                                                     Repealing the 2003 (LADCO)
           3-4                     1151     9-26-24  Addition to the Clive
                                                     Urban Renewal Area
           3-1-5(4)                1152     9-26-24  Operating Budget
                                                     Preparation
           1-10-2                  1153     9-26-24  Bond Requirements
           6-1-2;                  1154     9-26-24  Pedestrians' Right-of-Way
           6-5-7
Feb-25     7-2-2                   1155     1-9-25   Sidewalk Liability
           11-2-1(19)(EEE-GGG);                      Permitted Uses in
           11-3-6(4)(E);           1156     1-9-25   Commercial Zones
           11-7-4
           5-4D-2(3)               1157     2-6-25   Open Container Regulations
May-25     1-9D-2                  1158              Failed
           8-1B-2                  1159     5-1-25   Water Rates
                                                     Sanitary Sewer Service
           8-2D-2(1)               1160     5-1-25   Rates and Connection
                                                     Charges
           8-4A-3;
           8-4A-5;                 1161     5-1-25   Stormwater Rates
           8-4A-6
           1-9D-2                  1162     4-10-25  City Manager Appointment
                                                     and Term
           5-4B-2(3);
Jun-25     10-8-4(24)(A)(1);       1163     6-26-25  Use of Consumer Fireworks
           10-8-12(1)
           11-2-1(3)(Z-AA);
           11-2-1(4)(P-Q);
Jul-25     11-2-1(12)(L);          1164     7-24-25  Accessory Dwelling Units
           11-2-1(20)(M);
           11-4-21;
           11-6-11(1)
Oct-25     11-3-7                  1165     9-11-25  Variances
           11-4-7                  1166     10-9-25  Commercial Entertainment
                                                     Uses
           4-1-5(8)                1167     10-9-25  Liquor Licenses and Wine
                                                     and Beer Permits
           4-2                     1168     10-9-25  Cigarette and Tobacco
                                                     Sales
           3-1-5(4)(D)(1);         1169     10-9-25  Public Hearing
           3-1-5(6)                                  Requirements
           5-7-21                  1170     10-9-25  False Representation of
                                                     Service Animal
                                                     September 2025 Addition to
           3-4                     1171     10-9-25  the Clive Urban Renewal
                                                     Area
Dec-25     10-12                   1172     11-13-25 Rental Housing Code
           11-2-1(4)(Q);                             Boarding and Lodging
           11-6-3;                 1173     12-11-25 Houses
           11-13-8
 
Prepared By:   Local Government Professional Services, Inc.
DBA Iowa Codification
P. O. Box 244
114 E 5th Street
Storm Lake, Iowa 50588
(641) 355-4072
www.sc-ic.com
TITLE 1 - ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
CLIVE CITY CODE
 
1-1-1 Title      1-1-4 City Powers
1-1-2 Acceptance 1-1-5 Code Alterations
1-1-3 Amendments
 
1-1-1 TITLE.
   Upon the adoption by the Council, this Code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the Official City Code of Clive. This Code Of
Ordinances shall be known and cited as the Clive City Code and is hereby
published by authority of the Council and shall be supplemented to incorporate
the most recent legislation of the City as provided in Section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this Code by title in any legal documents.
1-1-2 ACCEPTANCE.
   The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of
this State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect,
except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section 1-2-1 of this title.
1-1-3 AMENDMENTS.
   Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter, and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the City
Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1-1-4 CITY POWERS.
   The City may, except as expressly limited by the State constitution, and if
not inconsistent with the laws of the State general assembly, exercise any
power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the
rights, privileges, and property of the City and of its residents, and preserve
and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its
residents, and each and every provision of this Code shall be deemed to be in
the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance of the foregoing
functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1-1-5 CODE ALTERATIONS.
   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of this Code of Ordinances, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented
thereby.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.5)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE; INDEMNITY
 
1-2-1 Repeal of General Ordinances              1-2-4 Severability Clause
1-2-2 Public Ways and Public Utility Ordinances 1-2-5 Indemnity
1-2-3 Court Proceedings                         1-2-6 Personal Injuries
 
1-2-1 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this Code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this Code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; ordinances
granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and
ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants;
salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys,
or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the City; and all special ordinances.
1-2-2 PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public
ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service, or rates of public utilities
shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
1-2-3 COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   1.   Prior Acts. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising, before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   2.   Extend to all Repeals. This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   3.   Current Pending Actions. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the City herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation,
or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this Code.
1-2-4 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this Code or any part thereof or any portion adopted by reference
therein, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or
ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or
any part thereof or any portion adopted by reference therein. The Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid, or
ineffective.
1-2-5 INDEMNITY.
   The applicant for any permit or license under this Code, by making such
application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or death of any person
or persons whomsoever, and all loss of or damage to property whatsoever,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or
related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the issuance of the permit or
license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant,
or the agents, employees, or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply
with any of the provisions of this Code or the terms and conditions of such
permit or license; and such applicant, by making such application, forever
agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents, and employees, and
agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits, or
liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury, or death, including all
costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing. The provisions
of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or license issued
under this Code or any other ordinance of the City whether expressly recited
therein or not.
1-2-6 PERSONAL INJURIES.
   When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to
have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify, in writing, any person
by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the
pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the
court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from
which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is
liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person
to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any
action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the
defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City
to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage
or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified to
recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by
the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATIONS
 
1-3-1 Rules of Construction 1-3-3 Catchlines
1-3-2 Definitions, General
 
1-3-1 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this Code, the following rules shall be observed,
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council or repugnant to the context of the provisions:
   1.   Verb Tense And Plurals: Words used in the present tense include the
future, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes
the singular.
   2.   May: The word “may” confers a power.
   3.   Must: The word “must” states a requirement.
   4.   Shall: The word “shall” imposes a duty.
   5.   Gender: The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
   6.   Interpretation: All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions
contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true
intent and meaning of the Council may be fully carried out.
   7.   Extension of Authority: Whenever an officer or employee is required or
authorized to do an act by a provision of this Code, the provision shall be
construed as authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate, or a
duly authorized designee of said officer or employee.
   8.   Ordinance: The word “ordinance” contained in the ordinances of the City
has been changed in the content of this Code to “title,” “chapter,” “section,”
or “subsection” or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the City’s ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
1-3-2 DEFINITIONS, GENERAL.
   Where words and phrases used in this Code are defined by State law, such
definitions apply to their use in this Code and are adopted by reference. Those
definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and
other words and phrases used herein, have the following meanings, unless
specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this Code:
   1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.
   2.   “City” means the city of Clive, Iowa.
   3.   “Clerk” means the city clerk of Clive, Iowa.
   4.   “Code” means the code of the City of Clive, Iowa.
   5.   “Council” means the city council of Clive, Iowa.
   6.   “County” means Polk County and Dallas County, Iowa.
   7.   “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution, or motion.
   8.   “Month” means a calendar month.
   9.   “Oath” means an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “affirm” and
“affirmed” are equivalent to the words “swear” and “sworn.”
   10.   “Occupant or tenant” means applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   11.   “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Clive, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance adopting this
Code, and those enacted hereafter.
   12.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic, or foreign
corporation, company, association, or joint stock association, trust, or other
legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar
representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
   13.   “Preceding and following” means next before and next after,
respectively.
   14.   “Property” means includes real property, and tangible and intangible
personal property unless clearly indicated otherwise.
   15.   “Property owner” means a person owning private property in the City as
shown by the County Auditor’s plats of the City.
   16.   “Public place” means but is not restricted to, any City owned open
place, such as parks and squares.
   17.   “Public property” means any and all property owned by the City or held
in the name of the City by any of the departments, commissions, or agencies
within the City government.
   18.   “Public way” means any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
   19.   “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge
of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
   20.   “State” means the State of Iowa.
   21.   “Statutes or laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
   22.   “Street or highway” means the entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
   23.   “Writing and written” means printing, typing, lithographing, or other
mode of representing words and letters.
   24.   “Year” means a calendar year.
1-3-3 CATCHLINES.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, titles, headings
(chapter, section, and subsection), cross references, and State law references,
unless set out in the body of the section itself, contained in this Code, do
not constitute any part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate,
explain, supplement, or clarify the contents of a section.
CHAPTER 4 
GENERAL PENALTY
 
1-4-1 Standard Penalty     1-4-3 Liability of Officers
1-4-2 Election of Remedies
 
1-4-1 STANDARD PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code of Ordinances for
violation of any particular provision, section, or chapter, any person failing
to perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise violating
any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted
herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of at least
$105.00 but not to exceed $855.00. The court may order imprisonment not to
exceed 30 days in lieu of a fine or in addition to a fine. † 1
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])
 
Notes
1 † EDITOR’S NOTE: For civil penalty for violations of this Code of Ordinances, see
  Chapter 4A.
1-4-2 ELECTION OF REMEDIES.
   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense, provided the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery.
1-4-3 LIABILITY OF OFFICERS.
   No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for failure to perform such duty unless the intention of
the Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty.
CHAPTER 4A
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
 
1-4A-1 Definition                             1-4A-3 Civil Citations
1-4A-2 Violations, Penalties, and Alternative 1-4A-4 Compliance with State Law
Relief
 
1-4A-1 DEFINITION.
   For use in this chapter, the term “repeat offense” means a recurring
violation of the same section of this Code.
1-4A-2 VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES, AND ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.
   1.   Municipal Infraction. A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any
ordinance or code herein adopted by reference or the omission or failure to
perform any act or duty required by the same, with the exception of those
provisions specifically provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated
misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters
687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by
civil penalty as provided herein. † 2
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
   2.   Environmental Violation. A municipal infraction that is a violation of
Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa, or of a standard established by the City in
consultation with the Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be
classified as an environmental violation. However, the provisions of this
section shall not be applicable until the City has offered to participate in
informal negotiations regarding the violation or to the following specific
violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
      A.   A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard
or requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
      B.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the
handling, drying, or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the
industrial production or manufacturing of grain products.
      C.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the
handling, drying, or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial
production or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to
January 15.
   3.   Schedule of Civil Penalties. Unless another civil penalty is provided
elsewhere in this Code for a specific violation, a municipal infraction is a
civil offense punishable as provided in the following schedule of civil
penalties:
      A.   Schedule of maximum civil penalties:
         First offense         $750.00
         Subsequent offenses   $1,000.00
   4.   Each Day a Separate Offense. Each day that a municipal infraction
occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
   5.   Alternative Relief. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this
chapter does not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the
court in the same action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not
limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive relief.
   6.   Alternative Penalties. This chapter does not preclude a peace officer
from issuing a criminal citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or
regulation if criminal penalties are also provided for the violation. Nor does
it preclude or limit the authority of the City to enforce the provisions of
this Code of Ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[12])
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: For criminal penalty for violations of this Code of
2 Ordinances, see Section
  1-4-1.
1-4A-3 CIVIL CITATIONS.
   1.   Authority to Issue. Any Police Officer, the Fire Chief, the Building
and Zoning Inspector, the Community Development Director, the Public Works
Director or the WRA, as authorized pursuant to Title 8 Chapters 3A and 3B of
this Code, may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal
infraction.
   2.   Serving Citation. The citation may be served by personal service or by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
   3.   Filing of Citation. A copy of the citation shall be filed with the
Clerk of the District Court.
   4.   Information Contained in Citation. The citation shall serve as
notification that a municipal infraction has been committed and shall contain
the following information:
      A.   The name and address of the violator.
      B.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer
issuing the citation.
      C.   The location and time of the infraction.
      D.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief
sought, or both.
      E.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
      F.   The time and place of court appearance.
      G.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
      H.   The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
1-4A-4 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.
   All citations issued pursuant to this chapter shall be prosecuted in
accordance with section 364.22 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 5
CITY CHARTER AND ELECTIONS
 
1-5-1 City Charter 1-5-2 City Elections
 
1-5-1 CITY CHARTER.
   1.   Title. This section may be cited as the Charter of the City of Clive,
Iowa.† 3  
   2.   Form of Government. The form of government of the City is the Mayor-
Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
   3.   Powers and Duties. The Council and Mayor and other City officers have
such powers and shall perform such duties as are authorized or required by
State law and by the ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the
City.
   4.   Number and Term of Council. The Council consists of five Council
members elected at large for overlapping terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
   5.   Term of Mayor. The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
   6.   Copies on File. The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on
file with the official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and
shall keep copies of the charter available at the Clerk’s office for public
inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 179 adopting a charter for the City was passed and
3 approved by the Council on June 19, 1975, and published by posting on June 23,
  1975.
1-5-2 CITY ELECTIONS.
   1.   Nominating Method. All candidates for elective municipal offices shall
be nominated under the provisions of Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
   2.   Candidacy. An eligible elector of the City may become a candidate for
an elective City office by filing with the City Clerk a valid petition
requesting that the elector’s name be placed on the ballot for that office. The
petition must be signed by eligible electors equal in number to at least two
percent of those who voted to fill the same office at the last regular City
election, but not less than 10 persons.
   3.   Runoff Election in Lieu of Primary. A runoff election shall be held in
lieu of a primary election for the choosing of persons for elective offices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.6)
   4.   Runoff Election Procedure. A runoff election shall be held only for
positions unfilled because of failure of a sufficient number of candidates to
receive a majority vote in the regular City election.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
   5.   Qualification. Candidates who do not receive a majority of the votes
cast for an office, but who receive the highest number of votes cast for that
office in the regular City election, to the extent of twice the number of
unfilled positions, are candidates in the runoff elections.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
   6.   Time Held. Runoff elections shall be held four weeks after the date of
the regular City election and shall be conducted in the same manner as regular
City elections.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
   7.   Candidates Elected. Candidates in the runoff election who receive the
highest number of votes cast for each office on the ballot are elected to the
extent necessary to fill the positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
CHAPTER 6
MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES AND PRECINCTS
 
1-6-1 Corporate Limits 1-6-2 Election Precincts
 
1-6-1 CORPORATE LIMITS.
   The corporate limits map and specific description shall be and remain on
file in the office of the City Clerk.
1-6-2 ELECTION PRECINCTS.
   1.   Precinct 1: Election Precinct 1 is that part of the City lying east of
the centerline of N.W. 86th Street.
   2.   Precinct 2: Election Precinct 2 is that part of the City lying west of
the centerline of N.W. 86th Street and east of the centerline of N.W. 100th
Street.
   3.   Precinct 3: Election Precinct 3 is that part of the City lying west of
the centerline of N.W. 100th Street and east of the centerline of N.W. 128th
Street.
   4.   Precinct 4: Election Precinct 4 is that part of the City lying west of
the centerline of N.W. 128th Street and east of the centerline of N.W. 142nd
Street.
   5.   Precinct 5: Election Precinct 5 is that part of the City lying west of
the centerline of N.W. 142nd Street and east of the centerline of N.W. 156th
Street.
   6.   Precinct 6: Election Precinct 6 is that part of the City lying west of
the centerline of N.W. 156th Street and south of the centerline of Douglas
Parkway.
   7.   Precinct 7: Election Precinct 7 is that part of the City lying east of
the centerline of Alices Road and north of the centerline of Douglas Parkway.
   8.   Precinct 8:  Election Precinct 8 is that part of the City lying west of
the centerline of Alices Road.
CHAPTER 7
MAYOR
 
1-7-1 Term of Office    1-7-4 Compensation
1-7-2 Powers and Duties 1-7-5 Voting
1-7-3 Appointments      1-7-6 Mayor Pro Tem
 
1-7-1 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
1-7-2 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
   1.   Chief Executive Officer. Act as the chief executive officer of the City
and presiding officer of the Council, supervise all City officers and
departments, except for supervisory duties delegated by ordinance to the City
Manager, and have the power to examine all functions of the municipal
departments, their records and to call for special reports from department
heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
   2.   Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the police
and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of
emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all
the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
   3.   Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor
deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
   4.   Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto, or take no action on an ordinance, amendment,
or resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an ordinance,
amendment, or resolution within 14 days after passage. The Mayor shall explain
the reasons for the veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the
veto.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 380.5 and 380.6[2])
   5.   Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as
required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the
municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
   6.   Negotiations. May represent the City in all negotiations properly
entered into in accordance with law or ordinance.
   7.   Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf
of the City.
   8.   Professional Services. Upon order of the Council, secure for the City
such specialized and professional services not already available to the City.
In executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in accordance with
the Code and the laws of the State.
   9.   Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any
absentee officer be carried on during such absence.
1-7-3 APPOINTMENTS.
   1.   The Mayor shall appoint the following officials:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
      A.   Mayor Pro Tem.
   2.   The Mayor shall recommend the appointment of the following officials
for Council approval:
      A.   Parks, Recreation, and Public Art Board.
      B.   Library Board of Trustees.
      C.   Civil Service Commission.
      D.   Building Codes Appeal Board.
      E.   Board of Adjustment.
      F.   Planning and Zoning Commission.
1-7-4 COMPENSATION.
   Beginning on January 1, 2022, the salary of the Mayor shall be $867.44 per
month, payable monthly. Each calendar year the Mayor’s compensation amount is
adjusted by no less than one percent and no greater than three percent equal to
the increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI -U, Midwest, all items NSA) for
the month of October for the 12 months prior, rounded to the closest $1.00.
1-7-5 VOTING.
   The Mayor is not a member of the Council and may not vote as a member of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
1-7-6 MAYOR PRO TEM.
   1.   Vice President of Council. The Mayor Pro Tem is vice president of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
   2.   Powers and Duties. Except for the limitations otherwise provided
herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of
absence or inability of the Mayor to perform such duties. In the exercise of
the duties of the office, the Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to employ, or
discharge from employment, officers, or employees that the Mayor has the power
to appoint, employ, or discharge without the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
   3.   Voting Rights. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a
member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
   4.   Compensation. If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor
during the Mayor’s absence or disability for a continuous period of 15 days or
more, the Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as
determined by the Council, based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the
Mayor’s duties and upon the compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 8
CITY COUNCIL
 
1-8-1 Number and Term of Council Members 1-8-4 Council Meetings
1-8-2 Powers and Duties                  1-8-5 Appointments
1-8-3 Exercise of Power                  1-8-6 Compensation
 
1-8-1 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   The Council consists of five Council members elected at large for
overlapping terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 372.4 and 376.2)
1-8-2 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to, the
following:
   1.   General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
   2.   Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all
funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls, and claims, and order
payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street
improvements, sidewalks, sewers, and other work, improvement or repairs which
may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 364.2[1], 384.16, and 384.38[1])
   3.   Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the
construction of any improvements, bridges, or buildings except as allowed under
Section 1-9D-4(12) of this Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
   4.   Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all
contracts except as allowed under Section 1-9D-4(H) of this Code. No contract
shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless adopted by resolution of the
Council except as allowed under Section 1-9D-4(6) of this Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.100)
   5.   Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number,
duties, term of office and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise
provided for by State law or this Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   6.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council
shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other
elected City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not
become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the
Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any
elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of a
regular City election. A change in the compensation of Council members becomes
effective for all Council members at the beginning of the term of the Council
members elected at the election next following the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
1-8-3 EXERCISE OF POWER.
   The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
   1.   Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution
requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a
motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must
be passed to spend public funds in excess of $100,000.00 on a public
improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their
completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure
that fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered
defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
   2.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within 30 days after the Mayor’s veto, the
Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all
of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
   3.   Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become
effective in one of the following ways:
      A.   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective when
the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
      B.   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon
signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
      C.   A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
      D.   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment, or resolution and the
Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes
effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a
law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published or posted,
unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
      E.   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment, or
resolution, a resolution becomes effective 14 days after the date of passage,
and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of
the ordinance is published or posted, but not sooner than 14 days after the
date of passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the
ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
   4.   Reference to Council Members. “All of the members of the Council”
refers to all of the seats of the Council, including a vacant seat and a seat
where the member is absent, but does not include a seat where the Council
member declines to vote by reason of a conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
1-8-4 COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions
regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section
1-10-6 of this Code. Additional particulars relating to council meetings are
the following:
   1.   Regular Meetings. The regular meetings of the Council shall be on the
second and fourth Thursdays of each month. All meetings shall be held at 6:00
p.m. in the Council chambers at City Hall. If any such day falls on a legal
holiday, the meetings may be rescheduled to a mutually convenient time or
canceled, as determined by the Council.
   2.   Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor
or upon the written request of a majority of the members of the Council
submitted to the Clerk. Notice of a special meeting shall specify the date,
time, place, and subject of the meeting and such notice shall be given
personally or left at the usual place of residence of each member of the
Council. A record of the service of notice shall be maintained by the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
   3.   Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
   4.   Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and
maintain records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
   5.   Compelling Attendance. Any three members of the Council can compel the
attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or duly called
meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
1-8-5 APPOINTMENTS.
   The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their
powers, duties, compensation, and term of office:
   1.   City Manager.
   2.   City Clerk.
   3.   City Attorney.
1-8-6 COMPENSATION.
   Beginning on January 1, 2022, the salary of each Council member shall be
$409.00 per month, payable monthly. Each calendar year this compensation amount
is adjusted by no less than one percent and no greater than three percent equal
to the increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI -U, Midwest, all items NSA)
for the month of October for the 12 months prior, rounded to the closest $1.00.
CHAPTER 9A
CITY CLERK
1-9A-1 Appointment and Compensation 1-9A-9 Attendance at Meetings
1-9A-2 Powers and Duties, General   1-9A-10 Licenses and Permits
1-9A-3 Publication of Minutes       1-9A-11 Notification of Appointments
1-9A-4 Recording Measures           1-9A-12 Elections
1-9A-5 Publication                  1-9A-13 City Seal
1-9A-6 Authentication               1-9A-14 Council Agenda
1-9A-7 Certification                1-9A-15 Assist City Manager
1-9A-8 Records
 
1-9A-1 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
   The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Clerk to serve at the
discretion of the City Manager. The Clerk shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
1-9A-2 POWERS AND DUTIES, GENERAL.
   The Clerk, or, in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Director of
Administrative Services, has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter,
this Code, and the law.
1-9A-3 PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.
   Within 15 days following a regular or special meeting of the Council, the
Clerk shall cause the minutes of the proceedings of the Council, including the
total expenditure from each City fund, to be delivered to a newspaper of
general circulation in the City for publication. The publication shall include
a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall show the
gross amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(6))
(Section 1-9A-3 – Ord. 1148 – Oct. 24 Supp.)
1-9A-4 RECORDING MEASURES.
   The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council and
record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the
Mayor signed, vetoed, or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure
was repassed after the Mayor’s veto. (2000 Code § 18.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 and 2])
1-9A-5 PUBLICATION.
   The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments,
proceedings, and official notices requiring publication as follows:
   1.   Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is
required by this Code or law, the notice must be published at least once, not
less than four nor more than 20 days before the date of the election, hearing,
or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1])
   2.   Manner of Publication. A publication required by this code or laws must
be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general circulation
in the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2])
1-9A-6 AUTHENTICATION.
   The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s
signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
1-9A-7 CERTIFICATION.
   The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district,
building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or
limits to the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
1-9A-8 RECORDS.
   The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:
   1.   Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances
and codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
   2.   Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all
writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise
specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   3.   Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents, or accurate
reproductions, for at least five years, except that ordinances, resolutions,
Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating
to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption or replacement of public
bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least 11 years following the final
maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council
proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to real
property transactions shall be maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 and 5])
   4.   Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of
any record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be
necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a
copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council
resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix
the seal of the City to those public documents or instruments which by
ordinance and code are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 372.13[4 and 5] and 380.7[5])
   5.   Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and
petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall
endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such
communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1-9A-9 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
   At the direction of the Director of Administrative Services, the Clerk shall
attend meetings of Council, committees, boards, and commissions. The Clerk
shall record and preserve a correct record of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1-9A-10 LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this
Code, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which shall show date of
issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number, name of person to
whom issued, term of license or permit, and purpose for which issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1-9A-11 NOTIFICATION OF APPOINTMENTS.
   The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to
offices in the City government of their position and the time at which they
shall assume the duties of their office. The Clerk shall also advise the Mayor
or Council at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the term of any
appointment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1-9A-12 ELECTIONS.
   The Clerk shall perform the following duties relating to elections and
nominations:
   1.   Certify to the County Commissioner of Elections the type of nomination
process to be used by the City no later than 90 days before the date of the
regular City election.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.6)
   2.   Accept the nomination petition of a candidate for a City office for
filing if on its face it appears to have the requisite number of signatures and
is timely filed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
   3.   Designate other employees or officials of the City who are ordinarily
available to accept nomination papers if the Clerk is not readily available
during normal working hours.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
   4.   Note upon each petition and affidavit accepted for filing the date and
time that the petition was filed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
   5.   Deliver all nomination petitions, together with the text of any public
measure being submitted by the Council to the electorate, to the County
Commissioner of Elections not later than 5:00 p.m. on the day following the
last day on which nomination petitions can be filed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
1-9A-13 CITY SEAL.
   The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the
Clerk to all transcripts, orders, and certificates which it may be necessary or
proper to authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the center of
which are the words “CLIVE, IOWA” and around the margin the words “CITY SEAL.”
1-9A-14 COUNCIL AGENDA.
   The Clerk shall prepare and maintain a Council agenda, subject to
modification by the Mayor, Council, or the City Manager, and forward copies to
such officials or persons as directed.
1-9A-15 ASSIST CITY MANAGER.
   The Clerk shall provide information and staff support to the City Manager in
related areas as requested by the City Manager.
CHAPTER 9B
CITY TREASURER
 
1-9B-1 Appointment  1-9B-3 Duties of Treasurer
1-9B-2 Compensation 1-9B-4 Boards, Commissions, and Agencies
 
1-9B-1 APPOINTMENT.
   The Director of Administrative Services is the Treasurer and performs all
functions required of the position of Treasurer.
1-9B-2 COMPENSATION.
   The Director of Administrative Services receives no additional compensation
for performing the duties of the Treasurer.
1-9B-3 DUTIES OF TREASURER.
   The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of
the City in the manner provided by law, and Council direction.
   2.   Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate.
   3.   Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all monies or securities
received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the date, from
whom, and for what purpose received.
   4.   Record Obligations. Keep an accurate account of all cash disbursed,
purchase and contract commitments, and property disposed of or sold by the
City, specifying the date and to whom paid.
   5.   Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all monies received by
the Treasurer from special assessments.
   6.   Deposit Funds. Upon receipt of monies to be held in the Treasurer’s
custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in depositories selected by
the Council.
   7.   Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the Treasurer’s
books and certify monthly to the Council, City Manager, and respective Boards
and Commissions the balance of cash and investments of each fund and amounts
received and disbursed.
   8.   Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all
payments of interest and principal.
   9.   Water Department. Be in charge of and supervise the water department
books of account, records, billings, and receipts.
   10.   Other Duties. Perform such other duties as specified by the Council by
resolution or ordinance or as requested by the City Manager.
1-9B-4 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND AGENCIES.
   The City Treasurer is the Treasurer and custodian of all funds received or
held in custody for any board, commission, or agency existing in the City and
created by the Council, and pays out all monies under control of the respective
boards, commissions, or agencies on orders signed by the respective chairs and
secretaries of such boards, commissions, or agencies, but receives no
additional compensation for such services.
CHAPTER 9C
CITY ATTORNEY
 
1-9C-1 Appointment and Compensation 1-9C-3 Duties and Responsibilities
1-9C-2 Attorney for City
 
1-9C-1 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
   The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney and assistants to
serve at the discretion of the Council. The City Attorney and assistants shall
receive such compensation as established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1-9C-2 ATTORNEY FOR CITY.
   The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters
affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any
court, tribunal, commission, or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or
defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1-9C-3 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Ordinance Preparation. The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances
which the Council may desire and direct to be prepared and report to the
Council upon all such ordinances before their final passage by the Council and
publication.
   2.   Review and Comment. The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a
report to the Council, City Manager, and Mayor giving an opinion on all
contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to or coming under
the City Attorney’s notice.
   3.   Provide Legal Opinion. The City Attorney shall give advice or a written
legal opinion on City contracts and all questions of law relating to City
matters submitted by the Mayor, Council members, or City Manager.
   4.   Attendance at Council Meetings. The City Attorney shall attend meetings
of the Council.
   5.   Prepare Documents. The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate
drafts for contracts, forms, and other writings which may be required for the
use of the City.
CHAPTER 9D
CITY MANAGER
 
1-9D-1 Purpose              1-9D-4 Duties
1-9D-2 Appointment and Term 1-9D-5 Residence
1-9D-3 Compensation         1-9D-6 Execution of Bond
 
1-9D-1 PURPOSE.
   By virtue of the authority conferred by Chapter 372 of the Code of Iowa, the
office of the City Manager for the City is hereby created.
1-9D-2 APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
   The City Manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the City Council
for a fixed term to be established in the City Manager’s employment agreement
or by separate resolution of the City Council. Such appointment may be renewed,
extended, or otherwise modified by the City Council upon expiration of that
term, pursuant to applicable law and the City Code. The City Manager shall hold
office at the discretion of the Council and shall be subject to removal by a
majority vote thereof.
(Section 1-9D-2 – Ord. 1162 – May 25 Supp.)
1-9D-3 COMPENSATION.
   The City Manager shall receive such annual salary as the Council shall, from
time to time, determine by resolution, and time of payment shall be fixed in
accordance with that for other City municipal employees.
1-9D-4 DUTIES.
   The City Manager is the chief administrative officer of the City. The duties
of the City Manager are as follows:
   1.   General. See that all resolutions, ordinances, laws, Council, and Mayor
directives and approved operational policies are either faithfully enforced and
executed or referred to the proper official for compliance thereof.
   2.   Attend Council Meetings. Attend all meetings of the Council unless
otherwise excused by the Mayor or Council.
   3.   Recommendations. Recommend to the Mayor and Council such measures as
the City Manager deems necessary or expedient for good efficient government,
and the general welfare of the City.
   4.   Supervision. Have general responsibility for the supervision,
direction, and administration of the following departments, offices, functions,
and services, and be directly responsible to the Council for the proper
function of the same:
      A.   Clerk’s office.
      B.   Fiscal and Administrative Services Department.
      C.   Fire and Rescue Department.
      D.   Police Department.
      E.   Community Development and Building Department.
      F.   Department of Public Works.
      G.   Parks and Recreation Department.
      H.   Library Department.
      I.   Personnel.
      J.   Budget control and finance.
      K.   Insurance and public bonds.
      L.   Capital improvement and planning.
   5.   Liaison. Maintain liaison with citizens, businesses, developers,
builders, engineers, and other governmental agencies.
   6.   Contracts. Be responsible for the supervision and performance of all
contracts for work and services to be done for the City, except as specified
otherwise in said construction or service program involved.
   7.   Agreements; Contracts. Maintain an accounting of all obligations,
agreements, commitments, and contractual franchises involving the City and
report to the Mayor and Council any deviations from the exact terms as
specified.
   8.   Purchasing. Direct the purchasing of all commodities, materials,
supplies, capital outlay and services for all departments of the City that have
been budgeted and appropriated by resolution of the Council, and enforce a
program to determine that such purchases are received and are of the quality
and character called for in the order.
      A.   Bids. The City Manager shall require the taking of bids on all
matters which the City Manager deems advisable, as required by law, or as
directed by the Council.
      B.   Purchasing Authority Limit. The City Manager may approve
professional services agreements, unbudgeted items, public improvements, and
change orders to existing public improvement contracts (“expenditure”) for
amounts up to and including $25,000.00 per expenditure, provided a budget
amendment is not required. The City Manager will report the use of this
authority to the Council on a monthly basis.
   9.   Appoint and Employ. Have the power to appoint or employ all officers
and employees to fill authorized positions with the exception of the Clerk,
City Attorney, Assistant City Attorney, City Prosecutor, Police Department
personnel appointed pursuant to civil service law (other than the Police Chief,
who shall be appointed by the City Manager), fire officers and full-time Fire
Department personnel. The appointment or employment of officers or employees at
the department head level is subject to Council approval.
   10.   Suspension or Discharge of Employees. Have the power to suspend
without pay for a period not exceeding 14 days or discharge summarily any
officer or employee which the City Manager has the power to appoint or employ,
subject, however, to the provisions of the veteran’s preference law, Chapter
35C of the Code of Iowa. The suspension or discharge of officers or employees
at the department head level is subject to review and confirmation by the
Council.
   11.   Emergency Employees. Have the authority to employ any person for
emergency purposes as deemed necessary for the welfare of the City, but in no
case shall said employment be extended after the first Council meeting
following the date of employment, unless otherwise approved by vote of the
Council.
   12.   Buildings and Equipment. Supervise the management of all buildings,
structures, and land under the jurisdiction of the Council, and be charged with
the care and preservation of all City-owned equipment, tools, machinery,
appliances, supplies, and commodities under the control of employees or
departments, over which the City Manager has, by this chapter, specific
authority.
   13.   Financial Condition. Keep the Mayor and Council fully advised of the
financial and other conditions of the City.
   14.   Annual Budget. Prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual
budget in the manner as prescribed by law.
   15.   Business Affairs. See that all business affairs of the City are
conducted by modern, approved methods and in an efficient manner.
   16.   Records. Be responsible at all times for the maintenance of accurate
and current records of all affairs of the departments under the jurisdiction of
the City Manager, and in a form acceptable by the Council. Copies of such
reports shall be available for public inspection.
   17.   Council Committees. Assist the Council committees in the execution of
their reviews, investigations, reports, and assignments, and provide
administrative support in compliance with their directives.
   18.   Delegated Powers. Perform duties and have direct authority on all
matters delegated by Council action.
   19.   Administrative Support. Provide administrative support and assistance
to the Mayor and perform duties in the coordination of all phases of municipal
activity as directed by the Mayor and Council.
1-9D-5 RESIDENCE.
   The City Manager shall, upon appointment and confirmation, reside within the
City limits.
1-9D-6 EXECUTION OF BOND.
   The City Manager shall execute and file a bond for the faithful performance
of duties, and in favor of the City, in a sum as determined by the Council. The
City shall pay the cost of such bond.
CHAPTER 10
MUNICIPAL OPERATING PROCEDURES
 
1-10-1 Oaths                 1-10-7 Conflict of Interest
1-10-2 Bonds                 1-10-8 Resignations
1-10-3 Powers and Duties     1-10-9 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
1-10-4 Books and Records     1-10-10 Vacancies
1-10-5 Transfer to Successor 1-10-11 Gifts
1-10-6 Meetings
 
1-10-1 OATHS.
   The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Qualify for Office:
      A.   All elected officers and the following appointed officers shall
qualify for office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required,
a bond:
         (1)   City Manager.
         (2)   City Clerk.
         (3)   Deputy City Clerk.
         (4)   Police Officers.
         (5)   Fire Chief.
      B.   The oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after being certified as
elected but not later than 12:00 p.m. of the first day, which is not a Sunday
or a legal holiday, in January of the first year of the term for which the
officer was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
   2.   Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear
that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best
of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in Clive
as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
   3.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to
administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the
business of their respective office:
      A.   Mayor.
      B.   City Clerk.
      C.   Members of all boards, commissions, or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
1-10-2 BONDS.
   Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
   1.   Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or
blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk,
Treasurer, and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and
advisable except as allowed in Subsection 5.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
   2.   Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
   3.   Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be
filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23(6))
   4.   Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of
Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City
officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24(1)(a))
   5.   Insurance Policy in Lieu of Bond. In lieu of a bond, a public officer
required to obtain a bond pursuant to Chapter 64 of the Code of Iowa may obtain
an insurance policy in an amount not less than the amounts required of a bond.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.3)
(Section 1-10-2 – Ord. 1153 – Oct. 24 Supp.)
1-10-3 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and this Code, or as otherwise directed by the Council unless
contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1-10-4 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open
to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law
expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.
Access to public records which are combined with data processing software shall
be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 22.2 and 22.3A)
1-10-5 TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.
   Each officer shall transfer to their successor in office all books, papers,
records, documents, and property in the officer’s custody and appertaining to
that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1-10-6 MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held
in accordance with the following:
   1.   Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section.
      A.   “Closed session” means a meeting to which all members of the public
do not have access as allowed by Section 21.5 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   “Hybrid meeting” means a meeting involving both remote participation
and in-person participation by members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(a))
      C.   “Open session” means a meeting to which all members of the public
have access.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.2(3))
      D.   “Remote participation” means real-time participation by a remotely
located individual in a meeting which is being held in a different physical
location using integrated audio, video, and other digital tools.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(b))
      E.   “Reasonable notice” means advising the news media who have filed a
request for notice with the governmental body and posting the notice on a
bulletin board or other prominent place which is easily accessible to the
public and clearly designated for that purpose at the principal office of the
body holding the meeting, or if not such office exists, at the building in
which the meeting is to be held.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4(1))
      F.   “Teleconference participation” means participation using audio
conference tools involving multiple participants in at least two separate
locations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(c))
      G.   “Virtual meeting” means a meeting involving real-time interaction
using integrated audio, video, and other digital tools, in which participants
do not share a physical location.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(d))
   2.   Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice of the time, date, and place of
each meeting and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
   3.   Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
   4.   Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time,
and place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The
minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to
indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member present shall
be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to
public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
   5.   Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote
of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting
and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
   6.   Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices
at any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
   7.   Electronic Meetings. A governmental body shall provide for hybrid
meetings, teleconference participation, virtual meetings, remote participation,
and other hybrid options for the members of the governmental body to
participate in official meetings. A governmental body conducting a meeting
pursuant to this subsection shall comply with all of the provisions of Chapter
21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
(Section 1-10-6 – Ord. 1147 – Oct. 24 Supp.)
1-10-7 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect,
in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services
to be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A
contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of
this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
   1.   Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City
officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding
of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[13a])
   2.   Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[23b])
   3.   City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as
Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[33c])
   4.   Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an
interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind
described in Subsection 8 of this section, or both, contracts are made by
competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened, or if the remuneration
of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the contract and if
the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement or preparation
of any part of the contract. The competitive bid qualification of this
subsection does not apply to a contract for professional services not
customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[53e])
   5.   Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[63f])
   6.   Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has
an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee
was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[73g])
   7.   Paid On-Call Personnel. Contracts with paid on-call firefighters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[83h])
   8.   Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five
percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate
family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[93i])
   9.   Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[43d])
   10.   Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this
section, for the purchase of goods or services which benefit a City officer or
employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a
cumulative total purchase price of $6,000.00 in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[103j])
   11.   Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a
utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential
City utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[123k])
   12.   Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other
obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from the City
but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may not be the
original underwriter, purchaser, or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3l])
1-10-8 RESIGNATIONS.
   An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a
resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and
considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for
appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was
elected, if during that time the compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
1-10-9 REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to
City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the
appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall
give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent
by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk
within 30 days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public
hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The
hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date the request is filed,
unless the person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
1-10-10 VACANCIES. A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office
shall be filled in accordance with Section 372.13[2] of the Code of Iowa.
1-10-11 GIFTS.
   Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee, or candidate, or that person’s immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series
of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in said Chapter 68B of the Code
of Iowa, and a restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually
or jointly with one or more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a
series of gifts to a public official, public employee or candidate.
TITLE 2 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
 
2-1-1 Appointment; Membership 2-1-4 Compensation
2-1-2 Term of Office          2-1-5 Powers and Duties
2-1-3 Vacancies
 
2-1-1 APPOINTMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   There shall be appointed by the Council a City Planning and Zoning
Commission, hereinafter referred to as the “Commission,” consisting of seven
members, who shall be residents of the City and qualified by knowledge or
experience to act in matters pertaining to the development of a City plan and
who shall not hold any elective office in the City government.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 414.6 and 392.1)
2-1-2 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five years. The
terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2-1-3 VACANCIES.
   If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or otherwise,
a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner
as the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2-1-4 COMPENSATION.
   All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2-1-5 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall have and exercise the powers and duties provided by
Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa, and the City zoning ordinance.
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING CODES APPEAL BOARD
 
2-2-1 Board Created      2-2-6 Hearing Notice
2-2-2 Board Organization 2-2-7 Decisions
2-2-3 Qualifications     2-2-8 City Council Remand
2-2-4 Purpose            2-2-9 Appeals From Board
2-2-5 Appeals
 
2-2-1 BOARD CREATED.
   A Building Codes Appeal Board is hereby established.
2-2-2 BOARD ORGANIZATION.
   1.   Appointment; Compensation. The Board shall consist of five resident
members. The Board shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the
Council. The members shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council and shall
receive no compensation for their service, except for reimbursement of
necessary expenses.
   2.   Staggered Terms. The appointment of each member of the Board shall be
for staggered terms of three years each. At the time of the initial
appointment, the Mayor shall designate the length of term for each member to
provide for staggered terms.
   3.   Chairperson and Vice Chair. Upon appointment, the Board shall be called
together by the Mayor and shall organize by electing one member as chair and
one member as vice chair from any of its members for a term of one year with
eligibility for reelection.
   4.   Meetings. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the
chairperson, and at such times as the Board may determine. All meetings of the
Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions all of which shall be immediately filed
in the Community Development Department and shall be treated as a public
record. The presence of three members shall be necessary to constitute a
quorum.
   5.   Removal of Members. Any Board member may be removed from the Board by
the Mayor, with the concurrence of the Council, for good and sufficient cause.
This shall be stated in writing and filed with the Clerk and a copy thereof
filed with the chair of the Board. Continued absence of any member from
meetings of the Board shall, at the discretion of the Mayor, render any member
liable for immediate removal from appointment with final approval by the
Council. In the event that a vacancy arises, a new Board member shall be
appointed to serve out the unexpired term.
2-2-3 QUALIFICATIONS.
   Board members shall be citizen representatives of the City at large who have
experience in or are knowledgeable about building, construction methods, and
codes. Members shall not hold any elected office within the City.
2-2-4 PURPOSE.
   It shall be the purpose of the Board:
   1.   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Community
Development Department in the enforcement of Title 10 of this Code.
   2.   To grant a variance in a specific case and from a specific provision of
Title 10 of this Code, subject to appropriate conditions and provided that the
Board makes findings of fact based on the following:
      A.   That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships, not
of the applicants own doing and not purely economic in nature, in carrying out
the strict letter of any notice or order and that such difficulties or
hardships are not generally applicable to other properties; and
      B.   That the effect of the application of the provisions would be
arbitrary in the specific case; and
      C.   That in granting a variance, such variance would not adversely
impact the intended spirit and intent of the provisions of the Code in
preserving the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants, neighbors, and
general public.
In the granting of a variance, the Board may set reasonable conditions and
safeguards to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants,
neighbors, and general public.
   3.   To revoke a variance at any time upon a showing that the basis for
granting the variance no longer exists or upon a showing that a condition of
the variance has been violated; and
   4.   To rule on requests for additional time, provided that the granting of
such additional time does not endanger the health, safety, and welfare of the
occupants, neighbors, and general public; and
   5.   To direct that legal action be brought to enforce the provisions of
Title 10 of this Code when such action is deemed necessary and appropriate due
to failure to comply or failure to appear before the Board for a scheduled
hearing.
2-2-5 APPEALS.
   Appeals to the Board may be made by any person aggrieved by the decision of
the Community Development Department in the enforcement of Title 10 of this
Code. Such appeal shall be taken within 10 days by filing an application
request on forms provided by the Community Development Department.
Additionally, the application must be accompanied with the appropriate fees in
an amount determined by resolution of the Council from time to time. An appeal
stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the
Community Development Department certifies to the Board, after notice of appeal
shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a
stay would, in the opinion of the Department, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Board or court of record on
application, on due cause shown.
2-2-6 HEARING NOTICE.
   After the Community Development Department has set the Board meeting date,
the Community Development Department shall post at least one notification sign
at least seven days prior to the Board meeting. At least one sign must be
placed so that it may be seen from a public street, and in cases of through
lots or corner lots, a sign may be posted at both frontages.
2-2-7 DECISIONS.
   1.   Authority of the Board. In exercising the above mentioned powers, the
Board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of Title 10
of this Code, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may make such order,
requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end,
shall have the power of the Community Development Department from whom the
appeal was taken.
   2.   Vote of the Members. The concurring vote of three members of the Board
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Community Development Department, or to decide in favor of
the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under Title 10 of
this Code.
   3.   Written Testimony or Evidence. Every decision granted or denied by the
Board shall be supported by a written testimony or evidence submitted in
connection therewith.
   4.   Denial of Application. If any application has been denied by the Board,
then no new application for the same relief shall be considered by the Board
unless the Board shall find conditions have changed.
   5.   Council Review. Any decision made by the Board shall not be deemed
effective until reviewed and accepted by the Council, at the next regularly
scheduled meeting, no more than 20 days from the date of such deciding vote.
2-2-8 CITY COUNCIL REMAND.
   The Council, may, at its sole discretion, review any affirmative decision of
the Board at any time before the effective date of the decision. After such
review but prior to the effective date of the decision, the Council may remand
any such decision to the Board for further review. Upon remand, the Board may
reconsider its decision and issue its final decision on the request within 30
days after the date of such remand.
2-2-9 APPEALS FROM BOARD.
   Any person or persons, any officer, department, or board of the City
severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board may present to a court of
record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal,
in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition
shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision
in the office of the Board.
CHAPTER 3
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 
2-3-1 Public Library Established     2-3-5 Contracting with Others for Use of
                                     Library
2-3-2 Board Appointment; Membership; 2-3-6 Nonresident Use of Library
Organization
2-3-3 Qualifications                 2-3-7 Appeal Process
2-3-4 Powers and Duties
 
2-3-1 PUBLIC LIBRARY ESTABLISHED.
   A free public library for the City is hereby established to be known as the
Clive Public Library (the “library”).
2-3-2 BOARD APPOINTMENT; MEMBERSHIP; ORGANIZATION.
   1.   Appointment; Terms; Compensation. The Board shall consist of an odd
number (between five and nine) of resident, voting members, appointed by the
Mayor, with the approval of the Council, for overlapping three-year terms.
Members of the Board shall serve without compensation but may receive
reimbursement for their actual expenses. Seven members shall initially be
appointed, including two Board members whose terms shall expire one year after
the effective date of their appointment, two Board members whose terms shall
expire two years after the effective date of their appointment, and three
members who will serve a full three-year term. Thereafter appointments shall be
made for three-year terms. In the event a vacancy arises, a new Board member
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the Council, and the
Board member so appointed shall serve out the unexpired term. Said vacancy
shall be filled within 60 days after the position becomes vacant.
   2.   Removal of Members. Any Board member may be removed from the Board by
the Mayor, with the concurrence of the Council, for good and sufficient cause
which shall be stated in writing and filed with the Clerk, and a copy thereof
filed with the Chair of the Board; or any Board member may be removed from the
Board for good and sufficient cause upon the recommendation of the Board, with
the concurrence of the Mayor and Council.
   3.   Election of Officers. The Board members shall annually elect, by
majority vote, a Chairperson, to preside over all meetings of the Board, and a
secretary, who shall keep minutes of its meetings.
2-3-3 QUALIFICATIONS.
   Members of the Library Board of Trustees shall be at least 18 years of age
and reside within the corporate limits of the City.
2-3-4 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Library Board of Trustees shall have and exercise the following powers
and duties, subject to review by the Council:
   1.   The Board may adopt, amend, or repeal bylaws governing the activities
of the Board and relating to its duties.
   2.   The Board shall develop and oversee plans for the development and
maintenance of the public library facilities, furnishings, and fixtures.
   3.   The Board shall provide recommendations and advice to the City Manager
regarding control and supervision of the public library staff.
   4.   The Board shall have the authority to adopt, amend, or repeal policies,
rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with law, for the use of the public
library facilities and resources, including establishing and enforcing
penalties for violations of the rules and regulations regarding the public’s
use of the library.
   5.   The Board shall provide recommendations and advice to the Director of
Library Services regarding selecting and purchasing books, pamphlets,
magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, audiovisual matters, software,
other library materials, furniture, fixtures, computer equipment, stationery,
and supplies for the library within budgetary limits.
   6.   The Board shall have the authority to authorize the use of the library
by nonresidents of the City and to fix charges therefor.
   7.   The Board shall have authority to accept gifts of real property,
personal property or mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust
funds, on behalf of the library; to coordinate with the City Manager for the
establishment of a special trust and agency account, to determine, consistent
with the City’s annual budget process, the expenditures of the funds in the
special trust and agency account for the improvement of the library; and to
enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, devises, and bequests accepted.
   8.   The Director of Library Services, in consultation with the Board, shall
prepare an annual budget request for the library’s operation, based upon the
municipal fiscal year, and submit the same to the City Manager for review and
incorporation into the City Manager’s budget request prior to being submitted
to the Council.
   9.   Immediately following the close of each municipal fiscal year, the
Board shall make an annual written report to the Council which shall contain a
statement of the Board’s activities during the preceding year, statements
regarding the condition of the library, the number of books and other materials
added thereto, the number circulated, the amount of fines collected, and
recommendations for proposed activities for the coming year.
2-3-5 CONTRACTING WITH OTHERS FOR USE OF LIBRARY.
   The Board may recommend contracting with any other Boards of Trustees of
free public libraries of any other City, school organization, institution of
higher learning, township, or County, or with the trustees of any County
library district for the use of the library by their respective residents.
2-3-6 NONRESIDENT USE OF LIBRARY.
   The Board may authorize the use of the library by nonresidents in any one or
more of the following ways:
   1.   By lending the books or other materials of the library to nonresidents
on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or upon payment
of a special nonresident library fee.
   2.   By establishing depositories of library books or other materials to be
loaned to nonresidents.
   3.   By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books or
other library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
   4.   By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other library
materials to nonresidents.
2-3-7 APPEAL PROCESS.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Library Board of Trustees may file
an appeal with the Council within 30 days of the action appealed from.
CHAPTER 4
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
 
2-4-1 Purpose                 2-4-7 Clerk
2-4-2 Appointment and Term    2-4-8 Records
2-4-3 Qualifications          2-4-9 Rooms and Supplies
2-4-4 Human Rights Commission 2-4-10 Powers and Duties
2-4-5 Compensation            2-4-11 Applicability; Exceptions
2-4-6 Chairperson
 
2-4-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the appointment, powers, and
duties of a Civil Service Commission in accordance with the requirements of
State law.
2-4-2 APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
   A Civil Service Commission consisting of three members shall be appointed by
the Mayor, with the approval of the Council, for staggered terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.1)
2-4-3 QUALIFICATIONS.
   Commissioners must be citizens of the State, eligible electors and residents
of the City preceding their appointment. No person, while on said Commission,
shall hold or be a candidate for any office of public trust.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
2-4-4 HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2-4-3 of this chapter, when a
Human Rights Commission has been established, the director thereof shall be an
ex officio member, without vote, of the Civil Service Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
2-4-5 COMPENSATION.
   Civil Service Commissioners shall serve without compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
2-4-6 CHAIRPERSON.
   The Chairperson of the Commission for each biennial period shall be the
member whose term first expires.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
2-4-7 CLERK.
   The Clerk, or designee of the Clerk, shall be the Clerk of the Commission.
2-4-8 RECORDS.
   The Civil Service Commission shall keep a record of all its meetings and
also a complete individual service record of each civil service employee, which
record shall be permanent and kept up to date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
2-4-9 ROOMS AND SUPPLIES.
   The Council shall provide suitable rooms in which the Commission may hold
its meetings and supply the Commission with all necessary equipment and a
qualified shorthand reporter or an electronic voice recording device to enable
it to properly perform its duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.5)
2-4-10 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall administer the civil service procedure as contained in
Chapter 400 of the Code of Iowa, and amendments thereto, and shall have,
exercise, and perform all powers and duties as provided thereby.
2-4-11 APPLICABILITY; EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter apply only to members of the Police
Department, except the following persons connected with such departments:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.6)
   1.   Police Chief.
   2.   Janitors, clerks, stenographers, secretaries, and dispatchers.
   3.   Casual employees.
CHAPTER 5
PARKS, RECREATION, AND PUBLIC ART BOARD
 
2-5-1 Board Created      2-5-4 Powers and Duties
2-5-2 Board Organization 2-5-5 Appeal Process
2-5-3 Qualifications     2-5-6 City Tree Committee
 
2-5-1 BOARD CREATED.
   A Parks, Recreation, and Public Art Board is hereby created to advise the
Council on the needed facilities to provide recreational opportunities and
programs for the enjoyment of the residents of the City through planning,
acquisition, and development of quality parks, public art, and recreation
facilities.
2-5-2 BOARD ORGANIZATION.
   1.   Appointment; Terms; Compensation. The Board shall consist of nine
resident, voting members appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the
Council. Appointments shall be made for three-year terms, with the expiration
of the terms staggered over a three-year period. Subsequent appointments shall
be made for three-year terms. Members of the Board shall serve without
compensation, but may receive reimbursement for their actual expenses. In the
event a vacancy arises, a new Board member shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the approval of the Council, and the Board member so appointed shall serve
out the unexpired term. Said vacancy shall be filled within 60 days after the
position becomes vacant.
   2.   Removal from Board. Any Board member may be removed from the Board by
the Mayor, with the concurrence of the Council, for good and sufficient cause
which shall be stated in writing and filed with the Clerk, and a copy thereof
filed with the Chair of the Board; or any Board member may be removed from the
Board for good and sufficient cause upon the recommendation of the Board, with
the concurrence of the Mayor and Council.
2-5-3 QUALIFICATIONS.
   Members of the Parks, Recreation, and Public Art Board shall be at least 18
years of age and reside within the corporate limits of the City. Board members
are required to possess a demonstrated interest in parks and recreation.
2-5-4 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   1.   The Board shall advise the Council on plans for parks, public art, and
recreation and their facilities and shall update and revise these plans as
required. The Board shall have all administrative powers in the adoption of
policies, rules, and regulations, subject to Council review, pertaining to the
use and control of all City parks and recreational buildings and facilities.
   2.   The Leisure Services Director, in consultation with the Board, shall
prepare an annual budget request for its operation, based upon the municipal
fiscal year, and submit the same to the City Manager for review and
incorporation into the City Manager’s budget request prior to being submitted
to the Council.
   3.   The Board shall make an annual written report to the Council which
shall contain a statement of its activities during the preceding year and
recommendations for proposed activities for the coming year.
2-5-5 APPEAL PROCESS.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board may file an appeal with the
Council within 30 days of the action appealed from.
2-5-6 CITY TREE COMMITTEE.
   A City Tree Committee shall be established as a standing committee of the
Parks, Recreation, and Public Art Board. The Committee shall consist of not
less than three members who shall be citizens or residents of the City. The
members of the Committee shall be appointed annually by the Chairperson of the
Parks, Recreation, and Public Art Board. The Committee shall study,
investigate, counsel, and develop plans for the care, preservation, planting,
and maintenance of trees and shrubs in parks, along public rights-of-way, and
in other public areas owned by the City. Such plans will be presented at
regular intervals, no greater than every five years, to the Parks, Recreation,
and Public Art Board for acceptance and approval. Upon acceptance and approval
of the plan by the Board, the written plan shall constitute the Official
Comprehensive City Tree Plan. The Committee, when requested by the Parks,
Recreation, and Public Art Board or Council, shall consider, investigate, make
findings, report, and recommend upon any special matter of question within the
scope of its work.
TITLE 3 - FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
 
3-1-1 Purpose         3-1-5 Operating Budget Preparation
3-1-2 Finance Officer 3-1-6 Budget Amendments
3-1-3 Cash Control    3-1-7 Accounting
3-1-4 Fund Control    3-1-8 Financial Reports
 
3-1-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules
and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
3-1-2 FINANCE OFFICER.
   The Director of Administrative Services is the finance and Accounting
Officer of the City and is responsible for the administration of the provisions
of this chapter.
3-1-3 CASH CONTROL.
   1.   Deposit of Funds. All monies or fees collected for any purpose by any
City officer shall be deposited through the Office of the finance officer. If
any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check
drawn by the finance officer and approved by the Council only upon such
officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law,
ordinance, or Council directive.
   2.   Deposits and Investments. All monies belonging to the City shall be
promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not
exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or
invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law,
including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
   3.   Petty Cash Fund. The finance officer shall be custodian of a petty cash
fund not to exceed $150.00 for the payment of small claims for minor purchases,
collect on delivery transportation charges and small fees customarily paid at
the time of rendering a service, for which payments the finance officer shall
obtain some form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor or
agent. At such time as the petty cash fund is approaching depletion, the
finance officer shall draw a check for replenishment in the amount of the
accumulated expenditures and said check and supporting detail shall be
submitted to the Council as a claim in the usual manner for claims and charged
to the proper funds and accounts. It shall not be used for salary payments or
other personal services or personal expenses.
   4.   Change Funds:
      A.   Finance Officer. The finance officer is authorized to draw a check
on the Utilities Fund for establishing a change fund in the amount of $200.00
for the purpose of making change without commingling other funds to meet the
requirements of the Utility Billing Department. The finance officer is further
authorized to draw a check on the General Fund for establishing a change fund
in the amount of $200.00 for the purpose of making change without commingling
funds to meet the requirements of the Administrative Services Department. Said
change funds shall be in the custody of the finance officer, who shall maintain
the integrity of the fund.
      B.   Parks and Recreation Division. The finance officer is authorized to
draw a check on the General Fund for establishing a change fund in the amount
of $250.00 for the purpose of making change without commingling other funds to
meet the requirements of the Parks and Recreation Division. Said change fund
shall be in the custody of the Leisure Services Director and the Director shall
maintain the integrity of the fund.
      C.   Library. The finance officer is authorized to draw a check on the
General Fund for establishing a change fund in the amount of $500.00 for the
purpose of making change without commingling other funds to meet the
requirements of the Clive Public Library. Said change fund shall be in the
custody of the Director of Library Services and the Director shall maintain the
integrity of the fund.
      D.   Police Department. The finance officer is authorized to draw a check
on the General Fund for establishing a change fund in the amount of $50.00 for
the purpose of making change without commingling other funds to meet the
requirements of the Police Department. Said change fund shall be in the custody
of the Police Chief and the Police Chief shall maintain the integrity of the
fund.
      E.   Aquatics Center and Campbell Park Concessions. The finance officer
is authorized to draw two checks on the General Fund. One is for establishing a
change fund in the amount of $1,500.00 for the purpose of making change without
commingling other funds to meet the requirements of the Parks and Recreation
Department at the Aquatics Center. The finance officer is authorized to draw a
second check to establish a change fund for the Campbell Park Concessions in
the amount of $500.00 for the purpose of making change without commingling
other funds to meet the requirements of the Campbell Park Concessions. Said
change funds shall be in the custody of the Recreation Coordinator of the
Aquatics Center and the Recreation Manager respectively, and the Leisure
Services Director shall maintain the integrity of the fund.
3-1-4 FUND CONTROL.
   There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in
accordance with the following:
   1.   Revenues. All monies received by the City shall be credited to the
proper fund as required by law, ordinance, or resolution.
   2.   Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such
disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance, or resolution, was properly
budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
   3.   Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency
Fund.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384, 388], Sec. 2.5[2])
   4.   Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
monies may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to
meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by
the original budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384, 388], Sec. 2.5[3])
   5.   Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited
by State law, monies may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital
Improvements Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original
budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384, 388], Sec. 2.5[4])
   6.   Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund
may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund and Road
Use Tax Funds, by resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all
required transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in accordance with
the terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to
the Utility or Enterprise Fund. A “surplus” is defined as the cash balance in
the operating account or the unrestricted retained earnings calculated in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in excess of:
      A.   The amount of the expense of disbursements for operating and
maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three months; and
      B.   The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted
accounts for the succeeding three months.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384, 388], Sec. 2.5[5])
   7.   Balancing Of Funds: Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of
each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
3-1-5 OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION.
   The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with
the following:
   1.   Proposal Prepared. The finance officer is responsible for preparation
of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption
by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
   2.   Boards and Commissions. All Boards, Commissions, and other
administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and
administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the finance officer
for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such form as
required by the Council.
   3.   Submission to Council. The finance officer shall submit the completed
budget proposal to the Council each year at such time as directed by the
Council.
   4.   Annual Statement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 24.2A(2))
      A.   On or before 4:00 p.m. on March 5 of each year, the City shall file,
with the Department of Management, a report containing all necessary
information for the Department of Management to compile and calculate amounts
required to be included in the statement mailed under Paragraph B.
      B.   Not later than March 15, the County Auditor, using information
compiled and calculated by the Department of Management shall send to each
property owner or taxpayer within the County, by regular mail, an individual
statement containing all of the required information as provided under Section
24.2(2)(B)(1-10) of the Code of Iowa.
      C.   The Department of Management shall prescribe the form for the report
required under Paragraph A, the statements to be mailed under Paragraph B, and
the public hearing notice required under Paragraph D.
      D.   The Council shall set a time and place for a public hearing on the
City’s proposed property tax amount for the budget year and the City’s
information included in the statements under Paragraph B. The proposed property
tax hearing shall be set on a date on or after March 20 of the budget year
immediately preceding the budget year for which the tax is being proposed. At
the hearing, the Council shall receive oral or written testimony from any
resident or property owner of the City. This public hearing shall be separate
from any other meeting of the Council, including any other meeting or public
hearing relating to the City’s budget, and other business of the City that is
not related to the proposed property tax amounts and the information in the
statements shall not be conducted at the public hearing. After all testimony
has been received and considered, the governing body may decrease, but not
increase, the proposed property tax amount to be included in the City’s budget.
         (1)   Notice of the public hearing shall be published not less than
four or more than 20 days in a newspaper published at least once weekly and
having general circulation in the City. However, if the City has a population
of 200 or less, publication may be made by posting in three public places in
the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec, 24.2A(4)(b)(2))
(Subparagraph (1) – Ord. 1169 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
         (2)   Notice of the hearing shall also be posted and clearly
identified on the City’s internet site for public viewing beginning on the date
of the newspaper publication and shall be maintained on the City’s internet
site with all such prior year notices.
         (3)   Additionally, if the City maintains a social media account on
one or more social media applications, the public hearing notice or an
electronic link to the public hearing notice shall be posted on each such
account on a date no later than the date of publication of the notice.
         (4)   Failure of a newspaper to publish a required notice under this
paragraph shall not be considered a failure of a political subdivision to
provide required notice under this paragraph if all of the following conditions
are met:
            a.   Notice of the public hearing was provided to each property
owner and each taxpayer within the political subdivision in statements required
under Subsection 2, Paragraph B.
            b.   The political subdivision can demonstrate to the County
Auditor that the political subdivision provided sufficient time for the
newspaper to publish the notice.
(Subsection 4 – Ord. 1152 – Oct. 24 Supp.)
   5.   Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may
make any adjustments it deems appropriate in the budget before accepting such
proposal for publication, hearing, and final adoption.
   6.   Notice of Hearing. Following, and not until completion of requirements,
of Subsection 4 of this section, the Council shall set a time and place for
public hearing on the budget to be held before April 30 and shall publish
notice of the hearing not less than four or more than 20 days before the
hearing. A summary of the proposed budget and a description of the procedure
for protesting the City budget under Section 384.19 of the Code of Iowa, in the
form prescribed by the Director of the Department of Management, shall be
included in the notice. Proof of publication of the notice under this
subsection must be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16(3))
(Subsection 6 – Ord. 1169 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
   7.   Copies of Budget on File. Not less than 20 days before the date that
the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than 10 days
before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number
of copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and
organizations, and have them available for distribution at the offices of the
Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
   8.   Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt,
by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall
certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor
and the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than,
but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget submitted at the
final hearing, unless an additional tax levy is approved at a City election.
Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of the tax certificate
must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
3-1-6 BUDGET AMENDMENTS.
   A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes
effective July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and
purpose specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
   1.   Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program
must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the
original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.2[384, 388])
   2.   Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to
another must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as
the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.3[384, 388])
   3.   Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to
another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the
Council.
(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])
   4.   Administrative Transfers. The City Manager shall have the authority to
adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a
specific activity without prior Council approval; provided, however, when such
adjustments in any one activity aggregate $1,000.00 or 10 percent of the amount
appropriated, whichever is greater, no further adjustments shall be made
without approval by resolution of the Council. All such transfers shall be
reported in writing at the next regular meeting of the Council following the
transfer and recorded in the minutes for the information of the Council and the
general public.
(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])
3-1-7 ACCOUNTING.
   The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:
   1.   Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained
books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and
disbursed.
   2.   General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general
ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording
unappropriated surpluses.
   3.   Checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the Director of
Administrative Services and the Mayor following Council approval, except as
provided by Subsection 5 of this section.
   4.   Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to
record receipts by source and expenditures by program and activity as will
provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and
approved by the Council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its
proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared
with revenue estimates and expenditures can be related to the authorizing
appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for
the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred.
   5.   Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution authorize
the Director of Administrative Services to issue checks for immediate payment
of amounts due, which if not paid promptly would result in loss of discount,
penalty for late payment or additional interest cost. Any such payments made
shall be reported to the Council for review and approval with and in the same
manner as other claims at the next meeting following such payment. The
resolution authorizing immediate payment shall specify the type of payment so
authorized and may include, but is not limited to, payment of utility bills,
contractual obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest.
   6.   Utilities. The finance officer shall perform and be responsible for
accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities.
3-1-8 FINANCIAL REPORTS.
   The finance officer shall prepare and file the following financial reports:
   1.   Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a
report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program, and
activity for the preceding month.
   2.   Annual Report. Not later than December 1 of each year there shall be
published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year
of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all
expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of
the City for the current fiscal year. The Annual Financial Report shall be
prepared on forms and pursuant to instructions prescribed by the Auditor of
State. Beginning with the Annual Financial Report published by December 1,
2025, each report shall include a list of bonds, notes, or other obligations
issued by the City during the most recently completed fiscal year, and the
applicable lists for other fiscal years beginning on or after July 1, 2024, for
which obligations remain unpaid, payable from any source, including the amount
of the issuance, the project or purpose of the issuance, whether the issuance
was approved at election, eligible to be subject to a petition for an election,
or was exempt from approval at election as the result of statutory exclusions
based on population of the City or amount of the issuance, and identification
of issuances from the fiscal year or prior fiscal years related to the same
project or purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
CHAPTER 2
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
 
3-2-1 Purpose                        3-2-6 Applications
3-2-2 Definitions                    3-2-7 Approval
3-2-3 Period of Partial Exemption    3-2-8 Exemption Repealed
3-2-4 Amounts Eligible for Exemption 3-2-9 Dual Exemptions Prohibited
3-2-5 Limitations                    3-2-10 Filing Fee for Application
 
3-2-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from
property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the
new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities,
warehouses, distribution centers, and the acquisition of or improvement to
machinery and equipment assessed as real estate.
3-2-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year
for which the exemption is received, except that actual value added by
improvements to machinery and equipment means the actual value as determined by
the local assessor as of January 1 of each year for which the exemption is
received.
   2.   “Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for
the storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail
outlets. “Distribution center” does not mean a building or structure used
primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer
to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the
storage of petroleum products, or used for the retail sale of goods.
   3.   “New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes new
buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to existing
buildings and structures. “New construction” does not include reconstruction of
an existing building or structure which does not constitute complete
replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing
building or structure unless the reconstruction of an existing building or
structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is
necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and
processing of specific products and the reconstruction is required for the
owner of the building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or
process those products, which determination shall receive prior approval from
the Council upon the recommendation of the Iowa Department of Economic
Development.
   4.   “New machinery and equipment assessed as real estate” means new
machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to Section 427A.1,
Subsection 1, Paragraph e of the Code of Iowa, unless the machinery or
equipment is part of the normal replacement or operating process to maintain or
expand the existing operational status.
   5.   “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings
devoted primarily to research and development activities, including, but not
limited to, the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for
experimental use, and corporate research services which do not have a primary
purpose of providing on site services to the public.
   6.   “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse
for the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of
Iowa, except that it does not mean a building or structure used primarily to
store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail.
3-2-3 PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION.
   The actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of
industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, distribution
centers, and the acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment
assessed as real estate, is eligible to receive a partial exemption from
taxation for a period of five years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
3-2-4 AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION.
   The amount of actual value added which is eligible to be exempt from
taxation shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
   1.   For the first year, 75 percent.
   2.   For the second year, 60 percent.
   3.   For the third year, 45 percent.
   4.   For the fourth year, 30 percent.
   5.   For the fifth year, 15 percent.
3-2-5 LIMITATIONS.
   The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new construction
constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall
not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced
below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of the
new construction added.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
3-2-6 APPLICATIONS.
   An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value
added for which an exemption is claimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
   1.   The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the
property with the County Assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which
the value added is first assessed for taxation.
   2.   Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the
Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of
the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the
Director of Revenue.
3-2-7 APPROVAL.
   A person may submit a proposal to the Council to receive prior approval for
eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the Council resolves to
consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public hearing
thereon. Thereafter, at least 30 days after such hearing, the Council, by
ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction
if the new construction is in conformance with City zoning. Such prior approval
shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the new
construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
3-2-8 EXEMPTION REPEALED.
   When, in the opinion of the Council, continuation of the exemption granted
by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the Council may repeal
this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their
expiration.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)
3-2-9 DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED.
   A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the
property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax
exemption authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)
3-2-10 FILING FEE FOR APPLICATION.
   Prior to final passage of any ordinance granting prior approval for
eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction, the property owner shall
pay to the City Treasurer, as a filing fee for said application, an amount
sufficient to cover all actual costs incurred by the City for legal services,
City staff services, and services of other persons or entities employed by the
City for, or in any way involved in, the review of all matters relating to said
application, publication of notices, and the preparation of any and all
documents, including any ordinance. For nonsalaried City staff personnel,
actual costs shall be that amount equal to the actual time spent by such
employee multiplied times the hourly wage for such employee, plus an amount
equal to that portion of the actual value of annual benefits for such employee
which is reflective of the actual time spent by such employee on the matter.
For salaried City staff personnel, actual costs shall be that amount equal to
that portion of such employee’s annual salary, including the actual costs of
annual benefits for such employee, which is reflective of the actual time spent
by such employee on the matter based on a 40-hour workweek.
CHAPTER 3
HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX
 
3-3-1 Definitions             3-3-4 Use of Proceeds
3-3-2 Tax Rate and Imposition 3-3-5 Determination of Need
3-3-3 Payment of Tax          3-3-6 Effective Date
 
3-3-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Gross receipts” means all of the monies received by a hotel or motel
for the renting of its rooms, apartments and sleeping quarters to persons for
periods of time not exceeding 31 consecutive days, other than those monies
received by State universities for the renting of sleeping quarters in their
dormitories or memorial unions.
   2.   “Hotel or motel” means any hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house,
rooming house, tourist court, trailer court, or other such place or
establishment located in the City where sleeping accommodations are furnished
to transient guests for rent, whether with or without meals.
   3.   “Lodging” means rooms, apartments, or sleeping quarters in a hotel,
motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house, or manufactured or mobile home
which is tangible personal property, or in a tourist court, or in any place
where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent,
whether with or without meals. Lodging does not include rooms that are not used
for sleeping accommodations.
   4.   “Renting” or “rent” means a transfer of possession or control of
lodging for a fixed or indeterminate term for consideration and includes any
kind of direct or indirect charge for such lodging or its use.
   5.   “Sales price” means the consideration for renting lodging and means the
same as the term is defined in Section 423.1 of the Code of Iowa.
All other words and phrases used in this chapter and defined in Section 423.1
of the Code of Iowa, have the meaning given them by Section 423.1 for the
purposes of this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.2)
3-3-2 TAX RATE AND IMPOSITION.
   A tax is hereby established upon the gross receipts of a hotel or motel at
the rate of seven percent of such gross receipts.
3-3-3 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid as is provided in Chapter 422A
of the Code of Iowa, as said chapter may be from time to time amended,
codified, or recodified.
3-3-4 USE OF PROCEEDS.
   The proceeds of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be used for the
purposes stated in Subsection 4 of Section 422A.2 of Chapter 422A of the Code
of Iowa:
   1.   Facilities. At least 50 percent of the revenues derived from such tax
for the acquisition of sites for, or constructing, improving, enlarging,
equipping, repairing, operating or maintaining of recreation, convention,
cultural, or entertainment facilities including, but not limited to, memorial
buildings, halls and monuments, civic center convention buildings, auditoriums,
coliseums, and parking areas or facilities located at those recreation,
convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities or the payment of principal
and interest, when due, on bonds or other evidence of indebtedness issued by
the City for those recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment
facilities; or for the promotion and enlargement of tourist and convention
business in the City and surrounding areas.
   2.   Operations. The remaining revenues may be spent for any City operations
authorized by law as a proper purpose for the expenditure within statutory
limitations of City revenues derived from ad valorem taxes.
   3.   Bonds. Up to 30 percent of the revenue derived may be pledged to secure
bonds which the City may issue for one or more of the purposes set forth in
Subsection 1 of this section. Any revenue pledged to the payment of such bonds
may be credited to the spending requirement of Subsection 1 of this section.
3-3-5 DETERMINATION OF NEED.
   The City has, through its Council, determined that it has a need for funds
set forth in Section 3-3-4 of this chapter, that such needs are in excess, both
jointly and severally, of the revenues expected to be derived from such tax and
that such tax must be levied and executed to meet such needs.
3-3-6 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The tax established in Section
3-3-2 of this chapter shall be imposed on and after April 1, 1985.
CHAPTER 4
URBAN RENEWAL
EDITOR’S NOTE 
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED            NAME OF AREA
488           May 2, 1991        Clive Urban Renewal Area
605           September 28, 1995 Fawn Engineering Urban Renewal Area
620           April 25, 1996     Microware Urban Renewal Area
653           September 4, 1997  Iowa Quality Meats Urban Renewal Area
659           November 20, 1997  1997 Addition to the Clive Urban Renewal Area
686           January 17, 1999   1999 Addition to the Clive Urban Renewal Area
690           March 18, 1999     1999 Addition to the Clive Urban Renewal Area
694           May 27, 1999       73rd and University Avenue Urban Renewal Area
1065          November 8, 2018   2018B Amendment to the Clive Urban Renewal
                                 Area
1129          April 27, 2023     Dallas County Urban Renewal Area Addition to
                                 the Clive Urban Renewal Area
1130          April 27, 2023     Polk County Urban Renewal Area Addition to the
                                 Clive Urban Renewal Area
1137          August 10, 2023    Repealing the 2002 (Corporate Woods) Addition
                                 to the Clive Urban Renewal Area
1138          August 10, 2023    Repealing the 128th Street Addition to the
                                 Clive Urban Renewal Area
1139          August 10, 2023    Repealing the 86th Street Addition to the
                                 Clive Urban Renewal Area
1151          September 26, 2024 Repealing the 2003 (LADCO) Addition to the
                                 Clive Urban Renewal Area
1171          October 9, 2025    September 2025 Addition to the Clive Urban
                                 Renewal Area
 
TITLE 4 - BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LIQUOR LICENSES; WINE AND BEER PERMITS
 
4-1-1 License or Permit Required 4-1-5 Prohibited Sales and Acts
4-1-2 General Prohibition        4-1-6 Amusement Devices
4-1-3 Investigation              4-1-7 Penalty
4-1-4 Action by Council           
 
4-1-1 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for
sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor control
license, wine permit or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 123.22, 123.122, and 123.171)
4-1-2 GENERAL PROHIBITION.  
   It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer, or keep for sale,
possess, or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms,
conditions, limitations and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code
of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked, or a civil
penalty may be imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 123.2, 123.39, and 123.50)
4-1-3 INVESTIGATION.
   Upon receipt of an application for a retail alcohol license, the Clerk may
forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an investigation and
submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the
application. The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine if they
conform to the requirements of the City. The Council shall not approve an
application for a license for any premises that does not conform to the
applicable law and ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
4-1-4 ACTION BY COUNCIL.
   The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of a retail
alcohol license, shall endorse its approval or disapproval on the application,
and shall forward the application with the necessary fee and bond, if required,
to the Iowa Department of Revenue.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])
4-1-5 PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.
   A person holding a retail alcohol license and the person’s agents or
employees shall not do any of the following:
   1.   Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])
   2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage on the premises covered by the
license, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b])
   3.   Sell alcoholic beverages to any person on credit, except with a bona
fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its
members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests, or to
retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center, or
events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])
   4.   Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold, except as
follows:
      A.   Definitions. For use in this subsection the following terms are
defined as follows:
         (1)   “Bar” means an establishment where one may purchase alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises and in which the serving of food is
only incidental to the consumption of those beverages.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2[1])
         (2)   “Restaurant” means eating establishments, including private and
public school cafeterias, which offer food to the public, guests, or employees,
including the kitchen and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere, and including a bar area within a restaurant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2[17])
      B.   This subsection shall not apply if the employer has, on file,
written permission from the parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a person 16
or 17 years of age for the person to sell or serve alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises where sold. However, a person 16 or 17 years of age
shall not work in a bar as defined in Paragraph A.
         (1)   The employer shall keep a copy of the written permission on file
until the person is either 18 years of age or no longer engaged in the sale of
or serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.
         (2)   If written permission is on file in accordance with Paragraph B,
a person 16 or 17 years of age may sell or serve alcoholic beverages in a
restaurant as defined above in Paragraph A during the hours in which the
restaurant serves food.
      C.   A person 16 or 17 years of age shall not sell or serve alcoholic
beverages under this subsection unless at least two employees 18 years of age
or older are physically present in the area where alcoholic beverages are sold
or served.
      D.   If a person employed under this subsection reports an incident of
workplace harassment to the employer or if the employer otherwise becomes aware
of such an incident, the employer shall report the incident to the employee’s
parent, guardian, or legal custodian and to the Iowa Civil Rights Commission,
which shall determine if any action is necessary or appropriate under Chapter
216 of the Code of Iowa.
      E.   An employer that employs a person under this subsection shall
require the person to attend training on prevention and response to sexual
harassment upon commencing employment.
      F.   Prior to a person commencing employment under this subsection, the
employer shall notify the employer’s dramshop liability insurer, in a form and
time period prescribed by the Director, that the employer is employing a person
under this subsection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])
   5.   In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow the
mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine, beer, or any
other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])
   6.   Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])
   7.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises
covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])
   8.   Keep on premises covered by a retail alcohol license any alcoholic
liquor in any container except the original package purchased from the Iowa
Department of Revenue and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the
premises for immediate consumption. However, mixed drinks or cocktails that are
mixed on the premises and are not for immediate consumption may be consumed on
the licensed premises, subject to Section 123.49, Subsection 2, Paragraph D,
Subparagraphs (2), (3), and (4) of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(d)(2), (3), and (4))
(Subsection 8 – Ord. 1167 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
   9.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or
receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or
adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents, or remaining
contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly
possess any original package that has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])
   10.   Allow any person other than the licensee or employees of the licensee
to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or
other container that is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except
as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])
   11.   Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine that is used to
vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized
form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2k])
   12.   Sell, offer to sell, dispense, or serve for on premises consumption an
unlimited number of servings of alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer for a fixed
price, or for free. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit a
holder of a liquor control license or wine or beer permit, or its employees or
agents, from: 1) including servings or drinks of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer
as part of a hotel or motel package which includes overnight accommodations; 2)
providing an unlimited or indefinite amount of drinks for a fixed price, or for
free, for a “private event,” which is defined as an event not open to the
general public and restricted to a particular group of persons invited to the
event by the host of the event, provided, that the licensee or permittee shall
provide means or methods by which to identify persons participating in the
private event, such as the use of a separate room or an identification tag or
badge; or 3) as otherwise permitted for a special event by the Council
(provided, however, that no permit holder shall be allowed to hold such a
special event under Item 3 of this Subsection 12 more than three times per
year).
4-1-6 AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   The following provisions pertain to electrical or mechanical amusement
devices possessed and used in accordance with Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa.
(Said devices are allowed only in premises with a retail alcohol license, as
specifically authorized in said Chapter 99B.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.57)
   1.   As used in this section, “registered electrical or mechanical amusement
device” means an electrical or mechanical device required to be registered with
the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals, as provided in Section 99B.53 of
the Code of Iowa.
   2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to participate in the
operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.
   3.   It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing a registered electrical
or mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing a
registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a
person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation of a registered
electrical or mechanical amusement device.
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation of a
registered electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under the
age of 21.
4-1-7 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 2
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO SALES
 
4-2-1 Definitions     4-2-7 Expiration
4-2-2 Permit Required 4-2-8 Refunds
4-2-3 Application     4-2-9 Persons Under Legal Age
4-2-4 City Approval   4-2-10 Self-Service Sales Prohibited
4-2-5 Fees            4-2-11 Permit Revocation
4-2-6 Issuance        4-2-12 Penalty
 
4-2-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
   1.   “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or
containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or
by any other means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not include cigarettes,
tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug
or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   2.   “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of
tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and
irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored,
adulterated, or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper
or cover made of paper or any other material. However, cigarettes shall not be
construed to include cigars.
   3.   “Department” means the State Department of Revenue.
   4.   “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products are sold, stored, or kept for
the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
   5.   “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes, or offers for
sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption,
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, irrespective of
the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages in the business
of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products to ultimate consumers.
   6.   “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement,
or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of
the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or
employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access
location.
   7.   “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars;
cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and
other smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and
other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and
sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such
manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for
both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
    8.   “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not
contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic
circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of
shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a solution or other
substance. “Vapor product” includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any
cartridge or other container of a solution or other substance, which may or may
not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device. “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a
drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter
V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
4-2-2 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   1.   Retail Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a
holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products,
or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit
the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products
within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit
shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be
easily seen by the public and the persons authorized to inspect the place of
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(1))
   2.   Retail Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products at any place of business without first having
received a permit as a retailer for each place of business owned or operated by
the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A(1))
A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a
retail tobacco permit. However, if a retailer only holds a retail cigarette
permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the retailer shall
not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products, during such time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A(4))
4-2-3 APPLICATION.
   A retailer shall submit to the department an application on forms furnished
by the department, accompanied by the required fees and adequate bond as
provided in Section 453A.14, of the Code of Iowa. Applications, any supporting
documentation, and the associated fees shall be submitted electronically to the
department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(5))
4-2-4 CITY APPROVAL.
   The City may approve retail permit applications for applicants with a place
of business within the City limits. The City shall use the electronic portal of
the department to process retail permit applications. Upon approval of a retail
permit application by the City the department shall issue the permit to the
applicant on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(2))
4-2-5 FEES.
   The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(3)(b) and 453A.47A(7))
 
For Permits Granted During     Fee
July, August, or September     $100.00
October, November, or December $75.00
January, February, or March    $50.00
April, May, or June            $25.00
 
4-2-6 ISSUANCE.
   Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for which it
is issued and shall be nonassignable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(9))
4-2-7 EXPIRATION.
   All permits shall expire on June 30 of each year. A permit shall not be
granted or issued until the applicant has paid the fees to the department for
the next period ending on June 30.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(3)(a))
4-2-8 REFUNDS.
    A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the
City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13(4) and 453A.47A(8))
4-2-9 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
   A person shall not sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any
person under 21 years of age. The provision of this section includes
prohibiting a person under 21 years of age from purchasing tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a
vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the
provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and
hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation,
assess the following:
   1.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty
in the amount of $300.00. Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under
this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period
of 14 days.
   2.   For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall
be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 or the retailer’s permit
shall be suspended for a period of 30 days. The retailer may select its
preference in the penalty to be applied under this subsection.
   3.   For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.
   4.   For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 60 days.
   5.   For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s
permit shall be revoked.
The Clerk shall give 10 days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy
of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a
permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the
time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22, and 453A.36(6))
4-2-10 SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.
   Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as
provided in Section 453A.36(6) of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell
or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
vapor products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
4-2-11 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by
the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or
any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be
issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person
for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has
expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown
to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail
permit to the department within 30 days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
4-2-12 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
(Title 4, Chapter 2 – Ord. 1168 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 3
SOLICITORS AND MOBILE FOOD UNITS
 
4-3-1 Purpose                   4-3-5 Unlawful Acts
4-3-2 Definitions               4-3-6 Suspension or Revocation of License
4-3-3 Solicitor Regulations and 4-3-7 Penalty
Requirements
4-3-4 Mobile Food Units
 
4-3-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents against fraud, protect
them from intrusion into the privacy of their homes, and to ensure the safety
of the residents by licensing and regulating solicitors and mobile food units.
4-3-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Approved event” means a larger event, such as a farmers’ market, music
festival, or similar activity that has been approved by the City through a
public property special event permit, a temporary use permit (on private
property) or a block party permit. An approved event would also include events
within a City park with the approval of the director of leisure services or
their designee.
   2.   “Catered event” means for the purposes of this chapter, any event where
a business or entity has requested the mobile food unit to provide food for a
targeted audience and where the food is served to the customers within a
building, structure, or facility and not directly from the mobile food unit, or
where the business or entity requesting the service is paying for the food in a
single lump sum payment rather than individual patrons paying for their food
themselves.
   3.   “Catering business” means a business, social, or home catering service
providing food and incidental services for a social affair, event, or for a
private dwelling, which does not engage in the sale of food or beverage to
individually paying patrons.
   4.   “Mobile food unit” means any type of annually licensed food
establishment that is a readily movable vehicle (on wheels), that is self-
propelled (driven), or can be pulled or pushed to a location and used for the
vending of food or beverage items to the public.
   5.   “Mobile food unit classification” means the type of mobile food unit
based upon the type of menu items being served and preparation and storage
requirements for the defined menu items based upon the Iowa Department of
Inspections and Appeals Mobile Food Unit Guide.
   6.   “Mobile food vendor” means a person engaged in the business of selling
food or beverages from a mobile food unit.
   7.   “Person” means natural persons, corporations, firms, and organizations
of any description, whether acting in person or through agents, employees, or
other persons.
   8.   “Pushcart” means a non-self-propelled mobile food unit that is pushed
or pulled by the mobile food vendor to a location and serves a limited offering
of food or beverage items.
   9.   “Solicitor” means any person who initiates or attempts to initiate
personal contact with other persons at or near residences or businesses,
including upon private driveways, parking lots, or public sidewalks in an
apparent effort to solicit or attempt to solicit monies or orders for goods,
services, subscriptions, or merchandise to be delivered immediately or at a
future date.
   10.   “State licensing level classification” means The Iowa Department of
Inspections and Appeals has established four classification levels for mobile
food vendors that will be referenced as a part of this chapter. There are more
requirements for each of the levels, but in general the levels are as follows:
      A.   Class I: Nonrefrigerated vending units that serve only intact,
nonpotentially hazardous commercially prepackaged food and beverages. Examples
include chips, crackers, cookies, soda, and sweets in manufacturer’s packaging.
      B.   Class II: Refrigerated or hot vending units that serve potentially
and nonpotentially hazardous commercially prepackaged foods from an approved
source. Examples include packaged sandwiches, ice cream bars, individually
wrapped and cooked hot dogs. No cooking is allowed as part of a Class II unit.
      C.   Class III: Units that serve potentially and nonpotentially hazardous
packaged food and unpackaged foods with limited assembly. These units are
limited to precooked foods from an approved source that may be reheated on the
unit. Examples include pushcart operations, packaged salads, hot dogs, shaved
ice.
      D.   Class IV: Units that serve potentially and nonpotentially hazardous
foods that are prepared, cooked, cooled, or reheated and assembled on the unit.
Examples include self-contained mobile food units, food trucks, and any units
that are capable of preparing and producing food items from precooked or raw
products (meat, fish, poultry, plant foods, and dairy products) to finished
product for consumption.
   11.   “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or
itinerant merchandising business selling direct to the public from a temporary
location or structure through a temporary association with a local property
owner or business owner. The term “transient merchant,” does not include mobile
food vendors. Transient merchants shall be regulated by the provisions of the
temporary use permit regulations within Title 11 Zoning Regulations of this
Code unless defined and regulated elsewhere within this Code.
4-3-3 SOLICITOR REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   Any person defined in Section
4-3-2 of this chapter as a “solicitor,” shall comply with the following
requirements:
   1.   License Required. Any solicitor must procure a license as provided for
herein. The term “person” as used herein includes natural persons,
corporations, firms, and organizations of any description, whether acting in
person or through agents, employers, or other persons.
   2.   Application for License; Fee. An application in writing shall be filed
with the Clerk for a solicitor license under this chapter. Such application
shall set forth the applicant’s name, permanent address, local address, and
business address, if any. The application shall also set forth the applicant’s
employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature of the applicant’s
business, the last three places where such business was conducted and the
length of time sought to be covered by the license. A nonrefundable application
fee of $20.00 shall be paid at the time of filing such application to cover the
cost of investigating the facts stated therein. The applicant and each
individual who is to be working for or on behalf of the applicant shall submit
a copy of their State issued photo ID or photo driver’s license, to be retained
by the Clerk, and a report of criminal history data obtained from the Iowa
Department of Public Safety. Solicitors whose business is limited to hanging
information on residence doors (referred to herein as “door hangers”) shall not
be required to submit a report of criminal history data.
   3.   License Fee. Each individual who is to be working for or on behalf of
the applicant is required to pay the license fee. A license fee in the
following amount shall be paid to the Clerk, by the applicant, prior to the
issuance of any license to cover the cost of issuance and policing during the
licensing period:
 
All Solicitors Except Door Hangers      Fee
One day permit                          $20.00
One week permit (seven contiguous days) $100.00
Door Hangers
One week permit (seven contiguous days) $30.00
 
   4.   Bond Required. Each applicant for a license required by this chapter
shall, before the license is issued to the applicant, file with the Clerk a
personal surety bond in the amount of $1,000.00, conditioned that the applicant
shall comply with and observe the terms and conditions of all provisions of
this Code relating to solicitors, and will pay all costs, fines, and penalties
incurred on account of the applicant’s failure to observe such provisions and
will pay all damages resulting to any person by reason of such applicant’s
actions in violation of such terms and conditions. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, solicitors whose business is limited to hanging information on
residence doorknobs shall not be required to file a personal surety bond.
   5.   License Issued. If the Clerk finds the application is completed in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are
found to be correct, the application and license fee paid, and the Police Chief
or designee has reviewed and approved said application, a license may be
issued. The license shall authorize the applicant to engage in the activities
of a “solicitor” as defined in Section 4-3-2 of this chapter (specified
limitations may be applied) for the period stated in the license, provided that
nothing herein shall authorize any act or practice which is contrary to any law
or ordinance. Upon expiration of the license, a new application shall be made
and a new license may be issued in the same manner as the original license.
   6.   Display of License. Each person licensed under this chapter shall keep
such license in possession at all times while doing business in the City and
shall, upon the request of prospective customers, exhibit the license as
evidence of compliance with all requirements of this chapter.
   7.   Character of Applicant.
      A.   Evidence of Good Character and Business Responsibility. In order to
be considered for a license, the applicant shall provide, in addition to the
application required under this section:
         (1)   The names, addresses, and phone numbers of at least two
residents of the City who are not the applicant’s employer, coworker, agent, or
relative (within two separations) and will certify as to the applicant’s good
character and business responsibility; or
         (2)   In the alternative, the applicant shall provide other available
evidence which attests to the good character and business responsibility of the
applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such reputation
and business responsibility.
      B.   Investigation. Upon receipt of the complete application as required
by this section and either the information required under Subsection 7(A)(1) or
7(A)(2) of this section, the Police Chief or a designee shall investigate the
applicant as deemed necessary for the protection of the public health, safety,
welfare, and good.
      C.   Unsatisfactory Character and Business Responsibility. If, as a
result of such investigation, the applicant’s character and business
responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory such that would harm the public
good, the Police Chief may endorse on such application disapproval and state
reasons for disapproval and return the application to the Clerk who shall
notify the applicant in writing that the application has been disapproved,
state the reasons for the denial, and the applicant’s right to appeal under
Subsection 7(E) of this section.
      D.   Satisfactory Character and Business Responsibility. If, as a result
of such investigation, the applicant’s character and business responsibility
are found to be satisfactory, the Police Chief may endorse approval on the
application and shall return the application to the Clerk and the license may
be issued under Subsection 7(E) of this section.
      E.   Right to Appeal. Any applicant whose application for license was
disapproved as under Subsection 7(C) of this section may appeal to the Council
at its next regularly scheduled meeting by filing with the Clerk a written
request for an appeal to the Council at least seven days prior to the meeting.
As a result of this appeal, the Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the
decision of the Clerk not to issue the license. If the application for license
is denied, the applicant is not eligible for the issuance of a license under
this chapter for a period of one year from the date of notification that the
license application was disapproved, was served in person, or deposited in U.S.
mail.
   8.   License Not Transferable. Licenses issued under the provisions of this
chapter are not transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to
the person filing the application, for the period stated and approved in the
license.
   9.   Hours to Do Business. All solicitor licenses shall provide that said
licenses are in force and effect only between the following hours: Monday
through Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., and Sunday, 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. No
soliciting shall occur on nationally recognized holidays. Any person found to
be acting as a solicitor without a license, shall also be limited to these
hours.
   10.   Solicitor License Exemptions:
      A.   Government Officers. Officers and employees of the United States,
the State, or any subdivision or agency thereof, while in the performance of
their official duties.
      B.   Public Utilities. Representatives of any public utility lawfully
doing business in the City, while acting in such capacity.
      C.   Route Salespersons. Route salespersons who call routinely on
customers on a regular basis or on an established route.
      D.   Charitable Organizations. Any organization which is acting under the
authority of Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa, which has obtained tax exempt
status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and if requested
by the City to do so, provide documentation of 501(c)(3) status to the City.
      E.   Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on
businesses or institutions for the purpose of selling products for resale or
institutional use.
      F.   Nationally Recognized Nonprofit Organizations. Members of any Des
Moines metro area Boy Scout, Girl Scout, Camp Fire, 4-H Club, FFA, and similar
nationally recognized nonprofit organizations, if the sales are to benefit the
organization in its recognized operation or programs.
      G.   Community Improvement or Benefit. Persons making door to door sales
for the purpose of a community improvement or benefit, approved by the Council,
on behalf of nonprofit, tax exempt organizations.
      H.   School Students. Students representing Des Moines metro area schools
conducting projects sponsored by organizations and recognized by such schools.
      I.   Youth Sports Organizations. Des Moines metro area youth sports
organizations.
      J.   Exercising Constitutional Rights. Persons going from house to house,
door to door, business to business, street to street, or place to place where
the activity is for the purpose of exercising that person’s State or federal
constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, press, and religion. This
exemption may be lost if the person’s exercise of these constitutional rights
are merely incidental to a commercial activity.
4-3-4 MOBILE FOOD UNITS.
   1.   Mobile Food Unit Licensing. It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in the sale of food or beverages to the public from a temporary or
mobile facility within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining
a mobile food unit license from the City, in addition to any other State,
federal, or County permits, certifications, and licenses.
      A.   A mobile food unit license is an annual license that expires on
April 15 each year and must be renewed prior to the first event after that
date.
      B.   Each mobile food unit shall be licensed separately. No license
transfer is allowed.
      C.   Although certain activities may be exempt from the licensing
requirements of this chapter, any food service to the public in the City is
expected to comply with all other local, County, and State requirements for
health inspections, licensing, safety, and fire code requirements.
      D.   The following shall be exempt from this requirement:
         (1)   Catering businesses.
         (2)   Grilling and food preparation activities of brick-and-mortar
establishments on the establishment’s premises for immediate consumption by
patrons or employees.
         (3)   Concession stands associated with sports or recreational venues
that have been approved as part of a site plan or permitted Conditional Use
Permit for the venue.
   2.   License/Inspection Fee(s). At the time of the submittal of a license
application, the applicant shall pay to the Clerk the applicable license fee in
addition to any applicable inspection fee(s).
      A.   The amount of the license and applicable inspections fee(s) shall be
determined in accordance with an established fee schedule, which fee schedule
may be modified, from time to time, with approval of the Council.
      B.   Any licensee who surrenders their license prior to the date of
expiration shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the fee.
   3.   Fire Department Inspection.
      A.   All mobile food units that have cooking facilities or use products
with grease laden vapors (Class III and Class IV State licenses) shall be
inspected by the Fire Department prior to initiation of business operations
within the City.
      B.   Inspections are required annually and prior to issuance of a mobile
food vending license. It shall be the obligation of the mobile food vendor to
schedule the inspection with the Fire Department. Class I and II State license
classifications are not required to meet this inspection requirement.
      C.   All Class III and IV mobile food units shall have an acceptable fire
suppression system, as determined by the Fire Department.
      D.   Upon completion of the annual fire inspection, a certificate shall
be issued to the applicant to verify completion of the fire inspection. Said
certificate shall be kept in the vehicle during operation.
      E.   At the discretion of the Fire Department, they may accept the
inspection of the mobile food unit by another city’s Fire Inspector to satisfy
the annual inspection requirement. Applicant is obligated to contact the Fire
Department to verify whether or not another community’s inspection is adequate
to fulfill obligation of City inspection requirements.
   4.   Mobile Food Unit Licensing Application.
      A.   Filing. Application requests shall be filed with the Clerk. No
application request shall be accepted for filing and processing unless it
conforms to the requirements of this chapter. This would include a complete and
true application, all of the required materials and information prescribed, and
is accompanied by the appropriate fees.
      B.   Timely Submittal. Unless otherwise provided herein, applications
must be submitted not less than 10 calendar days prior to the proposed start
date of the mobile food unit activities. The City reserves the right to reject
any applications that have not been timely submitted to the City.
      C.   Applicant’s Responsibility. Receiving approval of a mobile food unit
license from the City shall not preclude, supersede, circumvent, or waive the
applicant’s responsibility to obtain any additional permits, licenses, and
approvals for other applicable local, State, and federal regulations.
      D.   Application Contents. Application shall be made on a form provided
by the City and shall include:
         (1)   Full name of the applicant.
         (2)   Applicant’s contact information including mailing address, phone
numbers, and e-mail address.
         (3)   State health inspection certificate with the classification
level of the State license.
         (4)   Description of the kitchen facilities, cooking facilities,
preparation area, safety features (such as, but not limited to, suppression
system) of the mobile food unit.
         (5)   Photographs of the mobile food unit from the front, side, and
back.
         (6)   Make, model, and year of vehicle to be used and the license
plate number.
         (7)   Overall size of the vehicle; length and width.
         (8)   Copy of Fire Department inspection certificate.
         (9)   Fee.
      E.   Character of Applicant. Upon receipt of the complete application as
required by this chapter, the Police Chief or a designee shall investigate the
applicant as deemed necessary for the protection of the public health, safety,
welfare, and good.
         (1)   Unsatisfactory Character and Business Responsibility. If, as a
result of such investigation, the applicant’s character and business
responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory such that would harm the public
good, the Police Chief may endorse on such application disapproval and state
reasons for disapproval and return the application to the Clerk who shall
notify the applicant in writing that the application has been disapproved,
state the reasons for the denial, and the applicant’s right to appeal under
Subsection E(3) of this section.
         (2)   Satisfactory Character and Business Responsibility. If, as a
result of such investigation, the applicant’s character and business
responsibility are found to be satisfactory, the Police Chief may endorse
approval on the application and shall return the application to the Clerk and
the license may be issued.
         (3)   Right to Appeal. Any applicant whose application for license was
disapproved as under Subsection E(1) of this section may appeal to the Council
at its next regularly scheduled meeting by filing with the Clerk a written
request for an appeal to the Council at least seven days prior to the meeting.
As a result of this appeal, the Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the
decision of the Clerk not to issue the license. If the application for license
is denied, the applicant is not eligible for the issuance of a license under
this chapter for a period of one year from the date of notification that the
license application was disapproved, was served in person or deposited in U.S.
mail.
      F.   Applications Deemed Withdrawn. Any application received shall be
deemed withdrawn if it has been held in abeyance, awaiting the submittal of
additional requested information from the applicant, and if the applicant has
not communicated in writing with the City and made reasonable progress within
30 days from the last written notification from the City to the applicant. The
application fee is nonrefundable. Any application deemed withdrawn shall
require submission of a new application and fees to begin a new review and
approval process.
      G.   Issuance of License. Upon completion of the review process and a
determination of compliance with the applicable regulations, the Clerk will
issue a mobile food unit license.
      H.   Modification of License After Issuance. Should the mobile food
vendor change the food or beverage being offered during the term of an issued
license that would change the designation of the mobile food unit to a higher
State licensing level classification, a new application and fire inspection
shall be required.
   5.   Mobile Food Units on Public Property. No mobile food unit may be
operated on public property except as part of an approved event under a public
property special event permit issued by the Clerk’s office or as authorized by
the Director of Leisure Services or their designee, within a City park or
greenway. Requests for authorization to vend within a City park or greenway
(not as part of a City permitted public property special event) may be
submitted no less than five days and no more than 15 days prior to the
requested day of vending.
   6.   Unattended Mobile Food Unit. No mobile food unit shall be left
unattended or stored on any site overnight, unless that property is under the
ownership or control of (by way of a lease or other contractual agreement) the
operator of the unit and is being done so in compliance with all other City
Code requirements or the mobile food unit is a participant in a multiple
(contiguous) day, City permitted, public property special event. Any mobile
food unit found unattended shall be considered in violation of these
regulations and subject to license revocation, municipal infraction, towing, or
any other action legally allowed.
   7.   Music and Sound Making Devices. The use of music or sound making
devices as a part of a mobile food unit shall be prohibited, unless expressly
allowed as part of an approved event.
   8.   Mobile Food Unit Performance Standards. Persons conducting business
from a mobile food unit must do so in compliance with the following standards:
      A.   The mobile food vendor must obtain expressed written consent of the
property owner or lessee to use the property on which they propose to operate.
The written consent must be kept in the unit at all times that the unit is on
the property. Written consent does not excuse or permit the violation of any
other imposable regulations.
      B.   The operator of the mobile food unit shall display their City
license in full view of the public in or on the unit.
      C.   Mobile food units shall only be allowed on nonresidential
properties, except in the case of an approved residential block party or
private catering arrangement, so long as it is in compliance with all other
City Code requirements related to residential property.
      D.   Mobile food units that are within 300 feet of a residential use or
residentially zoned property, shall be limited to hours of operation between 7:
00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m.
      E.   A mobile food unit operating on nonresidential property (excluding
those operating as part of City permitted “public property special event”) may
only do so during the usual posted business hours of the consenting business
(es) of the property the mobile food unit is utilizing or during the posted
hours of the City park being utilized. Mobile food units may enter a
nonresidential property in order to set up to conduct business up to one-half
hour prior to the usual posted opening time of the corresponding business or
City park and must depart from the property no later than one-half hour after
the usual posted closing time of the corresponding business or City park. In
the case of operating a mobile food unit on nonresidential property where the
corresponding business(es) does not have usual posted business operating hours
or operates on a 24-hour type basis, the mobile food unit may not remain on the
premises for longer than 18 hours and must depart for at least six hours before
reentering unless operating under an approved public property special event
permit.
      F.   A mobile food unit operating on nonresidential property as part of a
City permitted public property special event may only do so during the granted
time period for the event.
      G.   Mobile food units must maintain a minimum separation between units
of 15 feet.
      H.   Mobile food unit operation is not a generally acceptable use of a
nonresidential parking lot and may only be allowed if doing so does not
diminish the usable number of parking spots within the lot to below the minimum
threshold needed as established by the City site plan for the property. It is
the joint responsibility of the property owner or lessee and mobile food unit
owner to ensure that this provision is not violated. Exceptions to this rule
may be applied for by way of a City approved temporary site plan amendment.
      I.   Mobile food units shall serve patrons which are on foot only; no
drive-up service to the unit itself shall be provided or allowed.
      J.   The mobile food unit must be located on a paved surface, unless
approved as part of a public property special event permit or through a
temporary site plan amendment.
      K.   No mobile food unit may be located on a vacant property or lot with
a vacant building. Exceptions to this rule may be granted by City staff after a
review of the particular property and the vendor has been able to make
arrangements to ensure safe and sanitary conditions. This would include, but is
not limited to: employee access to restrooms, adequate access for fire and
police personnel/vehicles, and that the site in general is free from hazards or
dangerous conditions.
      L.   No mobile food unit may operate within 100 feet of a permanent
restaurant or business offering food or beverage services unless they receive
expressed written consent of the restaurant or business owner.
      M.   All mobile food units shall maintain a minimum separation from
buildings, five feet for State IA Class I and II units and 15 feet for State IA
Class III and IV units, as measured to the closest building element including
awnings or canopies, tents, or membrane structures. Location of the food unit
shall not impede pedestrians entering or exiting a building.
      N.   The window or area where a patron orders and receives their purchase
shall be located so as to not require a patron to stand, or create a line that
may cause pedestrians to be in the public right-of-way, vehicle travel lane,
including parking lot drive aisles, or similar situation that may create a
potential safety hazard. Adequate safe space for patrons waiting for their
order must be available on the property where the mobile food unit is located.
      O.   With the exception of pushcarts as allowed herein, no mobile food
unit shall be placed on a public or private sidewalk. Pushcarts may locate on
or adjacent to a private sidewalk or public sidewalk, including the Clive
Greenbelt Trails, only as part of an approved public property special event
permit. However, a minimum 48-inch open walkway must be maintained for passing
pedestrians. The placement of the pushcart shall be in such a manner so as to
minimize encroachment into the 48-inch walkway by patrons waiting in line for
service from the pushcart.
      P.   Signs are limited to those that are attached to the exterior of the
mobile unit and must be mounted flat against the unit and not project more than
six inches from the exterior of the unit. No freestanding signs, banners,
flags, or similar items are allowed. Off premises signs directing patrons to
the mobile food unit are prohibited.
      Q.   During business hours, the mobile food vendor shall provide a trash
receptacle for use by customers.
      R.   The mobile food vendor shall keep the area around the mobile food
unit clear of litter and debris at all times.
      S.   All mobile food units shall be located in such a manner as to not
create a safety hazard, such as blocking emergency access to buildings and the
site, obstructing access to fire hydrants, impeding entering and exiting from a
building, creating a visual impediment for the motoring public at drive
entrances, intersections, pedestrian crossings, or similar movement and access.
   9.   Property Owner/Lessee Responsibility. By allowing the mobile food unit
on their property, the property owner or lessee jointly and severally with the
vendor are responsible for compliance with this chapter and to ensure the
safety of pedestrians and access of emergency vehicles to and around the site.
Failure to do so could result in the property owner or lessee being party to
any enforcement actions or penalties allowed by law.
4-3-5 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   1.   Fraudulent Representation/Harassment. No licensee shall falsely or
fraudulently misrepresent the quality, character, or quantity of any article,
item, or commodity offered for sale, or sell any unwholesome or tainted food or
foodstuffs. No licensee shall harass, intimidate, coerce, or threaten any
individual to induce a sale.
   2.   Failure to Maintain Licenses and Permits. Failure of any applicant to
maintain the appropriate County, State, and federal licenses and permits,
during the term of the local license or permits, shall be considered an
unlawful act and subject to revocation or any other penalties available to the
City.
4-3-6 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   1.   Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the City as follows:
      A.   Grounds. The Clerk or Clerk’s designee may suspend or revoke any
license issued under this chapter, for any of, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
         (1)   The licensee has made fraudulent statements in their application
for the license or in the conduct of their business.
         (2)   The licensee has violated this chapter or any other chapter of
this Code or has otherwise conducted their business in an unlawful manner.
         (3)   The licensee has conducted their business in such manner as to
endanger the public welfare, safety, order, or morals.
         (4)   The Clerk has received and investigated three or more found
complaints during the licensed period related to the manner in which the
licensee is conducting business.
      B.   Notice of Suspension or Revocation; Right to Appeal. The Clerk or
Clerk’s designee shall cause notice of the license revocation to be served in
person by a City official or by mail to the licensee’s local address, which
notice shall specify the reason(s) for such action, at which time operations of
the licensee must cease within the corporate limits of the City. The licensee
may appeal the revocation of the license to the Council at its next regularly
scheduled meeting by filing with the Clerk a written request for an appeal to
the Council at least seven days prior to the meeting. The Council may affirm,
modify, or reverse the decision of the Clerk to revoke such license. If a
license is revoked, no refund of any license fee paid shall be made. Upon the
revocation of a license, the licensee is not eligible for the issuance of a new
license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date the license
revocation is served in person or deposited in the U.S. mail.
4-3-7 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 4
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS
 
4-4-1 Definitions               4-4-8 Inspection of Register and Property
4-4-2 License Required          4-4-9 Ticket for Property Received
4-4-3 Exemptions                4-4-10 Holding Period
4-4-4 Affidavit Required        4-4-11 Police Order to Hold Property
4-4-5 Application               4-4-12 Prohibited Acts
4-4-6 Surety Bond               4-4-13 License Denial, Suspension, or
                                Revocation
4-4-7 Records Register Required 4-4-14 Penalty
 
4-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Pawnbroker” means a person who loans money on deposit or pledge of
personal property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of
personal property or other valuable thing on the condition of selling the item
back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel
mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part
thereof so mortgaged, or any person who displays at that person’s place of
business the sign of three gilt or yellow balls, generally used by pawnbrokers
to denote their business, or anyone holding themselves out to be a pawnbroker.
   2.   “Secondhand goods dealer” means any person whose business includes
selling, buying, or receiving any tangible personal property, previously owned,
used, rented, or leased. The term “secondhand goods dealer” includes
pawnbrokers.
4-4-2 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall carry on or engage in business as a secondhand goods dealer
in the City without first having obtained a license therefor from the City and
paying an annual license fee in an amount set by resolution of the Council. Any
person having several or separate places of business shall pay the license fee
and procure a license for each place. The license provided for herein is valid
only for the location designated in the application pursuant to Section
4-4-4 of this chapter and shall be prominently displayed therein at all times.
Upon any change in any of the information required to be submitted as part of
the application, the licensee shall, within three days of such change, notify
the Clerk of such change, in writing; and in the event of a change of address
where doing business, the license shall be returned to the Clerk and an amended
license issued designating the new location. The amended license will be valid
for the length of the time remaining on the original license. All licenses
issued under this chapter shall expire one year after the original date of
issuance.
4-4-3 EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to or include the following:
   1.   The sale of secondhand goods where all of the following are present:
      A.   The sale is held on property occupied as a dwelling by the seller or
owned, rented, or leased by a charitable or political organization; i.e., yard
sale, garage sale, or moving sale.
      B.   The items offered for sale are owned by the occupant or seller.
      C.   The sale does not exceed a period of 96 consecutive hours.
      D.   No more than two sales are held in any 12-month period.
      E.   None of the items offered for sale have been purchased for resale or
received on consignment for purpose of resale.
   2.   The sale of secondhand books or magazines.
   3.   The sale of goods at an auction held by a licensed auctioneer.
   4.   The business of buying or selling only those secondhand goods taken as
part or full payment for new goods and where such business is incident to and
not the primary business of a person.
   5.   A bulk sale of property from a merchant, manufacturer, or wholesaler
having an established place of business or of goods sold at open sale from
bankrupt stock.
   6.   Goods sold at the public market, i.e., farmers’ market, etc.
   7.   Goods sold at a bona fide antique, used furniture, or used clothing
store, i.e., a business in which 75 percent of the business’s revenue is
derived through the sale of antiques, used furniture, or used clothes.
4-4-4 AFFIDAVIT REQUIRED.
   Before any license required by this chapter is issued, the applicant
therefor shall file with the Clerk an affidavit that the applicant will observe
and carry out the requirements of any provisions of this Code in force at the
time of application, or any provision of this Code passed thereafter and during
the time the applicant’s license is in force, in relation to secondhand goods
dealers or their business.
4-4-5 APPLICATION.
   1.   Information. Any applicant for a secondhand goods dealer’s license must
complete an application form provided by the Clerk. The application form shall
contain the following information:
      A.   Name, place of birth, date of birth, and home address of applicant.
      B.   Designation of location, including street and number, where business
is to be transacted, plus name and address of the owner of the premises.
      C.   A detailed drawing of the interior of the place of business and any
other storage facilities used by the secondhand goods dealer for storing items
in the dealer’s possession.
      D.   A statement as to whether, within the previous five years, the
applicant has been convicted of any law relating to theft, damage, or trespass
to property, sale of a controlled substance or the operation of a business,
including the nature and date of the offense and the penalty received.
      E.   Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, or
partnership, and:
         (1)   If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of
all partners;
         (2)   If the applicant is a corporation, the state of incorporation
and the names and addresses of all officers and directors.
      F.   If the applicant is a natural person, the application shall be
signed and sworn to by the person; if a corporation, by an agent authorized to
sign; and if a partnership, by a partner.
      G.   The name of the manager or proprietor of the business.
      H.   Applicant shall provide the Clerk with any additional information
required by the Clerk with regard to the application.
   2.   Investigation. The Police Department shall investigate the facts set
forth in the application and shall report to the Clerk its findings thereon.
The applicant shall furnish to the Police Department such evidence as it may
reasonably require in support of the statements set forth in the application.
4-4-6 SURETY BOND.
   Each applicant for a license required by this chapter shall, before the
license is issued to the applicant, file with the Clerk a bond, with a surety
approved by the Council, in the penal sum of $1,000.00, conditioned that the
applicant will comply with and observe the terms and conditions of all
provisions of this Code relating to secondhand goods dealers or their business,
and will pay all costs, fines, and penalties incurred on account of the
applicant’s failure to observe such provisions and will pay all damages
resulting to any person by reason of the wrongful purchase or receiving of any
stolen property or property from any minor, which bond shall be approved by the
Council and filed with the Clerk.
4-4-7 RECORDS REGISTER REQUIRED.
   1.   Every secondhand goods dealer is required to keep a record register in
which the dealer accurately, intelligently, and legibly enters, in ink, in the
English language, at the time of purchasing or receiving any article or item:
      A.   The value of the article;
      B.   The amount paid, advanced, or loaned for the article;
      C.   A detailed, complete, and accurate description of the article,
including identifying marks;
      D.   The article’s serial number and model number, if any;
      E.   The name of the person from whom the article is purchased or
received, their residence address, social security number, height, and general
description;
      F.   The date, time, and place of the transaction;
      G.   The time and date when the article is to be redeemed or bought back;
      H.   Any mortgage or bill of sale taken, or receipt or pawn ticket given;
      I.   When, and by whom, an article was bought back or redeemed;
      J.   When, to whom, and how an article was disposed of, not to include
pawned items.
   2.   Every secondhand goods dealer shall also record the date of disposition
of said article or any part or portion thereof. Said disposition report shall
be located in the same book and at the same place where the receiving records
for said article are located.
   3.   Any person who fails to keep such records or fails to make the required
entries therein, or intentionally or knowingly makes any false or
unintelligible entry or any entry which the dealer has reason to believe is
untrue, or who fails to make the inquiries necessary to enable the dealer to
make such entries or any of them, or who fails to produce the records when
requested, or who destroys or negligently permits such records to be destroyed,
or lost is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
   4.   Every secondhand goods dealer shall submit to the Police Department, by
12:00 p.m. on Friday of each week, a record of each item received on pawn or
purchased outright. Such record shall include all information required by
Subsection 1 of this section. A secondhand goods dealer or employee who fails
to submit such record on each item received is guilty of a misdemeanor.
4-4-8 INSPECTION OF REGISTER AND PROPERTY.
   The secondhand goods dealer’s register, required by this chapter, shall at
all times be open to inspection by a duly authorized officer of the City
without warrant. The secondhand goods dealer shall also, upon request, show to
any such duly authorized officer any articles purchased, taken, or received by
the dealer or deposited with the dealer and in the dealer’s possession.
4-4-9 TICKET FOR PROPERTY RECEIVED.
   To each person selling, negotiating, depositing, or leaving any property
with a secondhand goods dealer, the secondhand goods dealer shall give a ticket
upon which shall be printed or written a copy of all entries required by this
chapter to be made in the secondhand goods dealer’s register with reference to
the transactions with such person. No charge shall be made by the secondhand
goods dealer for such ticket.
4-4-10 HOLDING PERIOD.
   Any item received by a secondhand goods dealer shall not be sold,
transferred, altered, removed from the premises, or otherwise disposed of for
seven days after the date of purchase. However, an individual may redeem an
item that they pawned any time after the item was received on deposit,
excluding Sundays and legal holidays. Failure to hold said items for the
required holding period is deemed a simple misdemeanor.
4-4-11 POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.
   The police are authorized to seize property, with proper seizure notice, or
require the dealer to hold property which they have probable cause to believe
is stolen property. A receipt will be given to the secondhand goods dealer for
all property seized.
4-4-12 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   1.   No person under the age of 18 years shall sell or pawn any item with
any secondhand goods dealer, nor shall any secondhand goods dealer receive any
items from a person under the age of 18 years.
   2.   No dealer shall receive any goods unless the seller presents two forms
of identification. Proper identification shall consist of, but not be limited
to, driver’s license, picture ID, medicard, draft card, or major credit card.
   3.   No goods or merchandise shall be stored or continuously displayed on
any public street, alley, or public parking. Any goods or merchandise stored or
displayed outside a fully enclosed building shall be done so in an orderly and
clean fashion so as not to create a nuisance, as defined in the Code of Iowa or
this Code, or stored or displayed in such a manner as to provide a habitat or
breeding area for rodents or insects. Goods and merchandise stored or displayed
outside, which are not designed to be placed, freestanding, on the ground,
shall be placed on racks or shelves.
4-4-13 LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION.
   1.   Any license under this chapter may be denied, suspended, or revoked for
any of the following reasons:
      A.   The proposed use is in conflict with the zoning ordinance;
      B.   The proposed use is in conflict with any health, building, building
maintenance, or other provision of this Code or State law;
      C.   Violation of any provision of this chapter;
      D.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements in securing a license;
      E.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements in the course of the
applicant’s business;
      F.   Conviction within the preceding five years of any public offense
relating to theft, damage, or trespass to property or to the operation of a
business.
   2.   The Clerk may, upon receipt of information alleging that grounds exist
to deny, suspend, or revoke the license of any applicant or licensee under this
chapter, and after consultation with the legal department, report the
circumstances to the Council, which in such cases may cause a notice to be
served on the applicant or licensee, which notice shall state that a denial,
suspension, or revocation hearing has been set before the Council, the grounds
for the proposed denial, suspension, or revocation, the date and time of the
hearing and the place where the hearing will be conducted. Upon such hearing,
if the Council determines that one or more of such grounds do exist, it may
deny an application or suspend or revoke an existing license. In the event such
license is revoked, no license under this chapter shall be issued to that
licensee for a period of one year.
4-4-14 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 5
HOUSE MOVERS
 
4-5-1 Definition         4-5-8 Public Safety
4-5-2 Permit Required    4-5-9 Time Limit
4-5-3 Application        4-5-10 Removal by City
4-5-4 Bond Required      4-5-11 Protect Pavement
4-5-5 Insurance Required 4-5-12 Overhead Wires
4-5-6 Permit Fee         4-5-13 Penalty
4-5-7 Permit Issued
 
4-5-1 DEFINITION.
   A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a building or
similar structure upon, over, or across public streets or property when the
building or structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks,
dollies, or any other specialized moving equipment or any method other than a
properly licensed motor vehicle.
4-5-2 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of “house mover” as
herein defined without a valid permit from the Community Development Department
for each house, building, or similar structure to be moved.
4-5-3 APPLICATION.
   Application for a house mover’s permit shall be submitted on forms provided
by the Community Development Department.
4-5-4 BOND REQUIRED.
   The applicant shall post with the Community Development Department a penal
bond in the minimum sum of $5,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to
issue such bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment
for any damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs
incurred by the City in the course of moving the building or structure.
4-5-5 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that
the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration
of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the
following minimum amounts:
   1.   Bodily injury   $1,000,000.00 per accident
   2.   Property damage   $300,000.00 per accident
4-5-6 PERMIT FEE.
   A permit fee as determined by the City shall be payable at the time of
filing the application with the Community Development Department. A separate
permit shall be required for each house, building, or similar structure to be
moved.
4-5-7 PERMIT ISSUED.
   Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate,
and payment of the required fee, the Community Development Department shall
issue a permit.
4-5-8 PUBLIC SAFETY.
   At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, or public property, the permittee shall maintain
flagmen at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to
the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure. At all times when the
building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or public
property, the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights at the
intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind, and ahead of the
building or structure.
4-5-9 TIME LIMIT.
   No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to
remain upon any street or other public way for a period of more than 12 hours
without having first secured the written approval of the City.
4-5-10 REMOVAL BY CITY.
   In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation
of Section 4-5-9 of this chapter, the City is authorized to remove such
building or structure and assess the costs thereof against the permit holder
and the surety on the permit holder’s bond.
4-5-11 PROTECT PAVEMENT.
   It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement,
unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are at
least one-inch in width for each 1,000 pounds of weight of such building. If
there is any question as to the weight of a house or building, the estimate of
the City’s Engineer or Community Development Director as to such weight shall
be final.
4-5-12 OVERHEAD WIRES.
   The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone,
cable television, and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and
replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same.
4-5-13 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 7
AFTER-HOURS BUSINESSES
4-7-1 Purpose; Findings               4-7-11 Examination of Premises
4-7-2 Definitions                     4-7-12 Violation by Clerks, Agents, and
                                      Employees
4-7-3 License or Permit Required;     4-7-13 Procedures for Suspension,
Eligibility                           Revocation, or Civil Penalty
4-7-4 Conditions for License Approval
4-7-5 License Application             4-7-14 Enforcement Alternatives
4-7-6 Security Required; Security     4-7-15 Causes for Suspension,
Employee Training                     Revocation, or Civil Penalty
4-7-7 Investigation Procedure         4-7-16 Emergency Suspension
4-7-8 License Fees                    4-7-17 Effect of Revocation
4-7-9 License Renewals                4-7-18 Appeal
4-7-10 Scope of License; Sale,
Transfer, and Assignability
 
 
4-7-1 PURPOSE; FINDINGS.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the reasonable regulation of
after-hours businesses within the City. The Council finds that the existence of
after-hours businesses, which allow the on-premises consumption of alcohol
during early morning hours, in the greater Des Moines metropolitan area has
caused detrimental effects on the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life
of residents, visitors, and upon cities in general. Based on these findings,
the Council has deemed it necessary to enact the following regulations for
after-hours businesses in the City.
4-7-2 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   1.   “After-hours business” means any business open during any time between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. any day of the week and where patrons are
allowed to bring their own beer and wine onto the business premises.
   2.   “Beer” means any liquid capable of being used for beverage purposes
made by the fermentation of an infusion in potable water of barley, malt, and
hops, with or without unmarred grains or decorticated and degerminated grains,
or made by the fermentation of or by distillation of the fermented products of
fruit, fruit extracts, or other agricultural products, containing more than
one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, but not more than five percent of
alcohol by weight but not including mixed drinks or cocktails; or, as otherwise
defined by succeeding State legislation.
   3.   “Business premises” or “licensed premises” means all buildings and
properties including parking lots owned or leased for the benefit of the
operation of the after-hours business.
   4.   “Designated security employee” means an agent, contract employee,
independent contractor, servant, or employee of a licensee or permittee who
works in a security position in any capacity at a commercial establishment
licensed or permitted under this chapter.
   5.   “Hotel” or “motel” means premises licensed by the State Department of
Inspections and Appeals and regularly or seasonally kept open in a bona fide
manner for the lodging of transient guests and with 20 or more sleeping rooms.
   6.   “Person” means any individual, association, partnership, corporation,
or club owning or operating an after-hours business.
   7.   “Person of good moral character, or as otherwise defined by succeeding
State legislation” means any person who meets all of the following
requirements:
      A.   The person has such financial standing and good reputation as will
satisfy the City that the person will comply with this chapter and all laws,
ordinances, and regulations applicable to the person's operations under this
chapter.
         (1)   In evaluating any applicant’s “financial standing,” the City may
consider the following: an applicant’s “financial standing” may include, but is
not limited to, verified source(s) of financial support and adequate operating
capital for the applicant’s proposed after-hours business, a record of prompt
payment of local or State taxes due, a record of prompt payment to the City and
the various utility companies of fees or charges due the City or the utility
companies for municipal services or utilities provided, and prompt payment of
or satisfaction of any fee, fine, or civil penalty imposed pursuant to any
chapter of this Code.
         (2)   In evaluating an applicant’s “good reputation,” the City may
consider such factors as, but not limited to, the following: a pattern or
practice of violating any of the requirements or prohibitions set out in this
chapter to which the licensee or licensee’s agents or employees have pleaded
guilty or been found guilty in a criminal court or have been otherwise
sanctioned under this chapter, a pattern or practice of violating any of the
State alcoholic beverages laws and regulations for which corrective action has
been taken, convictions of licensee under laws relating to operating a motor
vehicle while under the influence of drugs or alcohol, convictions under any
laws relating to illegal drug use, possession or sale, convictions on
misdemeanor charges, and their recency and severity.
      B.   The person is not subject to or prohibited from obtaining a liquor
control license or a wine or beer permit.
      C.   Notwithstanding Subsection E of this definition, the applicant is a
citizen of the United States and a resident of the State, or licensed to do
business in the State in the case of a corporation. Notwithstanding Subsection
E of this definition, in the case of a partnership, only one general partner
need be a resident of the State.
      D.   The person has not been convicted of a felony. However, if the
person’s conviction of a felony occurred more than five years before the date
of the application for a license or permit, and if the person’s rights of
citizenship have been restored by the Governor, the City may determine that the
person is of good moral character, notwithstanding such conviction.
      E.   The requirements of this definition apply to the following:
         (1)   Each of the officers, directors, and partners of such person.
         (2)   A person who directly or indirectly owns or controls 10 percent
or more of any class of stock of such person.
         (3)   A person who directly or indirectly has an interest of 10
percent or more in the ownership or profits of such person.
         (4)   For the purposes of this subsection, an individual and the
individual’s spouse shall be regarded as one person.
   8.   “Wine” means any beverage containing more than five percent of alcohol
by weight, but not more than 17 percent of alcohol by weight, or 21.25 percent
of alcohol by volume obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar contents
of fruits or other agricultural products, but excluding any product containing
alcohol derived from malt or by the distillation process from grain, cereal,
molasses, or cactus; or, as otherwise defined by succeeding State legislation.
4-7-3 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED; ELIGIBILITY.
   No person shall operate an after-hours business in the City without first
applying for and paying the license fee to procure an after-hours business
license. This chapter, however, shall not apply to hotels or motels. Upon
meeting the requirements imposed by this chapter, a person who is of good moral
character as defined by this chapter, may apply for, and hold an after-hours
license. For a corporation or partnership, the officers of the corporation and
the partners of a partnership shall be persons of good moral character as
defined by this chapter or State law.
4-7-4 CONDITIONS FOR LICENSE APPROVAL.
   The following conditions and regulations must be met by an applicant for an
after-hours business license:
   1.   The applicant must give consent in writing on the application that
members of the Fire and Police Departments and the Building Official may enter
upon the business premises without warrant to inspect for violations of the
provisions of State and municipal law, as well as for compliance with other
applicable Fire, Building, and Health Code regulations.
   2.   The premises for which an after-hours business license is sought must
be located within an area where such business is permitted and conforms to City
zoning requirements.
   3.   All applicable permits and licenses provided for by this Code shall be
displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises of the license holder and at
all times shall be subject to inspection.
   4.   No after-hours business license shall be approved for premises which do
not conform to all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, and health and
fire regulations.
4-7-5 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   1.   Filing of Application. All applicants for an after-hours business
license shall apply in writing to the Clerk. Applications for the issuance of
an after-hours business license shall be filed at the time and in the number of
copies as the Clerk shall prescribe, on forms prescribed by the Clerk.
   2.   Information Required. All applications shall be made in the name of the
owner of the business, whether an individual, a partnership, or a corporation,
and shall contain the following:
      A.   The full name, residence address, business address, date of birth,
and social security number of the applicant and, when the applicant is a
partnership or corporation, of the partners or officers.
      B.   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall
be set forth exactly as shown in its Articles of Incorporation together with
the names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors, and each
stockholder holding more than 10 percent of the stock of the corporation; if
the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and
the residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If
one or more of the partners is a corporation, the subsections of this section
pertaining to a corporate application apply.
      C.   The name and address of the owner of the building where such after-
hours business will be located.
      D.   If required by the Clerk, a sketch or diagram of the proposed
licensed premises, in such form and containing such information as the Clerk
may require.
      E.   A copy of a valid State Sales Tax Permit for operation of the after-
hours business.
4-7-6 SECURITY REQUIRED; SECURITY EMPLOYEE TRAINING.
   1.   Security Required. An after-hours business license holder shall provide
adequate security to provide for crowd control and the safety of patrons.
   2.   Security Employee. The City may, as a condition of obtaining and
holding an after-hours business license or permit, require a “designated
security employee,” as defined in this chapter, to be trained and certified in
security methods. This training shall include, but is not limited to, mediation
techniques, civil rights, or unfair practices awareness, and providing
instruction on the proper physical restraint methods used against a person who
has become combative.
4-7-7 INVESTIGATION PROCEDURE.
   1.   Background Check. Upon submission of an original application for an
after-hours business license to the Clerk, each person listed in the original
application shall also obtain and provide the Clerk with an officially sealed
Iowa Division of Criminal Investigation (“DCI”) personal background check at
that person’s expense. The Clerk shall forward a copy of the original
application documents to the Police Chief. The Police Chief may then conduct an
investigation as to the truth of the facts averred in the application documents
and transmit the results to the Clerk. The Police Chief and Clerk shall then
make a recommendation to the Council for approval or disapproval of the
application.
   2.   Police Review of Renewal Application. Upon submission of an application
for renewal of a current after-hours business license to the Clerk, any person
listed in the renewal application who did not previously obtain and provide the
Clerk with an officially sealed DCI personal background check must do so at
that person’s own expense. The Clerk shall forward a copy of the renewal
application documents to the Police Chief. The Police Chief shall then review
and comment on the renewal application, and the Police Chief and the Clerk will
make a recommendation to the Council for approval or disapproval of the renewal
application.
   3.   Inspection of Premises. The City’s Building Official, Zoning
Enforcement Officer, and the Fire Chief or their designees shall inspect the
premises to determine if they conform to the City’s requirements. No license or
permit shall be approved or issued unless or until the Clerk has been advised
that the applicant has fully complied with all requirements of this chapter and
all applicable ordinances and codes regulating fire, buildings, health, and
zoning.
4-7-8 LICENSE FEES.
   1.   An applicant for an after-hours business license shall submit a fee to
the Clerk at the time of filing the application.
   2.   All after-hours business licenses, unless sooner suspended or revoked,
shall expire at 6:00 a.m., one year from the date of issuance.
   3.   An applicant who files for renewal less than 30 days prior to the date
of any license expiration shall pay a late fee.
   4.   If the application is denied, or if the application is withdrawn,
before final action is taken by the City, a portion of the application fee
shall be retained by the Clerk for the cost of administration.
   5.   The license fee, its nonrefundable portion, and the late fee for the
after-hours business license shall be in the amounts set in the schedule of
fees adopted by the Council by resolution.
4-7-9 LICENSE RENEWALS.
   Every person operating an after-hours business shall apply for an after-
hours business license annually as if for an original license. There shall be
no automatic renewal. Such application shall be filed, and the fee paid not
less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the current license.
4-7-10 SCOPE OF LICENSE; SALE, TRANSFER, AND ASSIGNABILITY.
   1.   An after-hours business license shall be a personal privilege and is
revocable for cause. It is not property, nor is it subject to attachment and
execution, nor alienable nor assignable, and it shall cease upon the death of
the permittee or licensee, or terminate upon sale.
   2.   Every permit or license shall be issued in the name of the applicant,
and no person holding a permit or license shall allow any other person to use
the permit or license.
   3.   No after-hours business license shall be sold or transferred. The
purchaser of any after-hours business or of the majority of the stock of any
corporation operating an after-hours business shall make application for and
obtain a new license before operating such business at the location for which
the license has been issued. The after-hours business license shall not be
assignable.
4-7-11 EXAMINATION OF PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to refuse, resist, or attempt to prevent
any City employee or any authorized City agent from making a reasonable
examination of the business premises.
4-7-12 VIOLATION BY CLERKS, AGENTS, AND EMPLOYEES.
   Every clerk, agent, or employee of any after-hours business shall be subject
to and bound by all the sections of this chapter and State law and be liable
for the same penalties and to the same extent as their employer or principal
for any violation of this chapter or State law. Any violation of any section of
this chapter or State law by any clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee shall
be deemed the act of the licensee and shall subject the license of said
licensee to civil penalty, suspension, or revocation.
4-7-13 PROCEDURES FOR SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR CIVIL PENALTY.
   1.   Whenever the Council finds that the licensee, or its employees or
agents, have furnished any false information required under this chapter, or
has violated or failed to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter
or State law, the Council may impose a civil penalty not to exceed $500.00 upon
the licensee or suspend or revoke the license.
   2.   No civil penalty, suspension, or revocation shall be issued, except
upon notice delivered to the licensee by mailing notice via regular mail,
addressed to the licensee at the licensed premises, a minimum of 10 days prior
to the date set for hearing.  Such notice shall inform the licensee of the
time, date, and place of hearing and shall set out briefly the reasons for the
hearing.
   3.   If, after such hearing, the Council makes a finding based on
substantial evidence that a violation of this chapter or State law did in fact
take place as alleged, the Council may impose an appropriate civil penalty or
suspend or revoke the license. The determination of whether to impose a civil
penalty or suspend or revoke such license shall be in the discretion of the
Council, and shall be dependent upon the circumstances surrounding the
violation and its severity.
   4.   A licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible for
another such license for a period of two years after such revocation.
   5.   Failure to pay a civil penalty imposed within 30 days of the resolution
imposing such penalty, if not stayed by appeal, shall result in an automatic
suspension of the after-hours business license for 30 consecutive days. The
Clerk shall issue a suspension order and the 30-day suspension shall commence
at 6:00 p.m. five business days following service of the order via ordinary
mail to the last known address of the licensee or permittee.
4-7-14 ENFORCEMENT ALTERNATIVES.
   Any person who fails to perform an act required by this chapter or State
law, or who commits an act prohibited by this chapter or State law, may be
subject to a municipal infraction, punishable as provided in Title 1 Chapter 4A
Municipal Infractions of this Code or pursuant to State law, as an alternative
to the penalty procedures of Section
4-7-13 of this chapter.
4-7-15 CAUSES FOR SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR CIVIL PENALTY.
   A criminal conviction is not a prerequisite to suspend, revoke, or impose a
civil penalty pursuant to this chapter. An after-hours business licensee or
permittee may be required to pay a civil penalty or have the license suspended
for a period not to exceed one year or revoked for violations of this chapter,
following notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
   1.   Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for the
after-hours business license.
   2.   Violation of any of the provisions of State or municipal law pertaining
to the operation of the after-hours business.
   3.   Any change in the ownership or interest in the business, which was not
previously reported to and approved by the City.
   4.   Any event which would have resulted in disqualification from receiving
such license or permit when originally issued or renewed.
   5.   Any sale, hypothecation, or transfer of such license or permit.
   6.   The failure or refusal on the part of the licensee or permittee to
render any report or remit any taxes to the Department of Revenue of the State
that are required by State law.
4-7-16 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION.
   1.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Police Chief
or their designee may temporarily suspend the after-hours business license and
order a temporary closure of the business in a situation involving an immediate
danger to public health, safety, or welfare.
   2.   The Police Department shall give written notice of the temporary
suspension and closure order along with a brief statement of the facts and
reasons for the decision to suspend to persons who are required to comply with
the order. Such notice shall state that the matter of temporary suspension and
closure will be heard by the Council at the first regularly scheduled Council
meeting after expiration of five calendar days from the temporary suspension/
closure. The suspension and order of closure is effective when issued and will
remain effective until the Council reviews the facts, circumstances, and
reasons for the temporary suspension and closure.
   3.   A copy of the written notice of suspension and closure shall be sent to
the Clerk. Such hearing shall be placed on the Council agenda for the next
regularly scheduled Council meeting after expiration of five calendar days from
the temporary suspension and closure.
   4.   The Council may take any action it is authorized to take under Section
4-7-13 of this chapter or reinstatement of the after-hours business license.
4-7-17 EFFECT OF REVOCATION.
   1.   Any licensee whose license or permit is revoked shall not thereafter be
permitted to hold a license in the City for a period of two years from the date
of such revocation.
   2.   A spouse or business associate holding 10 percent or more of the
capital stock or ownership interest in the business of a person whose license
or permit has been revoked shall not be issued a license and no license shall
be issued which covers any business in which such person has a financial
interest for a period of two years from the date of such revocation.
   3.   If a license is revoked, the premises covered by such license shall not
be relicensed as an after-hours business for one year.
4-7-18 APPEAL.
   1.   The right of appeal to the Council shall be afforded an applicant for
an after-hours business license, or for a renewal license, whose license has
been denied. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the Clerk’s office
within 10 days after notice of denial is sent by ordinary mail.
   2.   Any applicant who feels aggrieved by a decision of the Council
penalizing, suspending, revoking, or disapproving issuance of a license may
appeal from such decision within 30 days to the Polk County or Dallas County
District Court.
CHAPTER 8
LICENSING OF KENNELS † 4
 
4-8-1 Definitions             4-8-4 Review or Revocation of Kennel License
4-8-2 Kennel License Required 4-8-5 Penalty
4-8-3 Inspection Required
 
 
Notes
4 † EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Title 5 Chapter 7 of this Code for animal protection and
  control provisions.
4-8-1 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the
following definitions shall apply:
   1.   “Animal control officer” means an employee of the City or a contracted
individual, firm, or governmental entity who responds to and remedies animal
control issues or inspects kennel facilities within the City.
   2.   “Cat” See Section
5-7-1 of this Code.
   3.   “Dog” See Section
5-7-1 of this Code.
   4.   “Domesticated animal exercise yard” See Section
11-2-1 of this Code.
   5.   “Kennel” means any premises as identified by an individual mailing
address on which more than four dogs or cats or combinations thereof, six
months old or older, are held for sale, boarding, grooming, or medical care.
Such dogs or cats may be the property of the owner of the site or of other
persons.
   6.   “Nuisance” See Section
5-6-1 of this Code.
   7.   “Person” means an individual, association, firm, partnership, company,
corporation, or any other legal entity.
   8.   “Primary enclosure” means any structure used to immediately restrict an
animal to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, crate, or
compartment. Such enclosure shall be constructed and occupied in accordance
with the standards set forth by the Humane Society of the United States as well
as those included in Subsection
11-4-8(5) of this Code.
4-8-2 KENNEL LICENSE REQUIRED.
   A person shall not operate a kennel within the City unless the person has
obtained a license issued by the Clerk. Application for the license shall be
made in the manner provided by the Clerk. A license may be renewed annually
beginning one year from date of issue. A license fee in accordance with the
license fee schedule approved by the Council, which license fee schedule may be
modified from time to time with the approval of Council, shall be payable at
the time of filing the license application with the Clerk.
4-8-3 INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   Upon the filing of an application for the issuance of a license, and
annually after the granting of such license, the Animal Control Officer shall
inspect the kennel to determine material compliance with the following
requirements:
   1.   The kennel shall be operated in a safe, sanitary, and humane manner,
with due regard for the criteria promulgated by the Humane Society of the
United States.
   2.   All primary enclosures shall be in an interior, climate-controlled
area, and adequate odor and sound mitigation shall ensure that the kennel does
not create a nuisance to adjacent property.
   3.   All primary enclosures shall be of a size that will permit the dog or
cat housed by such enclosure to stand up, lie down, and easily turn around
within such enclosure.
   4.   Each dog kept overnight shall be provided exercise on at least a twice
daily basis either: 1) in an indoor or outdoor domesticated animal exercise
yard, which shall be constructed subject to the limitations set forth in
Subsection
11-4-8(6) of this Code, or 2) on a handheld leash. Dogs shall not be allowed to
remain in a domesticated animal exercise yard to an extent that causes a
nuisance to adjoining property.
   5.   The kennel may contain no more than one primary enclosure per 25 square
feet of indoor, climate-controlled space.
If, upon such inspection, the Animal Control Officer finds that a new or
existing kennel is in compliance with these requirements, the Clerk shall issue
or renew the kennel license. The Animal Control Officer may also inspect any
kennel from time to time upon reasonable notice to the licensee. If the Animal
Control Officer finds material noncompliance with these requirements, which
noncompliance is not cured within seven days’ written notice from the Animal
Control Officer, the determination of whether to issue, renew, or revoke the
license for such kennel shall be referred to the Animal Review Board for
consideration in the manner set forth in Section
4-8-4 of this chapter.
4-8-4 REVIEW OR REVOCATION OF KENNEL LICENSE.
   If, upon inspection of a kennel as set forth in Section
4-8-3 of this chapter, the Animal Control Officer determines that there is
material noncompliance with the requirements set forth therein, which
noncompliance is not cured within seven days’ written notice, the Animal
Control Officer shall deliver a written report concerning the issuance,
renewal, or revocation of the kennel license to the applicant or licensee and
the Clerk.
   1.   Within 30 days of the delivery of the report to the Clerk, the Animal
Review Board shall hold a hearing concerning the granting, renewal, or
revocation of the kennel license. Notice of said hearing shall be delivered to
the kennel license holder not later than 15 days before the date of said
hearing.
   2.   The Animal Control Officer shall appear at the hearing and present
information to the Animal Review Board regarding compliance with the criteria
set forth in Section
4-8-3 of this chapter.
   3.   The applicant or licensee may appear at the hearing and present
information to the Animal Review Board regarding compliance with the criteria
set forth in Section
4-8-3 of this chapter.
   4.   The Animal Review Board shall consider the testimony and evidence
provided by the applicant or licensee and the Animal Control Officer, and shall
make a recommendation to the Council regarding whether the kennel license shall
be granted, renewed, or revoked. The Council shall then make a determination
regarding the licensing of the kennel at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
If a kennel license is revoked by the Council, the revocation shall be
effective 10 calendar days following the Council’s determination that the
kennel license shall be revoked (“revocation date.”) In the event of a
revocation, the kennel license holder shall cause the kennel to terminate its
operations before the revocation date.
4-8-5 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 9
MASSAGE THERAPIST BUSINESSES
 
4-9-1 Purpose                       4-9-7 Conditions Governing Issuance
4-9-2 Definitions                   4-9-8 Exemptions
4-9-3 License Required              4-9-9 Grounds for Denial and Revocation or
                                    Suspension
4-9-4 License Fee                   4-9-10 Appeal
4-9-5 Application                   4-9-11 Restriction and Regulations
4-9-6 Granting or Denial of License 4-9-12 Penalty
 
4-9-1 PURPOSE.
   State licensed massage therapists and businesses offering massage therapy
services perform an important service in addressing the health and wellbeing of
our citizens. Unfortunately, there are businesses that advertise the provision
of massage therapy or other therapeutic services, but are engaged in various
illegal activities which may include prostitution or human trafficking. This
chapter is not intended to discourage a legitimately licensed massage therapist
or massage therapy business from providing their services in the City. The
purpose of this chapter is to identify and address businesses that engage in
the practice of massage therapy without a license or are involved in illegal
activities which may include prostitution or human trafficking. Businesses
providing massage therapy yet conducting various types of illegal activity are
harmful to the City and the image of the massage therapy profession. The
implementation of this chapter will better enable the City to proactively
screen, monitor, and remove businesses that are engaged in illegal activity.
4-9-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the
meanings herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a
different meaning is intended.
   1.   “License” means permission granted by competent authority to exercise a
certain privilege that, without such authorization, would constitute an illegal
act. The document that confers permission for an individual to engage in
massage therapy shall be issued by the Iowa Board of Massage Therapy for State
licenses; business licenses shall be issued by the City.
   2.   “Massage patron” means any person who receives, or pays to receive, a
massage or massage services from a massage therapist for value.
   3.   “Massage therapist” means a person licensed to practice the health care
service of the healing art of massage therapy under Chapter 152C of the Code of
Iowa.
   4.   “Massage therapy” means performance for compensation of massage,
myotherapy, massotherapy, bodywork, bodywork therapy, or therapeutic massage
including hydrotherapy, superficial hot and cold applications, vibration, body
cleansing and topical applications, or other therein which involves
manipulation of the muscle and connective tissue of the body, excluding osseous
tissue, to treat the muscle tonus system for the purpose of enhancing health,
muscle relaxation, increasing range of motion, reducing stress, relieving pain,
or improving circulation.
   5.   “Massage therapy business” means any place of business, whether the
physical property is owned, leased, or managed by a company or individual,
wherein any of the treatments, techniques, or methods of treatment referred to
in the definition of massage therapy of this section are administered,
practiced, used, given, or applied.
   6.   “Reflexology” means manipulation of the soft tissues of the human body
which is restricted to the hands, feet, or ears, performed by persons who do
not hold themselves out to be massage therapists or to be performing massage
therapy.
4-9-3 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a massage therapy business within the City, either
exclusively or in connection with another business, without being licensed as
provided in this chapter.
4-9-4 LICENSE FEE.
   1.   New Massage Therapy Businesses in City.
      A.   The license fee for a massage therapy business in the City, as well
as additional fees per employee, contractor, or individual providing therapy
services at the business (“additional therapist fee”), shall be set by the
license fee schedule approved by the Council, which license fee schedule may be
modified from time to time with the approval of Council. The license fee and
additional therapist fee shall be paid when the application is filed and when a
therapist is added to the business.
      B.   The license, if granted, and not revoked or suspended, shall be
valid so long as the business does not change more than 51 percent of the
ownership, business name, or the service provided. An annual review shall be
initiated by the Clerk, with assistance from the Police Department, to confirm
business ownership, business name, service(s) provided and accurate and up-to-
date State licenses for the employees, contractors, or agents performing
massage therapy.
   2.   Existing Massage Therapy Businesses Within the City.
      A.   For a massage therapy business applying for licensure in the initial
year of this chapter’s effective date (July 1, 2018, through June 30, 2019) the
licensing fee identified in Subsection 1 of this section is waived. If an
application properly submitted during the first year of this chapter is
approved, and the massage therapy business remains in continuous operation,
renewal fees for a massage therapy business license will be waived. A massage
therapy business grandfathered in under this section will not be required to
pay for the additional therapist fee for each additional employee, contractor,
agent, or therapist not included in their original application.
      B.   An annual review shall be initiated by the Clerk, with assistance
from the Police Department, to confirm business ownership, business name,
service(s) provided and accurate and up-to-date State licenses for the
employees, contractors, or agents performing massage therapy.
   3.   A separate license shall be obtained for each place of business. The
licensee shall display the license in a prominent place in the licensed
business at all times.
   4.   During the 12-month licensed period, the massage therapy businesses
will be required to notify the Clerk of changes in massage therapist staffing,
contracting, therapists, ownership, or business management.
4-9-5 APPLICATION.
   Application for a massage therapy business license shall be made on forms
provided by the Clerk’s Office. The application shall include:
   1.   The address of the property to be used and documentation establishing
the applicant's interest in the premises on which the business will be located,
which shall be in the form of a lease, deed, or other document that establishes
the applicant’s interest.
   2.   The names, ages, and addresses of the applicant, owner, manager, and
all employees, contractors, agents, or therapists who are or will be employed
or present on the premises to perform massage therapy.
   3.   Dates and locations of other places the applicant has owned or operated
as a massage therapy business.
   4.   Descriptions of all crimes or other offenses, including the time,
place, date, and disposition for which the applicant, owner, manager, and all
persons employed by or hired as a contractor by the applicant or present on the
premises to perform massage therapy have been arrested, charged, or convicted.
   5.   A statement as to whether the applicant, owner, manager, or any person
employed by or hired as a contractor by the applicant has had any license to
perform massage therapy denied, revoked, or suspended in any city, state,
county, or any country and the reason for the denial, revocation, or
suspension.
   6.   A government issued photo ID of the applicant, owner, manager, and all
employees, contractors, agents, or persons present on the premises who are or
will be employed or engaged to perform massage therapy services.
   7.   Such other information as the Police Chief may require for purposes of
conducting a background check. If it is determined that a nationwide background
check is required, the applicant may be responsible for the expense to complete
the background check. A background check conducted by another State law
enforcement agency may be used in lieu of this background check.
   8.   Any application for a license shall be accompanied by proof of
insurance executed by an insurance company authorized to do business in the
State, in the amount, of $1,000,000.00. All insurance policies hereunder shall
provide for at least 30 days prior notice to the Police Department before a
cancellation thereof is effective and shall continue to provide coverage as to
all matters arising during the term of the insurance policy whether or not
later cancelled.
   9.   Provide proof of current State Board of Massage Therapy license for all
employees or contractors who are or will be employed, hired, engaged, or
present on the premises to perform massage therapy services.
4-9-6 GRANTING OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   Business license applications shall be reviewed by the Police Chief who,
after considering all of the information provided and obtained in the
background check, shall either grant or deny the license. If a business has
been granted a license by another unit of municipal or county government in the
State, the licensing requirement may be waived.
4-9-7 CONDITIONS GOVERNING ISSUANCE.
   1.   No license shall be issued if the applicant or any of its owners,
managers, employees, contractors, or agents has a criminal conviction for a sex
crime as defined by Chapter 709 of the Code of Iowa, or for prostitution as
defined by Chapter 725 of the Code of Iowa, or for keeping a house of
prostitution as defined by Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa, or who is a
registered sex offender, or who has been denied a license by any other
community.
   2.   Licenses shall be issued only if the applicant and all of its owners,
managers, employees, contractors, and agents are free of convictions for
offenses which involve sex crimes or which relate directly to such person’s
ability or fitness to legally and safely perform the duties and discharge the
responsibilities of the licensed activity.
   3.   Licenses shall only be issued to applicants who have truthfully
provided all of the information requested in the application, have paid the
license fee, and have cooperated with the Police Chief and other City officials
in review of the application.
   4.   The business license, if issued, shall be displayed on the business
premises in a conspicuous public area.
4-9-8 EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to the following businesses:
   1.   Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons who are
licensed to practice medicine or surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery,
chiropractic, cosmetology arts and sciences, or podiatry in the State, or
athletic trainers, nurses, occupational therapists, physical therapists, or
physician assistants licensed, certified, or registered in this State or acting
under the prescription or supervision of a person licensed to practice
medicine, surgery, osteopathic medicine, or chiropractic in this State.
   2.   Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons who are
licensed, registered, or certified in another state, territory, the District of
Columbia, or a foreign country when incidentally and temporarily present in
this State to teach a course of instruction related to massage therapy and
bodywork therapy.
   3.   Businesses which offer the services of students enrolled in a program
recognized by the State Board of Massage Therapy while completing a clinical
requirement for graduation performed under the supervision of a licensed
person.
   4.   Persons giving massage therapy and bodywork to members of their
immediate family.
   5.   Persons practicing reflexology.
   6.   Persons engaged within the scope of practice of a profession with
established standards and ethics utilizing touch, words, and directed movement
to deepen awareness of existing patterns of movement in the body as well as to
suggest new possibilities of movement, provided that the practices performed,
or services rendered are not designated or implied to be massage therapy. Such
practices include, but are not limited to, the Feldenkrais method, the Trager
approach, and mind-body centering.
   7.   Persons engaged within the scope of practice of a profession with
established standards and ethics in which touch is limited to that which is
essential for palpitation and affectation of the human energy system, provided
that the practices performed or services rendered are not designated or implied
to be massage therapy.
   8.   Persons incidentally present in this State to provide services as part
of an emergency response team working in conjunction with disaster relief
officials.
   9.   Massage therapy businesses with a place of business located outside the
corporate boundaries of the City, or their employees, agents, or contractors
who are engaged in performing massages on an out-call basis to locations in the
City that do not regularly offer massage therapy (i.e., private residences,
hotels, festivals, employee wellness events, and similar events).
4-9-9 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL AND REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   It shall be grounds for denial, revocation, or suspension of an application
or massage therapy business license if one or more of the following conditions
are met:
   1.   If the applicant or licensee is not complying with or has a history of
violations of the laws and ordinances that might adversely impact public health
or safety.
   2.   If the licensee solicits or advertises to offer services that are a
violation of this chapter.
   3.   If the applicant, an employee, licensee’s independent contractor, or
licensee is convicted of any violation of any City ordinance or federal or
State statute which may be reasonably related to the licensed activity or
occurring on the licensed premises.
   4.   If there is fraud or deception involved in the license application.
   5.   If the applicant, an employee, licensee’s independent contractor, or
licensee is found to be in control or possession of any narcotic drugs or
controlled substances on the licensed premises, possession of which is illegal
as defined by City, State, or federal law.
   6.   If the applicant, an employee, licensee’s independent contractor, or
licensee has, in the past, engaged in willful disregard for health codes and
regulations.
   7.   If the applicant fails to provide all the information and certificates
required by this chapter.
   8.   If the licensee permits an unlicensed individual(s) to conduct massage
therapy services at the licensee’s premises.
   9.   If the applicant, an employee, licensee’s independent contractor, or
licensee refuses to permit any authorized police officers or authorized City,
County, or State governmental official to inspect the licensed premises or
operations.
   10.   If the licensee is found to be violating provisions of this chapter or
the Code of Iowa.
   11.   If the licensed business promotes its services on websites that are
known to advertise services that are illegal.
4-9-10 APPEAL.
   1.   If an applicant or licensee has been denied, revoked, or suspended
pursuant to this chapter, then said person may file a written request with the
City Manager for review of the decision of the Police Chief within 10 days from
the issuance of the notice of denial, revocation, or suspension. Failure to
file a written request for review of the decision within this time frame shall
constitute a waiver of any right to contest the decision to deny, revoke, or
suspend a license.
   2.   The City Manager shall place a hearing of this action on the agenda for
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Council. The City Manager shall
notify the appealing applicant or licensee of the date, time, and place for
this hearing to review the decision of the Police Chief. At this hearing the
applicant or licensee may present oral or written arguments.
   3.   If the applicant or licensee’s denial, revocation, or suspension is
reversed by a majority vote of the Council, the Police Chief shall issue or
reinstate the appropriate license.
   4.   If the applicant or licensee’s denial, revocation, or suspension is
upheld by a majority vote of the Council, the applicant or licensee may appeal
said decision to the District Court pursuant to the laws of the State.
4-9-11 RESTRICTION AND REGULATIONS.
   1.   Compliance with Law. The licensee and persons in its employ and at its
premises, shall comply with all applicable regulations and City, State, and
federal laws.
   2.   Person in Charge. If the applicant or licensee is a partnership,
corporation, or other organizations, the applicant or license shall designate a
person to be manager and in responsible charge of the business. The manager
shall be a resident of the State. The manager shall provide written consent to
serve as an agent for service of notices and other process relating to the
business. The manager shall remain responsible for the conduct of the business
until another suitable person has been designated in writing by the licensee.
The licensee shall promptly notify the Police Chief in writing of any change
indicating the address of the new manager and the effective date of such
change.
   3.   Hours of Business. The licensed premises shall not be open for business
nor shall business be permitted on the premises between the hours of 12:00 a.m.
and 5:00 a.m.
4-9-12 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
TITLE 5 - POLICE, HEALTH, AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
5-1-1 Department Established        5-1-6 Police Officers Appointed
5-1-2 Organization                  5-1-7 Powers and Duties of Police Chief
5-1-3 Police Officer Qualifications 5-1-8 Departmental Rules
5-1-4 Required Training             5-1-9 Summoning Aid
5-1-5 Oath                          5-1-10 Taking Weapons
 
5-1-1 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   The Police Department of the City is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.
5-1-2 ORGANIZATION.
   The Department consists of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement
officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the
Council.
5-1-3 POLICE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.
   In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement
officer unless such person meets at least the minimum standards established by
the State law enforcement academy and the City.
5-1-4 REQUIRED TRAINING.
   All police officers shall have received the minimum training required by law
at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment.
Police officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])
(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
5-1-5 OATH.
   Every police officer, before taking the position, shall qualify for office
by taking the oath prescribed by Section
1-10-1 of this Code.
5-1-6 POLICE OFFICERS APPOINTED.
   The City Manager shall appoint the Police Chief as provided by Chapter
400.13 of the Code of Iowa. The Police Chief shall be responsible to the City
Manager for the functions of the Police Department. Other members of the
department shall be appointed by the Police Chief, subject to civil service
procedures and to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 372.4 and 400.13)
5-1-7 POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
   The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval
of the Council:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   General. Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by law or
ordinance.
   2.   Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances, and regulations and bring
all persons committing any offense before the proper court.
   3.   Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the
Police Chief.
   4.   Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to
the State Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
   5.   Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including
conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
   6.   Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers,
boards, and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
   7.   Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for
the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
   8.   Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by
showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City
ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest, and the disposition of the
charge.
   9.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report
as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
   10.   Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and
be responsible for the care, maintenance, and use of all vehicles, equipment,
and materials of the department.
   11.   Other Duties. Have such other duties as lawfully assigned.
5-1-8 DEPARTMENTAL RULES.
   The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with this Code,
and subject to the approval of the City Manager, as may be necessary for the
operation of the department.
5-1-9 SUMMONING AID.
   Any police officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons
as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the
arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
5-1-10 TAKING WEAPONS.
   Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items
which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have
within such person’s control to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
 
5-2-1 Establishment and Purpose 5-2-8 Obedience to Fire Chief
5-2-2 Organization              5-2-9 Constitution
5-2-3 Training                  5-2-10 Accidental Injury Insurance
5-2-4 Compensation              5-2-11 Liability Insurance
5-2-5 Officers                  5-2-12 Calls Outside City
5-2-6 Oath                      5-2-13 Authority to Cite Violations
5-2-7 Duties of Fire Chief      5-2-14 Emergency Medical Service Fees
 
5-2-1 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   A fire department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish fires and
to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire prevention and
fire safety, to provide emergency medical services, transportation to medical
facilities for sick and injured persons, to promote first aid and emergency
readiness among the citizens and to answer all emergency calls for which there
is no other established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
5-2-2 ORGANIZATION.
   The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers and
personnel as may be authorized by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5-2-3 TRAINING.
   All members of the department shall attend and actively participate in
regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2)
5-2-4 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5-2-5 OFFICERS.
   The City Manager shall appoint a Fire Chief, subject to the approval of the
Council. The Fire Chief shall be responsible to the City Manager for the
functions of the Fire Department. The Fire Chief shall appoint any other
officers in the department. In case of absence of the Chief, the officer next
in rank shall be in charge and have and exercise all the powers of Chief.
5-2-6 OATH.
   The Fire Chief, before entering upon the duties of office, shall qualify for
office by taking the oath prescribed by Section
1-10-1 of this Code.
5-2-7 DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.
   The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or
ordinance, including, but not limited to, the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention
and the investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires.
   2.   Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits, and
development of fire emergency plans.
   3.   Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation
as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation,
investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other
hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the
reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   4.   Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle, or vessel from
approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel,
or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the Fire
Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   5.   Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect
ropes, guards, barricades, or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-
of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to
prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the Fire
Department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete,
or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
   6.   Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline, and control of the Fire Department. The members of the Fire
Department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
   7.   Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all
fire apparatus, tools, equipment, and other property used by or belonging to
the Fire Department.
   8.   Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage
in excess of $200,000.00 has occurred as a result of a fire, or if arson is
suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately. For all other
fires causing an estimated damage of $50.00 or more or emergency responses by
the Fire Department, file a report with the State Fire Marshal’s Division
within 10 days following the end of the month. The report shall indicate all
fire incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of the
property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated
total loss to the property, origin of the fire as determined by investigation,
and other facts, statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 and 100.3)
   9.   Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any
building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of
making such investigation or inspection that under law or ordinance may be
necessary to be made and that is reasonably necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 10A.514)
   10.   Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers, or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
   11.   Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal,
and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by
investigating, preventing, and reporting data pertaining to fires.
   12.   Records. Cause to be kept records of the Fire Department personnel,
firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number
of responses to alarms, their cause, and location, and an analysis of losses by
value, type, and location of buildings.
   13.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report
of the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as
may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
5-2-8 OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Chief.
5-2-9 CONSTITUTION.
   The department shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they deem calculated
to accomplish the object contemplated, and such constitution and bylaws and any
change or amendment to such constitution and bylaws, before being effective,
must be approved by the City Manager.
5-2-10 ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE.
   The Council shall contract to insure the City against liability for worker’s
compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization,
nursing, and medical attention for volunteer firefighters injured in the
performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or outside the
corporate limits of the City. All volunteer firefighters shall be covered by
the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61, and Sec. 410.18)
5-2-11 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The Council shall contract to insure against liability of the City or
members of the department for injuries, death, or property damage arising out
of and resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside
the corporate limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 and 517A.1)
5-2-12 CALLS OUTSIDE CITY.
   The Fire Department is hereby authorized, subject to the conditions set out
in this section, to answer calls outside the corporate limits of the City. The
dispatching of equipment or personnel of the Fire Department to answer a call
outside the corporate limits of the City shall be made by the Fire Chief, or in
the absence of the Chief, by the Assistant Chief, or in the Assistant Chief’s
absence, by such other member of the department as is designated by the Fire
Chief or Assistant Chief, only after giving due consideration to the equipment
and personnel needed in order to provide adequate fire protection and emergency
medical service within the corporate limits of the City at the time of the said
call and during the period of time it is anticipated that equipment or
personnel will be absent from the City in answer to said call; and in so
considering the fire protection and emergency medical service needed for the
City, any mutual aid protection agreements providing fire protection to the
City may be considered.
5-2-13 AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS.
    Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 10A, Subchapter V,
Part 2 of the Code of Iowa, may issue citations in accordance with Chapter 805
of the Code of Iowa, for violations of Chapter 10A, Subchapter V, Part 2 of the
Code of Iowa or a violation of a local fire safety code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
(Section 5-2-13 – Ord. 1150 – Oct. 24 Supp.)
5-2-14 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE FEES.
   In the event that the department provides emergency medical services,
advanced emergency medical care, or ambulance services to any person, the
department shall charge a fee to the user of such service as set forth in a
schedule of fees adopted by the Council in resolution form. Payment of such fee
shall be made to the City and deposited by the Treasurer in the general fund
for the benefit of the Fire Department.
CHAPTER 3
TEMPORARY CIVIL DISORDER RESTRICTIONS
 
5-3-1 Declaration of Civil Disorder 5-3-3 Temporary Restrictions
5-3-2 Promulgation of Temporary     5-3-4 Termination of Temporary Restrictions
Restrictions
 
5-3-1 DECLARATION OF CIVIL DISORDER.
   Whenever the Mayor determines that there has been either an act of violence
or resistance to a lawful exercise of public authority, and that as a result
thereof, there is reason to believe that there exists a clear and present
danger of a riot or other general public disorder involving widespread
disobedience of the law and substantial injury to persons or property, which
riot or other general public disorder constitutes an immediate threat to the
public peace and to the general welfare of the City, or any area of it, the
Mayor may declare a state of civil disorder within the City or any of its
areas.
5-3-2 PROMULGATION OF TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS.
   Whenever the Mayor declares that a state of civil disorder exists, the Mayor
may promulgate any, all, or part of the temporary restrictions provided for in
Section
5-3-3 of this chapter, with such limitations and conditions as the Mayor may
deem appropriate under the circumstances. In so doing, the Mayor shall specify
the area of the City affected by each restriction. Any measure promulgated will
take effect only after reasonable notice of its contents has been given.
5-3-3 TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS.
   The Mayor is authorized to promulgate any, all, or part of the following
restrictions:
   1.   Alcohol. Order the immediate closing of all taverns and order the
cessation of the sale or any other distribution of intoxicating liquor and
beer;
   2.   Weapons. Order the cessation of public display, possession, sale, or
any other distribution of firearms and ammunition;
   3.   Explosives and Flammables. Order the cessation of the sale or any other
distribution of explosives and flammables;
   4.   Curfew. Order the closing of all or some public parks, public streets,
or other public places during specified hours;
   5.   Assembly. Order the cessation of gatherings by three or more persons in
public buildings, streets, parks, and other open areas, either public or
private;
   6.   Other Activities. Order the cessation of any other activities
reasonably believed hazardous to the maintenance of public safety.
5-3-4 TERMINATION OF TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS.
   Any restriction promulgated in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter will terminate automatically 48 hours after the Mayor’s declaration of
civil disorder was issued or upon issuance by the Mayor of a declaration that a
state of civil disorder no longer exists, whichever occurs first; provided,
however, any or all of the restrictions promulgated by the Mayor may be
extended by successive resolutions of the Council for additional periods of
time. The period of any one extension shall not exceed five days.
CHAPTER 4A
PUBLIC PEACE
 
5-4A-1 Assault             5-4A-5 Parades Regulated
5-4A-2 Harassment          5-4A-6 Picketing Residence or Dwelling
5-4A-3 Disorderly Conduct  5-4A-7 Penalty
5-4A-4 Failure to Disperse
 
5-4A-1 ASSAULT.
   No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
   1.   Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to cause pain or injury to
another or that is intended to result in physical contact that will be
insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute
the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])
   2.   Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to place another in
fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting,
or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])
An act described in Subsections 1 and 2 shall not be an assault under the
following circumstances: (i) if the person doing any of the enumerated acts,
and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other
activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable
incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk of
serious injury or breach of the peace; (ii) if the person doing any of the
enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic
school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a
school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle or
other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or
staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school
grounds, or at an official school function, regardless of the location, whether
the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between
students or other individuals, if the degree and the force of the intervention
is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those
assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
5-4A-2 HARASSMENT.
   No person shall commit harassment.
   1.   Term Described. A person commits harassment when, with intent to
intimidate, annoy, or alarm another person, the person does any of the
following:
      A.   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing, or via
electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to
cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      B.   Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      C.   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without such other person's knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      D.   Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law
enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing
that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal
act, knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   2.   Personal Contact. A person commits harassment when the person,
purposefully and without legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another
person, with the intent to threaten, intimidate, or alarm that other person. As
used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact”
means an encounter in which two or more people are in visual or physical
proximity to each other. “Personal contact” does not require a physical
touching or oral communication, although it may include these types of
contacts.
5-4A-3 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   No person shall do any of the following:
   1.   Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or
in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in
athletic contests may engage in such conduct that is reasonably related to that
sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1a])
   2.   Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or
public building which intentionally or recklessly causes unreasonable distress
to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1b])
   3.   Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening
gesture that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a
violent reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1c])
   4.   Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of
authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct
intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1d])
   5.   False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate
a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such
report to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1e])
   6.   Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United
States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the
United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will
provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault. As used in this
subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1f])
      A.   “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
      B.   “Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
      C.   “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be
flown from a pole or mast.
      D.   “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make
imperfect.
      E.   “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate, or trample.
      F.   “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a
machine, vehicle, or animal to tread upon.
   7.   Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 1,000 feet of the building or other
location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within
1,000 feet of a funeral procession or burial:
      A.   Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable distress to the
persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the
funeral procession.
      B.   Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction
by another.
      C.   Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral
procession, or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral,
memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.
This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during, and
within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or
burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
5-4A-4 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   A Police Officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly
or persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to
disperse. No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to
obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
5-4A-5 PARADES REGULATED.
   No person shall conduct, cause, or participate in any parade on any street
except as provided herein:
   1.   Parade Defined. “Parade” means any march or procession of 15 or more
persons, with or without vehicles, organized for marching or moving on the
streets, sidewalks, or other public ways in an organized fashion, or any march
or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the public as
a parade.
   2.   Permit Required. No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining a
written permit from the Police Chief.
      A.   Permit Application. The permit application must be made in writing
not less than three days in advance of the parade and shall state:
         (1)   The date and time for the parade;
         (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of applicant;
         (3)   The route of the parade; and
         (4)   The approximate number of persons and vehicles in the parade.
      B.   Restrictions. The City shall issue the applicant a permit unless:
         (1)   The Police Chief determines that the time, route, or size of the
parade will disrupt the use of any street or sidewalk which is ordinarily
subject to significant congestion or traffic;
         (2)   Another parade permit has already been issued for that day; or
         (3)   The proposed parade violates any other governing law or
ordinance.
   3.   Hours. No permit shall be granted for a parade through a residential
district, except during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
   4.   No Fee. No fee shall be charged for the parade permit.
5-4A-6 PICKETING RESIDENCE OR DWELLING.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before, about, or
immediately adjacent to the residence or dwelling of any individual in the
City. For the purpose of this section, “before, about, or immediately adjacent
to” means in front of or within one house on either side of a residence or
dwelling, but not the sidewalk or public area across the street from the
residence or dwelling.
5-4A-7 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 4B
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
5-4B-1 Distributing  5-4B-11 Slingshots
Dangerous Substances
5-4B-2 Fireworks     5-4B-12 Traps
5-4B-3 False Reports
to or Communications 5-4B-13 Urination and Defecation
with Public
Safety Entities      5-4B-14 Extreme Fighting Contests
5-4B-4 Refusing to   5-4B-15 Pseudoephedrine Restrictions
Assist Officer
5-4B-5 Harassment of
Public Officers and  5-4B-16 Providing False Identification Information
Employees
5-4B-6 Abandoned or  5-4B-17 Removal of an Officer’s Communication or Control
Unattended           Device
Refrigerators
5-4B-7 Antenna and   5-4B-18 Interference with Official Acts
Radio Wires
5-4B-8 Barbed Wire   5-4B-19 Failure to Assist
and Electric Fences
5-4B-9 Firearms      5-4B-20 Penalty
5-4B-10 Bows and
Arrows
 
5-4B-1 DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.
   No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any
corrosive, caustic, poisonous, or other injurious substance unless the person
delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes
reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or
animals from the place where the substance is deposited.
5-4B-2 FIREWORKS.† 5
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
   1.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
      A.   “Consumer fireworks” means the following fireworks, as described in
Chapter 3 of the American Pyrotechnics Association (“APA”) Standard 87-1:
         (1)   First-class consumer fireworks:
            a.   Aerial shell kits and reloadable tubes;
            b.   Chasers;
            c.   Helicopters and aerial spinners;
            d.   Firecrackers;
            e.   Mine and shell devices;
            f.   Missile-type rockets;
            g.   Roman candles;
            h.   Sky rockets and bottle rockets;
            i.   Multiple tube devices under this paragraph which are
manufactured in accordance with APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.5.
         (2)   Second-class consumer fireworks:
            a.   Cone fountains;
            b.   Cylindrical fountains;
            c.   Flitter sparklers;
            d.   Ground and hand-held sparkling devices, including multiple
tube ground and hand-held sparkling devices that are manufactured in accordance
with APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.5;
            e.   Ground spinners;
            f.   Illuminating torches;
            g.   Toy smoke devices that are not classified as novelties
pursuant to APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.2;
            h.   Wheels;
            i.   Wire or dipped sparklers that are not classified as novelties
pursuant to APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.2.
      B.   “Display fireworks” includes any explosive composition, or
combination of explosive substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration,
or detonation, and includes fireworks containing any explosive or flammable
compound, or other device containing any explosive substance. “Display
fireworks” does not include novelties or consumer fireworks enumerated in
Chapter 3 of the APA Standard 87-1.
      C.   “Novelties” includes all novelties enumerated in Chapter 3 of the
APA Standard 87-1, and that comply with the labeling regulations promulgated by
the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission.
   2.   Display Fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to use or explode any
display fireworks; provided, the Council may, upon application in writing,
grant a permit for the display of display fireworks by municipalities, fair
associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or groups of individuals
approved by the City when the display fireworks will be handled by a competent
operator. No permit shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or
sponsoring organization has filed with the City evidence of insurance in the
following amounts:
      A.   Personal Injury:   $250,000.00 per person
      B.   Property Damage:   $50,000.00
      C.   Total Exposure:   $1,000,000.00
   3.   Consumer Fireworks. Except for on July 3, July 4, and December 31 in
accordance with Iowa Code Section 727.2(4), it is unlawful for any person to
use or explode consumer fireworks within the City. It is unlawful for any
person to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail without a State
issued license and during the dates as established by the State Fire Marshal.
(Subsection 3 – Ord. 1163 – Jun. 25 Supp.)
   4.   Novelties. This section does not apply to novelties.
 
Notes
5 † EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Section
  10-8-12 of this Code.
5-4B-3 FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES.
   No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
   1.   Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department,
a law enforcement authority, or other public safety entity, knowing that the
information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act
knowing the act did not occur.
   2.   Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that they are
not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or
assistance.
   3.   Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who
enters the information on a citation.
5-4B-4 REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.
   Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or police officer
to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make
an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render
assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably, and without lawful cause,
refuse, or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
5-4B-5 HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer
or employee from performing the officer's or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
5-4B-6 ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.
   No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator,
icebox, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such
refrigerator, icebox, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on
premises in the person's possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so
accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
5-4B-7 ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.
   It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio
wires or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground, or public building.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
5-4B-8 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
   It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose
land within the City limits without the written consent of the Council unless
such land consists of 10 acres or more and is used as agricultural land.
5-4B-9 FIREARMS.
   No person shall fire, shoot, or discharge any firearm, air gun, or BB gun
within the City unless first having obtained a permit therefore from the Police
Chief. The provisions of this section do not apply to a qualified peace officer
in the discharge of official duties, an authorized Nuisance Wildlife Control
Organization (NWCO), or to personnel or patrons of a permitted indoor shooting
range. The permit shall limit the time and place of such firing and may be
revoked at any time by the Mayor or Police Chief.
5-4B-10 BOWS AND ARROWS.
   No person shall fire, shoot, or discharge a bow and arrow or crossbow within
the City unless first having obtained a permit therefor from the Police Chief
or having obtained a permit from the City for bow hunting of deer in the City’s
designated urban deer management zone. The permit shall limit the time and
place of such shooting and may be revoked at any time by the Mayor or Police
Chief. Notwithstanding the foregoing, persons on private property may, with
permission of the owner or tenant of the premises, shoot or discharge a bow and
arrow at a backstop of sufficient size and substance that the arrow will not
pass through or beyond the backstop, and provided that the arrow does not
travel beyond the boundaries of such property.
5-4B-11 SLINGSHOTS.
   No person shall use, fire, shoot, or discharge any sling, slingshot, wrist
slingshot or wrist supported slingshot of any type or kind within the City.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, persons on private property may, with permission
of the owner or tenant of the premises, shoot or discharge a sling, slingshot,
wrist slingshot or wrist supported slingshot; provided, that the projectile
does not travel beyond the boundaries of such property.
5-4B-12 TRAPS.
   No person, except an authorized Nuisance Wildlife Control Organization
(NWCO), shall set, use, or maintain any snare, pitfall, deadfall, spring gun,
set gun, steel leg trap, or any other trap within the City; provided, however,
that the owner or tenant of any private property may use a cage trap, box trap,
mouse trap, rat trap, or other small trap not dangerous to children on such
property to rid such property of vermin or pests.
5-4B-13 URINATION AND DEFECATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk,
street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building,
including, but not limited to, the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway,
doorway, or window thereof, or onto public or private land.
5-4B-14 EXTREME FIGHTING CONTESTS.
   A person shall not hold, promote, or participate in an extreme fighting
contest within the City. For purposes of this section, “extreme fighting
contest” shall mean any amateur contest, in which a person delivers, or is not
forbidden by the rules of such contest from delivering, kicks, punches, or
blows of any kind to the body of an opponent. Extreme fighting contests may
also be described as “no holds barred,” “no rules,” “ultimate fighting,”
“extreme fighting,” or “shoot boxing.” The term “extreme fighting contest”
shall specifically exclude boxing, wrestling, or martial arts, provided that
such activities are conducted before a licensed official or in accordance with
official rules adopted by a nationally recognized organization. Any person
violating this section commits a simple misdemeanor.
5-4B-15 PSEUDOEPHEDRINE RESTRICTIONS.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 126.23A)
   1.   Product Sales Limited. A retailer shall not sell and a person shall not
purchase in a single transaction more than two packages containing
pseudoephedrine as the product’s sole active ingredient.
   2.   Sale Behind Counter or with Antitheft Device. Except as otherwise
provided, a retailer who offers for sale a product containing pseudoephedrine
as the product’s sole active ingredient shall display and offer such product
for sale behind a counter where the public is not permitted, or within 20 feet
of a counter which allows the attendant to view the products in an unobstructed
manner. A retailer may display or offer for sale, without restriction, a
product containing pseudoephedrine as the sole active ingredient if the product
is displayed using any type of antitheft device system, including, but not
limited to, an electronic antitheft device system that utilizes a product tag
and detection alarm which prevents the theft of the product.
   3.   Posting Notice. A retailer shall post a notice at the location where a
product containing pseudoephedrine as its sole active ingredient is displayed
or offered for sale stating the following:
State law prohibits the sale or purchase of more than two packages containing
pseudoephedrine as the sole active ingredient.
   4.   Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
      A.   Any package of a product containing pseudoephedrine as the product’s
sole active ingredient which is in liquid form.
      B.   Any package of a product containing pseudoephedrine as the product’s
sole active ingredient which is primarily intended for administration to
children under 12 years of age according to the label, regardless of whether
the product is in liquid or solid form.
      C.   Any package of a product containing pseudoephedrine as the product’s
sole active ingredient that the Board of Pharmacy Examiners, with the
concurrence of the Department of Public Safety, upon application of a
manufacturer, exempts from this section because the product is formulated to
effectively prevent conversion of the active ingredient into methamphetamine or
its salts or precursors.
   5.   Violation; Penalty. An employee of a retailer who sells or a person who
purchases pseudoephedrine in violation of Subsection 1 of this section commits
a simple misdemeanor, punishable in an amount equal to a scheduled violation
under Section 805.8C(4a) of the Code of Iowa. If a citation is issued for a
violation of Subsection 1 of this section, the citation shall be issued to both
the employee and the purchaser. For each violation of Subsection 1, 2, or 3 of
this section by a retailer, the retailer shall be assessed an amount equal to a
scheduled fine under Section 805.8C(4b) of the Code of Iowa, which is a civil
penalty.
5-4B-16 PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION.
   No person shall knowingly provide false identification information to anyone
known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider, or
firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is
within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency
medical care provider, or firefighter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)
5-4B-17 REMOVAL OF AN OFFICER’S COMMUNICATION OR CONTROL DEVICE.
   No person shall knowingly or intentionally remove or attempt to remove a
communication device, or any device used for control from the possession of a
peace officer or correctional officer, when the officer is in the performance
of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that
officer and the person knew or should have known the individual to be an
officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.12)
5-4B-18 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.
   No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to
be a peace officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider under Chapter 147A
of the Code of Iowa, medical examiner, or firefighter, whether paid or
volunteer, or a person performing bailiff duties pursuant to Section 602.1303
[4] of the Code of Iowa, in the performance of any act that is within the scope
of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, jailer, emergency medical care
provider, medical examiner, or firefighter, or person performing bailiff
duties, or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any
authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order of any court. The
terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in this section do not include verbal
harassment unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present ability and
apparent intention to execute a verbal threat physically.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
5-4B-19 FAILURE TO ASSIST.
   A person who reasonably believes another person is suffering from a risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death shall, if the person is able,
attempt to contact local law enforcement or local emergency response
authorities, if doing so does not place the person or other person at risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death. No person shall without
lawful cause violate the provisions of this section. A person shall not be
required to contact local law enforcement or emergency response authorities if
the person knows or reasonably believes that the other person is not in need of
help or assistance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.12)
5-4B-20 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 4C
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
 
5-4C-1 Trespassing                       5-4C-8 Obstructing Drainage
5-4C-2 Defacing Public Grounds           5-4C-9 Criminal Mischief
5-4C-3 Injuring New Pavement             5-4C-10 Fraud
5-4C-4 Destroying Park Equipment         5-4C-11 Theft
5-4C-5 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 5-4C-12 Unauthorized Computer Access
5-4C-6 Injury to Fire Apparatus          5-4C-13 Standing, Loitering, and
                                         Obstructing Persons
5-4C-7 Damage to Property                5-4C-14 Penalty
 
5-4C-1 TRESPASSING.
   1.   Prohibited. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the
property of another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.8)
   2.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[1])
      A.   “Property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance,
vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly or
privately owned.
      B.   “Public utility” is a public utility as defined in Section 476.1 of
the Code of Iowa or an electric transmission line as provided in Chapter 478 of
the Code of Iowa.
      C.   “Public utility property” means any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure owned, leased,
or operated by a public utility and that is completely enclosed by a physical
barrier of any kind.
      D.   “Railway corporation” means a corporation, company, or person
owning, leasing, or operating any railroad in whole or in part within this
State.
      E.   “Railway property” means all tangible real and personal property
owned, leased, or operated by a railway corporation, with the exception of any
administrative building or offices of the railway corporation.
      F.   “Trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])
         (1)   Entering upon or in property without the express permission of
the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a
public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place
thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
         (2)   Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification
after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or
vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or the
agent or employee of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by
any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise
the use or maintenance of the property.
         (3)   Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect
of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
         (4)   Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing
therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein
anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the
owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession.
         (5)   Entering or remaining upon or in railway property without lawful
authority or without the consent of the railway corporation which owns, leases,
or operates the railway property. This paragraph does not apply to passage over
a railroad right-of-way, other than a track, railroad roadbed, viaduct, bridge,
trestle, or railroad yard, by an unarmed person if the person has not been
notified or requested to abstain from entering onto the right-of-way or to
vacate the right-of-way and the passage over the right-of-way does not
interfere with the operation of the railroad.
         (6)   Entering or remaining upon or in public utility property without
lawful authority or without the consent of the public utility that owns,
leases, or operates the public utility property. This paragraph does not apply
to passage over public utility right-of-way by a person if the person has not
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering onto the right-of-way or to vacate the right-of-way.
   3.   Specific Exceptions. “Trespass” does not mean either of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])
      A.   Entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of
retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been
thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that
the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route
to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is
possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
This paragraph does not apply to public utility property where the person has
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering.
      B.   Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway.
5-4C-2 DEFACING PUBLIC GROUNDS.
   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to cut, break, or deface any tree
or shrub on public property or on any public way by willfully defacing,
cutting, breaking, or injuring.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 364.1 and 364.12[2])
5-4C-3 INJURING NEW PAVEMENT.
   It is unlawful for a person to injure new pavement in any street, alley, or
sidewalk by willfully driving, walking, or making marks on such pavement before
it is ready for use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
5-4C-4 DESTROYING PARK EQUIPMENT.
   It is unlawful for a person to destroy or injure any property or equipment
in public swimming pools, playgrounds, or parks by willfully defacing,
breaking, damaging, mutilating, or cutting.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
5-4C-5 DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES.
   It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down,
or destroy, in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law
of the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement, or
notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by
order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
5-4C-6 INJURY TO FIRE APPARATUS.
   It is unlawful for a person willfully to destroy or injure any engine, hose,
hook and ladder truck, or other thing used and kept for extinguishment of
fires.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
5-4C-7 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful to deface, injure, write upon, or make marks or drawings on
any part of any property located within the City without the consent of the
owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
5-4C-8 OBSTRUCTING DRAINAGE.
   It is unlawful to divert, obstruct, impede, or fill up, without legal
authority, any ditch, drain, or watercourse, or to break down any levee
lawfully established, constructed, or maintained.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
5-4C-9 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally
damage, deface, alter, or destroy tangible property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
5-4C-10 FRAUD.
   It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
5-4C-11 THEFT.
   It is unlawful for any person to commit theft. A person commits theft when
the person does any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
   1.   Takes possession or control of the property of another, or property in
the possession of another, with the intent to deprive the other thereof.
   2.   Misappropriates property which the person has in trust, or property of
another which the person has in the person’s possession or control, whether
such possession or control is lawful or unlawful, by using or disposing of it
in a manner which is inconsistent with or a denial of the trust or of the
owner’s rights in such property, or conceals found property, or appropriates
such property to the person’s own use, when the owner of such property is known
to the person.
   3.   Obtains the labor or services of another, or a transfer of possession,
control, or ownership of the property of another, or the beneficial use of
property of another, by deception.
   4.   Exercises control over stolen property, knowing such property to have
been stolen, or having reasonable cause to believe that such property has been
stolen, unless the person’s purpose is to promptly restore it to the owner or
to deliver it to an appropriate public officer.
   5.   Takes, destroys, conceals, or disposes of property in which someone
else has a security interest, with intent to defraud the secured party.
   6.   Makes, utters, draws, delivers, or gives any check, share draft, draft,
or written order on any bank, credit union, person, or corporation, and obtains
property or service in exchange therefor, if the person knows that such check,
share draft, draft or written order will not be paid when presented.
   7.   Obtains gas, electricity, or water from a public utility or obtains
cable television or telephone service from an unauthorized connection to the
supply or service line or by intentionally altering, adjusting, removing, or
tampering with the metering or service device so as to cause inaccurate
readings.
   8.   Any act that is declared to be theft by any provision of the Code of
Iowa.
5-4C-12 UNAUTHORIZED COMPUTER ACCESS.
   It is unlawful for a person to knowingly and without authorization access a
computer, computer system, or computer network.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.6B)
5-4C-13 STANDING, LOITERING, AND OBSTRUCTING PERSONS.
   1.   With the exception of persons authorized to use the public right-of-way
pursuant to Title 7 Public Ways and Property of this Code, no person shall
congregate, stand, climb upon, lay upon, loaf, or loiter upon any street,
bridge, trail, or crossing so as to obstruct the street, bridge, trail, or
crossing, or hinder or prevent persons passing or attempting or desiring to
pass thereon.
   2.   A violation of this section shall be punishable by a municipal
infraction or a simple misdemeanor.
5-4C-14 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 4D
OFFENSES INVOLVING DRUGS AND ALCOHOL
 
5-4D-1 Marijuana and Drug Paraphernalia     5-4D-3 Social Host
5-4D-2 Alcohol Consumption and Intoxication
 
5-4D-1 MARIJUANA AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   1.   Possession of Marijuana. It is unlawful for any person, knowingly or
intentionally, to possess marijuana as defined in Chapter 124 of the Code of
Iowa, unless same was obtained directly from or pursuant to a valid
prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of said
practitioner’s professional practice or as otherwise authorized by Chapter 124
of the Code of Iowa.
   2.   Controlled Substance Defined. The term “controlled substance,” as used
in this section, is defined as the term “controlled substance” is defined in
the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it
now exists or is hereafter amended.
   3.   Drug Paraphernalia Defined. The term “drug paraphernalia,” as used in
this section, means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which
are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, concealing, containing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the
Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa. It
includes, but is not limited to:
      A.   Growing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can
be derived.
      B.   Processing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances.
      C.   Isomerization Devices. Isomerization devices used, intended for use,
or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is
a controlled substance.
      D.   Testing Equipment. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or
designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or
purity of controlled substances.
      E.   Scales. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for
use in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
      F.   Diluents. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances.
      G.   Separators; Sifters. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for
use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise
cleaning or refining, marijuana.
      H.   Mixing Devices. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing
devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances.
      I.   Containers. Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers
used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
      J.   Storage Containers. Containers and other objects used, intended for
use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
      K.   Injecting Devices. Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects
used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting
controlled substances into the human body.
      L.   Ingesting/Inhaling Device. Objects used, intended for use, or
designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin,
marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
         (1)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal
bowls;
         (2)   Water pipes;
         (3)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (4)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (5)   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials,
such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held
in the hand;
         (6)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         (7)   Chamber pipes;
         (8)   Carburetor pipes;
         (9)   Electric pipes;
         (10)   Air driven pipes;
         (11)   Chillums;
         (12)   Bongs;
         (13)   Ice pipes or chillers.
   4.   Determining Factors. In determining whether an object is drug
paraphernalia, for the purpose of enforcing this section, the following factors
should be considered in addition to all other logically relevant factors:
      A.   Statements. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use.
      B.   Prior Convictions. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object under any State or federal law relating to any
controlled substance.
      C.   Proximity to Violation. The proximity of the object, in time and
space, to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter
124 of the Code of Iowa.
      D.   Proximity to Substances. The proximity of the object to controlled
substances.
      E.   Residue. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on
the object.
      F.   Evidence of Intent. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent
of an owner or of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons who
they know, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a
violation of the uniform controlled substances act, Chapter 124 of the Code of
Iowa.
      G.   Innocence of an Owner. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not prevent a finding
that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
      H.   Instructions. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the
object concerning its use.
      I.   Descriptive Materials. Descriptive materials accompanying the object
which explain or depict its use.
      J.   Advertising. National and local advertising concerning its use.
      K.   Displayed. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
      L.   Licensed Distributor or Dealer. Whether the owner, or anyone in
control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the
community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
      M.   Sales Ratios. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of
sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      N.   Legitimate Uses. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community.
      O.   Expert Testimony. Expert testimony concerning its use.
   5.   Possession of Drug Paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to use,
or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia, to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of
Iowa.
   6.   Manufacture, Delivery or Offering For Sale. It is unlawful for any
person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, manufacture with intent to
deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia, intending that the drug
paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under circumstances where one
reasonably should know that it will be used, or knowing that it is designed for
use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances
Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
   7.   Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter
for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of
this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
5-4D-2 ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION.
   1.   Persons Under Legal Age. As used in this section, “legal age” means 21
years of age or more.
      A.   A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase, consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic beverages in their
possession or control; except in the case of any alcoholic beverage given or
dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the
knowledge, presence, and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or
medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or
dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under
legal age may handle alcoholic beverages during the regular course of the
person’s employment by a retail alcohol licensee, or wine or beer permittee
under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])
      B.   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person's age for
the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage,
wine, or beer from any licensee or permittee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
   2.   Public Consumption or Intoxication:
      A.   Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires:
         (1)   “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code
of Iowa, and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the
Code of Iowa.
         (2)   “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or
urine to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person
using devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
         (3)   “Police officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of
the Code of Iowa.
         (4)   “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a
public or private school which provides teaching for any grade from
kindergarten through grade twelve.
      B.   Possession and Consumption Restricted. A person shall not use or
consume alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer upon the public streets or highways. A
person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor in any public place, except
premises covered by a liquor control license. A person shall not possess or
consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer on public school property or while
attending any public or private school related function. A person shall not be
intoxicated or simulate intoxication in a public place.
      C.   Arrest for Public Intoxication. When a police officer arrests a
person on a charge of public intoxication under this section, the police
officer shall inform the person that the person may have a chemical test
administered at the person’s own expense. If a device approved by the
Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample of a person's breath to
determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is available, that is the
only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a prosecution for public
intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test performed under this
subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper foundation. The percentage of
alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or urine established by the
results of a chemical test performed within two hours after the person’s arrest
on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of alcohol
present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
   3.   Open Containers in Motor Vehicles. See Section
6-2-1, Subsections 50 and 51 of this Code.
(Subsection – Ord. 1157 – Feb. 24 Supp.)
   4.   Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter
for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of
this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
5-4D-3 SOCIAL HOST.
   A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has control over,
property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any person,
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under the age of
18, to consume or possess on such property any alcoholic beverage. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a landlord or manager of the
property or to a person under legal age who consumes or possesses any alcoholic
beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony, or rite.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47)
CHAPTER 5
MINORS
 
5-5-1 Minors in Certain Establishments 5-5-4 Contributing to Delinquency
5-5-2 False ID                         5-5-5 Penalty
5-5-3 Cigarettes and Tobacco
 
5-5-1 MINORS IN CERTAIN ESTABLISHMENTS.
   It is unlawful for a person or establishment holding a liquor control
license, wine permit or beer permit issued in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa, or such person’s or establishment’s agents or
employees (collectively “licensee”) or the licensee’s agents or employees to
permit or allow any person under 21 years of age (a “minor”) to remain upon the
licensed premises unless one or more of the following exceptions applies:
   1.   Over 50 percent of the dollar volume of the business establishment
comes from the sale and serving of prepared foods and nonalcoholic beverages or
from the sale of athletic and fitness club memberships; or
   2.   The minor is an employee of the license holder, or is performing a
contracted service with respect to said license holder, and is on the licensed
premises during their scheduled work hours; or
   3.   The licensed premises is an events center. The term “events center” as
used herein shall mean: 1) a facility with a capacity to seat 500 or more
persons, 2) which does not have any regular business hours, and 3) which is
open exclusively for special events, such as sporting events, musical events,
weddings, private parties, banquets, and similar activities. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, at any public event at an events center in which any minor is in
attendance, the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be subject to the following
restrictions: 1) the alcoholic beverages shall be served only in a specially
designated bar area or areas, which are physically separated from the remainder
of the premises in a manner reasonably acceptable to the Police Chief; 2) only
persons who are 21 years of age or over shall be admitted to the specially
designated bar area; 3) persons who are 21 years of age or over shall receive
some form of physical identification, such as a distinctive stamp or a
wristband, which identifies their ability to consume alcoholic beverages; 4) no
shots shall be served in the specially designated area; and 5) a person shall
not be able to leave the specially designated area with any alcoholic
beverages. A “public event” is defined as an event in which the general public
is solicited to attend; or
   4.   The minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, who is 21 years
of age or over; or
   5.   The license or permit has been issued for an outdoor community event or
festival sponsored by a nonprofit entity to which the public is invited,
subject, however, to such restrictions as may be imposed by the City to
determine whether a person in attendance is 21 years of age or older; or
   6.   The licensee is a grocery, convenience store, or pharmacy.
Violations of this section by a licensee may constitute a municipal infraction,
subject to civil penalty as set forth in this Code and may be considered as
grounds for suspension or revocation of the licensee’s license or permit. The
licensee qualifying in Subsection 1 of this section based upon satisfying
certain revenue requirements shall submit certification to the Clerk upon the
Clerk’s request providing evidence that the applicable percentage requirements
set forth above have been satisfied for the preceding year.
5-5-2 FALSE ID.
   It is unlawful for any person under legal age to present any false
identification or to misrepresent their age for the purpose of purchasing or
attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage or beer, or to obtain unlawful
admission to any business establishment.
5-5-3 CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO.
   It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to smoke, use, possess,
purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes. Possession of tobacco,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes
by an individual under 21 years of age shall not constitute a violation of this
section if the individual under 21 years of age possesses the tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as part
of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a
valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers for
sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
5-5-4 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY.
   It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under 18 years of age
to commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
5-5-5 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 6
NUISANCES; ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
5-6-1 Definitions                   5-6-10 Method of Service
5-6-2 Nuisances Enumerated          5-6-11 Request for Hearing
5-6-3 Building Maintenance          5-6-12 Failure to Abate
5-6-4 Household Goods and Machinery 5-6-13 Abatement by City
5-6-5 Construction Equipment and    5-6-14 Collection of Costs
Materials
5-6-6 Junk Vehicles                 5-6-15 Installment Payment of Cost of
                                    Abatement
5-6-7 Nuisances Prohibited          5-6-16 Abatement in Emergency
5-6-8 Nuisance Abatement            5-6-17 Penalty
5-6-9 Notice to Abate; Contents     5-6-18 Adult Establishments
 
5-6-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Inoperable condition” means a vehicle that: a) has a missing or
defective part that is necessary for normal operation; or b) is on blocks,
jacks, or other supports; or c) does not have a current license for operation
on a public roadway.
   2.   “Junk” means all refuse; rubbish; old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or
any other nonferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper,
trash, rubber, debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled
vehicles, machinery, and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery, or
appliances; iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or
discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or
hardware. Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not
considered junk.
   3.   “Junk vehicle” means a motor vehicle which is in inoperable condition
and is: a) partially dismantled; or b) is being used for sale of parts or as a
source of repair or replacement parts; or c) which is being kept for scrapping
or salvage. Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to
the finding that the vehicle is a “junk vehicle.”
   4.   “Motor vehicle” means as defined in Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa,
including motorized bicycles, motorcycles, and all-terrain vehicles.
   5.   “Nuisance” means whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or
unreasonably offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of
property so as essentially to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
5-6-2 NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   1.   Specific Nuisances. The following subsections include, but do not
limit, the conditions which are deemed to be nuisances in the City:
      A.   Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing, or using any building or
other place for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture, which,
by occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other
annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property
of individuals or the public.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[1])
      B.   Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth,
or noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice
of others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[2])
      C.   Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[10])
      D.   Sanitary Sewer Facilities. Facilities for the storage or processing
of sewage, such as privies, vaults, sewers, private drains, septic tanks,
cesspools and drain fields, which have failed or do not function properly or
which are overflowing, leaking, or emanating odors. Septic tanks, cisterns, and
cesspools which are abandoned or no longer in use, unless they are emptied and
filled in accordance with applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations. Any
vault, cesspool or septic tank which does not comply with the Polk County or
Dallas County Department of Health Regulations.
      E.   Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the
water of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its
natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[4])
      F.   Impeding Passage of Rivers or Streams. Obstructing or impeding,
without legal authority, the passage of any rivers, streams, harbor, or
collection of water.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[3])
      G.   Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by
fences, buildings, or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places, or burying grounds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[5])
      H.   Dense Growth of Weeds, Vines, Brush, and Other Vegetation. Dense
growth of all weeds, vines, brush, or other vegetation in the City so as to
constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[11])
      I.   Grasses and Weeds. Grasses and weeds on any developed lot that are
allowed to grow to a height greater than 10 inches, grasses and weeds on any
undeveloped lot that are allowed to grow to a height greater than 15 inches and
any growth of noxious weeds as defined in the Code of Iowa. This subsection
does not apply to grasses grown as agricultural crops on undeveloped property
or to grasses growing in an area declared by the Council to be a natural
woodlands area. For land zoned RE Residential Estate Zoning Classification,
this subsection does not apply to grasses grown on the portion of a lot zoned
RE that does not contain the residence or the yard associated with the
residence, including grasses grown on such lots for agricultural purposes, such
as pastureland.
      J.   Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch elm disease.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[12])
      K.   Junk. Any junk stored outside on public or private property.
      L.   Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk,
such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones, and paper, by dealers in such
articles within the corporate limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[9])
      M.   Vermin Harborage. Conditions which are conducive to the harborage or
breeding of vermin.
      N.   Dilapidated Buildings. Any building or other structure which is in
such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in
such an unsafe or unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of
people residing in the vicinity thereof, or any building or structure defined
as a dangerous building in the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous
Buildings.
      O.   Billboards. Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether
erected and constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and
impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway,
boulevard, or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render
dangerous the use thereof. (See also Section 6-2-12 of this Code).
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[7])
      P.   Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of
prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code
of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as
defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or houses
where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are carried on
or permitted to the disturbance of others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[6])
      Q.   Businesses. Businesses, the operation or maintenance of which
adversely impacts nearby residential, commercial, or industrial uses and which:
         (1)   Jeopardize or endanger the public health or safety, or the
health or safety of persons residing or working on the premises or in the
surrounding area;
         (2)   Have resulted in or facilitated any of the following activities:
disturbances of the peace, illegal drug activity including sales or possession
thereof, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby,
gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft,
assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, illegal parking,
excessive noise (particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.),
noxious smells or fumes, traffic violations, or police detention, citations or
arrests; or
         (3)   Violates any other subsection of this section or any other City,
State, or federal regulation, ordinance, or statute.
   2.   Other Nuisances. Noncompliance with the conditions listed in Sections
5-6-3 through
5-6-6 of this chapter is also declared to be a nuisance.
5-6-3 BUILDING MAINTENANCE.
   Every building shall be maintained to be free from excessively peeling paint
or other conditions suggestive of deterioration or inadequate maintenance.
Exterior surfaces shall not have any holes or broken glass; loose, cracked, or
damaged shingles or siding; or other defects in the exterior finish which admit
rain, cold air, dampness, rodents, insects, or vermin. Basements, cellars, and
crawl spaces shall be free of standing water and hazards. All wood, including
floorboards, subfloors, joists, bridging, roof rafters and sheathing, and all
other wood in any interior or exterior floor, wall, roof, or other part of the
structure, shall be maintained to be free of cracks affecting structural
integrity, termite damage, infestation, or rot. Any and all damaged or
deteriorating materials shall be replaced. If infestation exists in any
basement, cellar, or crawl space, such infestation shall be remedied in
accordance with industry standards.
5-6-4 HOUSEHOLD GOODS AND MACHINERY.
   No furniture, household furnishings, appliances, or other such items not
designed for outside use, and no machinery, implements or other such equipment
which is in an inoperable condition, including component parts thereof, shall
be stored or kept outside for a period of more than 24 hours on any premises in
a residential area, excluding the week prior to the annual spring cleanup
program.
5-6-5 CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS.
   Operable machinery, equipment and materials being used for construction
purposes, including pipes, lumber, forms, dirt, sand, and sod, shall not be
stored, or kept in the open, except:
   1.   For use in the ordinary course of business as the inventory or asset of
a contractor, supplier, or government subdivision; or
   2.   On the job site of a project in progress for a period not to exceed 30
days after construction has been completed or a separate Certificate of
Occupancy has been issued, whichever occurs first.
5-6-6 JUNK VEHICLES.
   No junk vehicles shall be parked or stored outside for a period of more than
24 hours on private property. The provisions of this section do not apply to
any junk vehicle stored within:
   1.   Building. A garage or other enclosed building; or
   2.   Salvage Yard. An auto salvage yard or junkyard lawfully operated within
the City.
5-6-7 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance,
public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or
State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
5-6-8 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   Whenever the Mayor, City Manager, or other authorized municipal officer
finds that a nuisance exists, such officer shall cause to be served upon the
property owner a written notice to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time
after notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5-6-9 NOTICE TO ABATE; CONTENTS.
   The notice to abate shall contain:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   1.   Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the
nuisance.
   2.   Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
   3.   Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to
abate the nuisance.
   4.   Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.
   5.   Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or condition
is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time
prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against such person.
   6.   Request for Hearing. A statement that a hearing before the Council may
be requested by the person ordered to abate the nuisance to determine whether a
nuisance exists. The request for a hearing must be made in writing and
delivered to the Clerk within the time stated in the notice to abate.
5-6-10 METHOD OF SERVICE.
   The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or sent by certified mail to
the property owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5-6-11 REQUEST FOR HEARING.
   Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the Council
as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a hearing must be made in
writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time stated in the notice, or it
will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be abated as
ordered. The hearing will be before the Council at a time and place fixed by
the Council. The findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance
is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable time under
the circumstances.
5-6-12 FAILURE TO ABATE.
   Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail or refuse to
abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified in
the notice to abate is in violation of this Code.
5-6-13 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to
abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping
an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall
be filed with the Clerk, who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5-6-14 COLLECTION OF COSTS.
   The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense incurred by regular
mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate, and
if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within 10 business days
after the mailing of such statement, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the
County Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same
manner as, general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5-6-15 INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT.
   If the amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds $500.00,
the City may permit the assessment to be paid in up to 10 annual installments,
to be paid in the same manner and with the same interest rates provided for
assessments against benefited property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
5-6-16 ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY.
   If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing
maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may perform any action which
may be required under this chapter without prior notice. The City shall assess
the costs as provided in Section
5-6-14 of this chapter after notice to the property owner under the applicable
provisions of Sections
5-6-8,
5-6-9, and
5-6-10 of this chapter, and hearing as provided in Section
5-6-11 of this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5-6-17 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject
to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in
Title 1 Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs or
is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
5-6-18 ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS.
   1.   As used in this section, “adult establishment” means any business that
provides nude or topless dancing or operates any other adult-oriented business.
   2.   A public safety nuisance exists when it is established by clear and
convincing evidence that an owner, manager, employee, contemporaneous patron,
or guest of an adult establishment commits any of the following acts either on
the premises or in any parking lots or areas, including but not limited to
public rights-of-way, adjacent to the premises:
      A.   Unlawfully discharges a firearm or uses an offensive weapon, as
defined in Section 724.1 of the Code of Iowa, regardless of whether it inflicts
injury or death.
      B.   Assaults another person with a dangerous weapon as defined in
Section 702.7 of the Code of Iowa resulting in injury or death.
      C.   Engages in a riot as defined in Section 723.1 of the Code of Iowa on
three or more dates within a 12-month period to which the police respond and
disperse a crowd. The participants need not be the same persons for each
incident.
   3.   When the City Attorney believes a serious threat to the public safety
exists, the City Attorney or any other attorney on behalf of the City Attorney,
may file a suit in equity in the district court without bond seeking abatement
of the public safety nuisance arising from an adult establishment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.12)
(Section 5-6-18 – Ord. 1149 – Oct. 24 Supp.)
CHAPTER 7
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
5-7-1 Definitions                      5-7-12 Number of Animals and Fowl
                                       Limited
5-7-2 Licensing of Dogs and Cats       5-7-13 Slaughtering Restricted
5-7-3 Animal and Livestock Neglect     5-7-14 Grazing and Feeding
5-7-4 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs     5-7-15 Removal of Dead Animals
5-7-5 Keeping Livestock                5-7-16 Impoundment, Redemption, and
                                       Disposition of Animals
5-7-6 At-Large Prohibited              5-7-17 Pet Awards Prohibited
5-7-7 Damage or Interference           5-7-18 Tampering with a Rabies
                                       Vaccination Tag
5-7-8 Annoyance or Disturbance         5-7-19 Tampering with an Electronic
                                       Handling Device
5-7-9 Rabies Vaccination               5-7-20 Penalty
5-7-10 Duty to Report Animal Biting or 5-7-21 False Representation of Service
Attacking Person                       Animal
5-7-11 Confinement                      
 
5-7-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any medium,
including (but not limited to) print, radio, television, sign, display, label,
tag, or articulation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   2.   “Animal” means every wild, tame, or domestic member of the animal
kingdom other than a human vertebrate.
   3.   “Animal shelter” means any premises, either designated, or contracted
for the proper care of impounded animals held under the authority of this
chapter.
   4.   “At-large” means found within the City upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, public or private grounds. A dog, properly licensed as required by
law, is not deemed to be at large if:
      A.   It is on the premises of the owner; or
      B.   It is under the control of a person competent to restrain and
control the dog, either by leash, cord, chain, or other similar restraint or
properly restrained within a motor vehicle; or
      C.   It is properly housed in a veterinary hospital or kennel; or
      D.   It is accompanied by or at “heel” beside and obedient to the
commands of the owner or a competent responsible person.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any dog is deemed at-large
at any time when attacking persons or domestic animals, destroying property, or
on a public school ground except when under restraint as set out in Subsections
B and D of this definition. Further, any female dog in heat is deemed at-large
at any time when not under restraint as set out in Subsections A and C of this
definition.
   5.   “Cat” means all members of the Felis domestica species, male or female,
altered or unaltered.
   6.   “Commercial establishment” means an animal shelter, boarding kennel,
commercial breeder, commercial kennel, dealer, pet shop, pound, public auction,
or research facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
   7.   “Community cat” means any member of the Felis domestica species, male
or female, altered or unaltered, that primarily lives as a wild cat in the
City, where no ownership can be determined.
   8.   “Contractor” means the third-party engaged, by approval of the Council
to provide pet licensing, animal control, transport, or sheltering services.
   9.   “Dog” means all animals of the canine species, male and female, altered
and unaltered.
   10.   “Fair” means any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
      A.   The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State Fair Board
pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event conducted by a
fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products.
      C.   An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or concession
booths.
   11.   “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill” as defined in
Section 99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   12.   “Injury” means an animal’s disfigurement; the impairment of an
animal’s health; or an impairment to the functioning of an animal’s limb or
organ, or the loss of an animal’s limb or organ.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
   13.   “Kennel” means any business premises on which four or more dogs, or
four or more cats, six months old or older, are kept or raised solely for the
bona fide purpose of sale and which are kept under constant restraint.† 6
   14.   “Licensed cat” means any cat bearing a currently valid license under
Section
5-7-2 of this chapter.
   15.   “Licensed dog” means any dog bearing a currently valid license under
Section
5-7-2 of this chapter.
   16.   “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine,
ovine or porcine species, ostriches, rheas, and emus; farm deer (as defined in
Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa); or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
   17.   “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring an
animal.
   18.   “Pet” means a living dog, cat, or an animal normally maintained in a
small tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not limited to a
rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch, tropical fish,
goldfish, snake, turtle, gecko, or iguana.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   19.   “Pet shop” means any person engaged in the business of breeding,
buying, selling, or boarding animals of any species, except the operation of a
kennel, agricultural, or wildlife pursuits.
   20.   “Pound” means a facility for the prevention of cruelty to animals
operated by the State, a municipal corporation, or other political subdivision
of the State for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized stray, homeless,
abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, or other animals; or a facility operated for
such a purpose under a contract with any municipal corporation or incorporated
society.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   21.   “Research facility” means any school or college of medicine,
veterinary medicine, pharmacy, dentistry, or osteopathic medicine, or hospital,
diagnostic or research laboratories, or other educational or scientific
establishment situated in the State concerned with the investigation of, or
instruction concerning the structure or function of living organisms, the
cause, prevention, control, or cure of diseases or abnormal conditions of human
beings or animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   22.   “Trap Neuter/Spay Release” (TNR) means a program administered by a
third-party contractor to identify community cats, provide means to alter those
animals, and return them to the area they were found in.
   23.   “Veterinarian” means a veterinarian licensed pursuant to Chapter 169
of the Code of Iowa who practices veterinary medicine in the State.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
 
Notes
6 † EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Title 4, Chapter 8 for kennel licensing provisions.
5-7-2 LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS.
   1.   Annual License Required. The owner of all dogs and cats, six months of
age or older, shall annually obtain a license as hereinafter provided. It shall
be unlawful for any owner to have a dog or cat within the City without
obtaining a license as required herein.
   2.   Applications. The owner of a dog or cat, for which a license is
required, shall, on or before April 30 of each year, apply to the Clerk or
designee for a license for each dog or cat owned. Applications may be made at
any time immediately following the possession of the dog or cat, or at such
time said dog or cat has reached the age of six months. Applications for
licenses shall state the breed, sex, age, color, markings, and name, if any, of
the dog or cat, and the name, address, and telephone number of the owner. A
certificate from a licensed veterinarian must accompany all applications
claiming an animal has been spayed or neutered.
   3.   License Fee. The amount of the annual license fee for dogs and cats
shall be established by resolution approved by the Council, subject to the
following provisions:
      A.   The owner of a certified service animal who applies for a dog or cat
license may qualify for a waiver of the annual license fee.
      B.   If the owner of a dog or cat acquires the animal less than six
months prior to the expiration date of the license for that period, the license
fee shall be reduced 50 percent and the full regular license fee as herein
provided shall henceforth be in effect the following calendar year.
   4.   Delinquency; Late Fee Penalty. All license fees for dogs and cats
become delinquent on May 1 of the year in which they are due and payable, and a
late fee penalty shall be added to each unpaid license on and after said date.
The late fee penalty schedule shall be established by resolution approved by
the Council.
   5.   Issuance of License; Evidence of Vaccination; Dangerous Dog Insurance.
      A.   The Clerk or designee shall issue dog and cat licenses when properly
applied for and shall require evidence of rabies vaccination as herein
provided. The rabies vaccination required shall be an injection of anti-rabies
vaccine approved by the State Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship,
and the frequency of revaccination necessary for approved vaccinations shall be
established by that State Department. The vaccine shall be administered by a
licensed veterinarian and shall be given as approved by the State Department of
Agriculture and Land Stewardship. The veterinarian shall issue a tag with the
certificate of vaccination, and the tag shall at all times be attached to the
collar of the dog or cat.
      B.   The owner of a “dangerous dog” as defined in Section
5-7A-1 shall, at the time of procuring a license under this subsection, provide
to the Clerk an insurance policy or a certificate of insurance in compliance
with the requirements of Subsection
5-7A-6(B).
   6.   Submission of Rabies Vaccination Certificates by Veterinarians. Each
veterinarian within the City limits shall forward to the Clerk or designee by
the 10th day of each month a copy of each certificate of rabies vaccination
issued by the veterinarian during the preceding month. Each certificate of
vaccination shall be typed or printed so as to be clearly legible.
   7.   Transfer or Chance of Ownership. When the permanent ownership of a dog
or cat is transferred and the animal remains within the City limits, the new
owner shall be required to apply for a new license as herein provided. The new
owner shall have 30 calendar days in which to obtain the new license.
   8.   Duration of License. All licenses shall expire on April 30 of the year
following the date of issuance.
   9.   Exceptions to License Requirements. The requirements for licensing dogs
and cats shall not apply in the following circumstances:
      A.   The animal is in transit through the City only.
      B.   The first 30 calendar days of residency in the City by the owner, or
the first 30 calendar days the owner has owned the animal.
      C.   The animal has been temporarily housed in a veterinary hospital, an
animal grooming shop, an established licensed kennel, or an accredited
institution for research.
   10.   License Tag; Use of Tag. The Clerk or designee shall, upon receipt of
application, payment of license fee, proof of rabies vaccination and other
necessary required evidence, deliver or mail to the applicant a license which
shall be in the form of a metal, permanent tag. The license tag shall be
attached by the owner to the dog’s or cat’s collar and shall be kept on the dog
or cat for which the license was issued at all times.
   11.   Tag not Transferable. A license tag issued for one animal shall not be
transferable to another animal. A license issued by another city partnering
with this City in a consolidated animal licensing agreement shall be honored
when a resident moves from that city to this City with the same dog or cat.
   12.   Duplicate Tag. Upon the filing of a written statement that the license
tag has been lost or destroyed, the owner may obtain another tag upon payment
of the required license replacement fee, which shall be established by
resolution approved by the Council.
5-7-3 ANIMAL AND LIVESTOCK NEGLECT.
   1.   It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of an animal and
confines that animal to fail to provide the animal with any of the following
conditions for the animal’s welfare:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
      A.   Access to food in an amount and quality reasonably sufficient to
satisfy the animal’s basic nutrition level to the extent that the animal’s
health or life is endangered.
      B.   Access to a supply of potable water in an amount reasonably
sufficient to satisfy the animal’s basic hydration level to the extent that the
animal’s health or life is endangered. Access to snow or ice does not satisfy
this requirement.
      C.   Sanitary conditions free from excessive animal waste or the
overcrowding of animals to the extent that the animal’s health or life is
endangered.
      D.   Ventilated shelter reasonably sufficient to provide adequate
protection from the elements and weather conditions suitable for the age,
species, and physical condition of the animal so as to maintain the animal in a
state of good health to the extent that the animal’s health or life is
endangered. The shelter must protect the animal from wind, rain, snow, or sun
and have adequate bedding to provide reasonable protection against cold and
dampness. A shelter may include a residence, garage, barn, shed, or doghouse.
      E.   Grooming, to the extent it is reasonably necessary to prevent
adverse health effects or suffering.
      F.   Veterinary care deemed necessary by a reasonably prudent person to
relieve an animal’s distress from any of the following:
         (1)   A condition caused by failing to provide for the animal’s
welfare as described in this section.
         (2)   An injury or illness suffered by the animal causing the animal
to suffer prolonged pain and suffering.
   2.   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      A.   A person operating a commercial establishment under a valid
authorization issued or renewed under Section 162.2A of the Code of Iowa, or a
person acting under the direction or supervision of that person, if all of the
following apply:
         (1)   The animal, as described in Subsection 1, was maintained as part
of the commercial establishment’s operation.
         (2)   In providing conditions for the welfare of the animal, as
described in Subsection 1, the person complied with the standard of care
requirements provided in Section 162.10A[1] of the Code of Iowa, including any
applicable rules adopted by the Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship
applying to: (i) a State licensee or registrant operating pursuant to Section
162.10A[2a] or [2b] of the Code of Iowa; or (ii) a permittee operating pursuant
to Section 162.10A[2c] of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   A research facility if the research facility has been issued or
renewed a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture and Land
Stewardship pursuant to Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa, and performs functions
within the scope of accepted practices and disciplines associated with the
research facility.
   3.   Livestock Neglect. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines
livestock in any place to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent
with customary animal husbandry practices, or to deprive the livestock of
necessary sustenance, or to injure or destroy livestock by any means that
causes pain or suffering in a manner inconsistent with customary animal
husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
5-7-4 ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS.
   1.   A person who has ownership or custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon
the cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another person
who will accept ownership and custody, or the person may deliver the cat or dog
to an animal shelter.
   2.   Any cost for delivery of the animal will be subject to the provisions
of an approved contractor as approved by the Council.
   3.   Community cats, trapped by residents of the City, may be transported to
a contractor site by the resident and admitted to the TNR program for
alteration. Costs associated shall be determined and charged by the contractor
participating in the TNR program as set forth by the Council.
5-7-5 KEEPING LIVESTOCK.
   It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except by
written consent of the Council or except in compliance with the City’s zoning
regulations.
5-7-6 AT-LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any owner to allow dogs, cats, cattle, horses, swine,
sheep, chickens, or other similar animals or fowl to run at-large within the
corporate limits of the City. Any such animal or fowl at-large may be
impounded. The penalty for violation of this section is $25.00 for the first
offense within any one-year period, $50.00 for the second offense within any
one-year period, and $70.00 for the third offense, and each offense thereafter,
within any one year period.
5-7-7 DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE.
   It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to
pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference
with, the premises.
5-7-8 ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.
   It is unlawful for the owner of a dog, or any person or kennel in possession
of a dog, to allow or permit such dog to cause serious annoyance or disturbance
to any person or persons by frequent and habitual howling, yelping, barking, or
otherwise; or, by running after or chasing persons, bicycles, automobiles, or
other vehicles.
5-7-9 RABIES VACCINATION.
   Every owner of a dog or cat, which is six months of age or over shall obtain
a rabies vaccination for such animal. It is unlawful for any owner to own or
have a dog or cat in said person’s possession within the City, which is six
months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
5-7-10 DUTY TO REPORT ANIMAL BITING OR ATTACKING PERSON.
   It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat, or other animal which has
bitten or attacked a person, or any person having knowledge of such bite or
attack, to report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is
the duty of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health
the existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
5-7-11 CONFINEMENT.
   If a local board of health receives information that an animal has bitten a
person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall
order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner
fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be
apprehended and impounded by such board, and after 10 days the board may
humanely destroy the animal. If such animal is returned to its owner, the owner
shall pay the cost of impoundment. This section does not apply if a police
service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in the
performance of its duties has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
5-7-12 NUMBER OF ANIMALS AND FOWL LIMITED.
   1.   Dogs, Cats, and Livestock. No more than four dogs or cats, or
combinations thereof, over the age of six months shall be kept by any person on
any premises in the City except in bona fide kennels or pet shops. Not more
than two of any combination of horses, cattle, or other bovine animals, sheep,
goats, or swine shall be kept by any person on any parcel of less than five
acres in area.
   2.   Fowl. No more than 12 of any combination of poultry, pigeons, or other
fowl shall be kept by any person or persons on any parcel of land less than one
and one-half acres in area.
5-7-13 SLAUGHTERING RESTRICTED.
   No person shall slaughter any horse, bovine animal, sheep, goat, or swine on
any parcel of land less than five acres in area, for any commercial or personal
use, other than as otherwise permitted by this Code.
5-7-14 GRAZING AND FEEDING.
   On any parcel of land less than five acres in area, no grazing or feeding
shall be permitted, nor any structure or enclosure for housing, feeding, or
caring for horses, cattle, or other bovine animals, sheep, goats, swine,
poultry, or other fowl, except pigeons, shall be located, within 150 feet from
any human habitation or within 50 feet of the property line of the parcel of
land upon which such animals are kept.
5-7-15 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for any person to place any dead animal in any street or
other public place in the City, or to allow any dead animal which said person
owned, or of which said person had control, to remain in any street or other
public place or on the premises of any person within the City for more than
five hours. Should an animal die in any street or other public place or on the
premises of any person within the City, then the person who owned or had
possession and control of the animal prior to its death shall remove or cause
to be removed the carcass within five hours after the time the animal dies, and
have the same desiccated or cremated. Should any person violate the provisions
of this section by failing to remove or cause to be removed said carcass within
said time and have the same desiccated or cremated, the City may cause such
carcass to be removed and have the same desiccated or cremated, and said person
shall make payment to the City in the amount of $35.00 as a fee therefor.
5-7-16 IMPOUNDMENT, REDEMPTION, AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
   1.   Contract for Impounding. The City may enter into a contract with any
health department or any public or private agency or organization for the use
of its facilities for the restraining and impounding of dogs, cats, or other
animals, for assisting in the collection of unlicensed dogs and cats, and for
the destruction or disposition of such animals as provided by ordinance or law.
All animals so impounded shall be given humane care.
   2.   Notice of Impounding. It is the agreed duty of the contractor to give
notice to the owner of any animal impounded if such owner’s name and address
appear on the animal’s collar or if such owner is otherwise known.
   3.   Access to Records. It is agreed the City shall grant access to the
contractors, to records of ownership and pet licensing for the limited purpose
of and in an effort to increase the opportunity of locating the owner of an
animal impounded to the contractor’s facility.
   4.   Period for Keeping Dogs and Cats. All dogs and cats impounded that do
not have a current license, collar, or similar identification shall be kept for
not less than four days after being impounded, unless sooner redeemed by the
owner in accordance with this chapter. All dogs and cats impounded that have a
current license, collar, or similar identification shall be kept for not less
than six days after being impounded, unless sooner redeemed by the owner in
accordance with this chapter.
   5.   Redemption of Animals. The owner of any dog, cat, or other animal shall
pay impoundment, pick up, and disposal fees to the contractor. The amounts of
the fees shall be established by resolution approved by the Council.
   6.   Disposition of Animals.
      A.   After the fifth day of impoundment, an unclaimed and unlicensed dog,
cat, or other animal, not held for observation, may be humanely destroyed, or
adopted to a new owner by the contractor at their discretion.
      B.   After the seventh day of impoundment of a licensed animal where
ownership has been identified, an unclaimed but licensed dog, licensed cat or
other animal, if not being held for observation, at the discretion of the
contractor, may be humanely destroyed, or adopted to a new owner.
      C.   At the expiration of the observation period, an unredeemed dog, cat,
or other animal being held for observation, at the discretion of the
contractor, may be humanely destroyed or may be adopted to a new owner.
      D.   The City agrees to take part in a Trap Neuter/Spay Release (TNR)
program for community cats. Community cats impounded under the TNR program,
will be neutered, or spayed while in the care of the contractor, have their
ears clipped, and be returned to the wild, where they were located.
5-7-17 PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717E)
   1.   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or advertise
that a pet may be awarded as any of the following:
      A.   A prize for participating in a game.
      B.   A prize for participating in a fair.
      C.   An inducement or condition for visiting a place of business or
attending an event sponsored by a business.
      D.   An inducement or condition for executing a contract that includes
provisions unrelated to the ownership, care, or disposition of the pet.
   2.   Exceptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
      A.   A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code of Iowa if
the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a pet on the
premises of the pet shop.
      B.   Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers of America;
the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated with outdoor
recreation, hunting, or fishing, including but not limited to the Iowa
Sportsmen’s Federation.
5-7-18 TAMPERING WITH A RABIES VACCINATION TAG.
   It is unlawful to tamper with a rabies vaccination tag.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.45)
   1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with a rabies vaccination tag
if all of the following apply:
      A.   The person knowingly removes, damages, or destroys a rabies
vaccination tag as described in Section 351.35 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   The rabies vaccination tag is attached to a collar worn by a dog,
including as provided in Sections 351.25 and 351.26 of the Code of Iowa.
   2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
      A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized
to take action by the owner.
      B.   A peace officer.
      C.   A veterinarian.
      D.   An animal shelter or pound.
5-7-19 TAMPERING WITH AN ELECTRONIC HANDLING DEVICE.
   It is unlawful to tamper with an electronic handling device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.46)
   1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with an electronic handling
device if all of the following apply:
      A.   The person knowingly removes, disables, or destroys an electronic
device designed and used to maintain custody or control of the dog or modify
the dog’s behavior.
      B.   The electronic device is attached to or worn by the dog or attached
to an item worn by the dog, including (but not limited to) a collar, harness,
or vest.
   2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
      A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized
to take action by the owner.
      B.   A peace officer.
      C.   A veterinarian.
      D.   An animal shelter or pound.
5-7-20 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
5-7-21    FALSE REPRESENTATION OF SERVICE ANIMAL.
   A person commits the offense of intentional misrepresentation of an animal
as a service animal or a service-animal-in-training if, for the purpose of
obtaining any of the rights or privileges set forth in State or federal law,
the person intentionally misrepresents an animal in one’s possession as one’s
service animal or service-animal-in-training or a person with a disability’s
service animal or service-animal-in-training whom the person is assisting by
controlling.
(Code of Iowa, Section 216C.11(3)(B))
(Section 5-7-21 – Ord. 1170 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 7A
DANGEROUS DOGS AND OTHER DANGEROUS ANIMALS
 
5-7A-1 Definitions                  5-7A-5 Determination of Potentially
                                    Dangerous Dog or Dangerous Dog
5-7A-2 Animal Review Board; Appeals 5-7A-6 Requirements for Keeping Dangerous
                                    Dogs and Potentially Dangerous Dogs
5-7A-3 Keeping of Dangerous Animals 5-7A-7 Owner Responsibility for Dangerous
Prohibited; Exceptions              or Potentially Dangerous Dogs
5-7A-4 Seizure, Impoundment, and    5-7A-8 Penalty
Disposition of Dangerous Animals
 
5-7A-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this article, the following terms are defined:
   1.   Dangerous animal: means:
      A.   Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle, and which is of a
wild nature or disposition, and which is capable of killing, inflicting serious
injury upon or causing disease among human beings; and
      B.   The following animals, which are deemed to be dangerous animals per
se:
         (1)   Wolves, coyotes, and foxes;
         (2)   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, mink, and other Mustelids;
         (3)   Bats;
         (4)   Bears;
         (5)   Gila monsters, and lizards that are venomous or poisonous;
         (6)   All apes (including chimpanzees), baboons, and macaques;
         (7)   Monkeys, except the squirrel monkey;
         (8)   Elephants;
         (9)   Wild boar;
         (10)   Black widow and brown recluse spiders and scorpions;
         (11)   Snakes which are naturally venomous or poisonous;
         (12)   Snakes which are constricting and exceeding six feet (6’) in
length;
         (13)   All Carnivora of the family Felidae, including, but not limited
to, lions, cougars, tigers, jaguars, leopards, lynx, ocelots, and bobcats, but
excluding domestic cats; and
         (14)   Raccoons, opossums, and skunks.
      C.   Dangerous animals shall not include dangerous dogs as defined in
this section or potentially dangerous dogs as defined in this section.
   2.   Dangerous dog: any dog that:
      A.   Causes a serious injury to a person or domestic animal; or
      B.   Having previously been designated as a potentially dangerous dog,
engages in additional behavior that poses a threat to public safety or poses a
threat of a “serious injury” as defined in this section.
   3.   Impound: taken into the custody of the Clive Police Department.
   4.   Owner: any person, firm, corporation, organization or department
possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in, or having control or
custody of a dog.
   5.   Pet safety course: a course preapproved by the Chief of Police or his
designee consisting of, but not limited to, instruction in safe management of
dogs.
   6.   Potentially dangerous dog: a dog that poses a threat to public safety
as demonstrated by any of the following behaviors:
      A.   Causing an injury to a person or domestic animal on public or
private property that is less severe than a serious injury;
      B.   Without provocation, chases or approaches a person, a domestic
animal or a wheeled conveyance upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or
private property, in an apparent attitude of attack; or has a known propensity,
tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise
threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals;
      C.   Running at large and impounded or owner cited by Police Department
two (2) or more times for running at large within any twelve (12) month period;
or
      D.   Acts in a highly aggressive manner within a fenced yard/enclosure
and appears to a reasonable person able to jump over or escape.
   7.   Proper Enclosure: “proper enclosure” of potentially dangerous and
dangerous dogs requires::
      A.   Potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs must be securely confined
within an occupied residence or in a securely enclosed and locked fenced area,
pen, or kennel, except when leashed as provided in this article. Such fenced
area, pen, or kennel must be constructed in a manner and to a height to prevent
the escape of the dog.
      B.   All fenced areas, pens or kennels designed, constructed or used to
confine potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs must be locked with a key or
combination lock when such dogs are within the structure.
      C.   Any structures erected must comply with all zoning and building
regulations of the City. All such structures must be adequately lighted and
ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No potentially dangerous
or dangerous dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or
structure that would allow the potentially dangerous or dangerous dog to exit
such building on its own volition.
   8.   Provocation: the threat, injury or damage caused by the dog was
sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or
other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was
tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or was committing or attempting to
commit a crime.
   9.   Responsible person: a person at least eighteen (18) years old who is
able to keep the dog under complete control at all times.
   10.   Serious injury: any physical injury to a human being resulting in a
major fracture, muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or lacerations
requiring multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery.
(Section 5-7A-1 – Ord. 1146 – Jun. 24 Supp.)
5-7A-2 ANIMAL REVIEW BOARD; APPEALS.
   1.   Board Created; Purpose. An Animal Review Board is hereby created for
the sole purpose of hearing and deciding administrative appeals regarding
dangerous animals, potentially dangerous dogs, or dangerous dogs, according to
the procedure set forth in this chapter. The Animal Review Board shall consist
of the following three (3) persons: the City Manager, and two (2) members of
the Council, to be appointed annually by the Mayor.
   2.   Filing of Appeal. In order to appeal an order to remove a dangerous
animal or a determination that a dog is a potentially dangerous dog or
dangerous dog, written notice of appeal must be filed with the City Clerk
within seven (7) days after receipt of the order or written determination.
Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of the
right to appeal the order or determination of the Chief of Police.
   3.   Serving Notice; Hearing; Determination. The notice of appeal shall
state the grounds for such appeal and shall be delivered personally or by
certified mail to the City Clerk. The hearing by the Animal Review Board of
such appeal shall be scheduled within twenty (20) days of the receipt of notice
of appeal. After such hearing, the Animal Review Board may affirm or reverse
the order or determination of the Chief of Police. Such determination shall be
contained in a written decision and shall be filed with the City Clerk within
seven (7) days after the hearing, or any continued session thereof. The written
decision shall immediately be served upon the person or entity against whom
rendered in the same manner as the order or determination of the Chief of
Police.
   4.   Decisions Final. A decision of the Animal Review Board shall constitute
the final decision of the City of Clive with respect to a determination under
this article. Decisions of the Animal Review Board are not subject to review by
the City Council.
(Section 5-7A-2 – Ord. 1146 – Jun. 24 Supp.)
5-7A-3 KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor any dangerous animal or act as a
custodian for such animal, or keep such animal for any purpose or in any
capacity within the City except in the following circumstances:
   1.   The keeping of dangerous animals in a public zoo, bona fide educational
or medical institution, humane society, or museum where they are kept as live
specimens for the public to view or for the purpose of instruction, research,
or study.
   2.   The keeping of dangerous animals for exhibition to the public by a
circus, carnival, exhibit, or show where such circus, carnival, exhibit, or
show is of a traveling nature, is displayed before large assemblages of people
and maintains any and all required federal or State licenses.
   3.   The keeping of dangerous animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary
hospital for treatment.
   4.   The keeping of dangerous animals by a wildlife rescue organization with
appropriate permit from the State Department of Natural Resources.
   5.   Any dangerous animals under the jurisdiction of and in the possession
of the State Department of Natural Resources, pursuant to Chapters 481A and
481B of the Code of Iowa.
5-7A-4 SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT, AND DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   1.   City Authority to Destroy. In the event that a dangerous animal is
found at large and unattended upon public property, park property, public
right-of-way, or the property of someone other than its owner, thereby creating
a hazard to persons or property, such animal may, in the discretion of the
Police Chief, be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The City shall
be under no duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous animal
found at-large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such animal
prior to its destruction.
   2.   Investigation; Order of Police Chief. Upon the complaint of any
individual that a person is keeping, sheltering, or harboring a dangerous
animal in the City, the Police Chief shall cause the matter to be investigated,
and if after investigation, the facts indicate that such person is keeping,
sheltering, or harboring a dangerous animal in the City, the Police Chief shall
order such person to safely remove such animal from the City, and permanently
place the animal with an organization or group allowed under Section
5-7A-3 of this chapter to possess dangerous animals, or destroy the animal,
within three days of the receipt of such order. Such order shall be contained
in a notice to remove the dangerous animal, which notice shall be given in
writing to the person keeping, sheltering, or harboring the dangerous animal,
and shall be served personally or by certified mail. Such order and notice to
remove the dangerous animal shall not be required where the dangerous animal
has previously caused serious physical harm or death to any person, in which
case, the Police Chief shall cause the animal to be immediately seized and
impounded or killed if seizure and impoundment are not possible without risk of
serious physical harm or death to any person.
   3.   Right to Appeal; Seizure of Animal. The order to remove a dangerous
animal, issued by the Police Chief, may be appealed to the Animal Review Board
as set forth in Section
5-7A-2 of this chapter. If the Animal Review Board affirms the action of The
Police Chief, the board shall order in its written decision that the individual
or entity owning, sheltering, harboring, or keeping such dangerous animal,
remove such animal from the City, permanently place such animal with an
organization or group allowed under Section
5-7A-3 of this chapter to possess dangerous animals, or destroy it. If the
original order of the Police Chief is not appealed and is not complied with
within three days, or if the order of the Animal Review Board after appeal is
not complied with within three days of its issuance, the Police Chief is
authorized to seize and impound such dangerous animal. An animal so seized
shall be impounded for a period of seven days. If, at the end of the
impoundment period, the individual or entity against whom the decision and
order of the Animal Review Board was issued has not petitioned the State
District Court for a review of said order, the City shall cause the animal to
be disposed of by sale, permanently place such animal with an organization or
group allowed under Section
5-7A-3 of this chapter to possess dangerous animals, or destroy such animal in
a humane manner. Failure to comply with an order of the City issued pursuant
hereto shall constitute a serious misdemeanor offense, punishable pursuant to
this Code.
5-7A-5 DETERMINATION OF POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG OR DANGEROUS DOG.
   1.   Determination of Potentially Dangerous Dog.
      A.   The Chief of Police or his designee is authorized to make a
determination whether a dog is potentially dangerous based on the factors
listed in Section
5-7A-1 of this article, definition of “potentially dangerous dog,” and shall
notify the owner of the dog in writing by certified mail or hand delivery with
signature of that status.
      B.   Following attempted notice to the owner, if the Chief of Police or
his designee has probable cause to believe that a dog is a potentially
dangerous dog and may pose a threat to public safety, the Chief of Police or
his designee may obtain a search warrant pursuant to Iowa rules of civil
procedure and arrange for the impounding of the dog pending disposition of the
case or until the dog owner has fulfilled the requirements of Section
5-7A-6 of this article. The owner of the dog shall be liable to the City for
the costs of impounding and keeping the dog.
      C.   Upon notice, the owner may, within seven (7) days after a
determination that a dog is a potentially dangerous dog, appeal the
determination to the Animal Review Board as set forth in Section
5-7A-2 of this article. A decision by the Animal Review Board overturning the
determination of the Chief of Police or his designee shall not affect the right
of the Chief of Police or his designee to later declare a dog to be a
potentially dangerous dog or a dangerous dog, or to determine that the dog
poses a threat to public safety, based on the dog’s subsequent behavior.
   2.   Determination of Dangerous Dog.
      A.   The Chief of Police is authorized to make a determination whether a
dog is dangerous based on the factors listed in Section
5-7A-1 of this article, definition of “dangerous dog,” and shall notify the
owner of the dog in writing by certified mail with signature or hand delivery
of that status.
      B.   Following attempted notice to the owner and prior to any hearing, if
Chief of Police or his designee has probable cause and believes the dog to be a
dangerous dog and that the animal poses an imminent threat to public safety,
law enforcement, the Chief of Police or his designee may obtain a search
warrant pursuant to Iowa rules of civil procedure and impound the dog pending
disposition of the case or until the dog owner has fulfilled the requirements
of Section
5-7A-6 of this article. The owner of the dog shall be liable to the City for
the costs of impounding and keeping the dog if the dog is determined to be a
dangerous dog.
      C.   The owner may, within seven (7) days after a determination that a
dog is a dangerous dog, appeal the determination to the Animal Review Board as
set forth in Section
5-7A-2 of this article. A decision by the Animal Review Board overturning the
determination of the Chief of Police or his designee shall not affect the right
of the Chief of Police or his designee to later declare a dog to be a dangerous
dog or to determine that the dog poses a threat to public safety based on the
dog’s subsequent behavior.
   3.   Exceptions to Dangerous or Potentially Dangerous Dog Determination. No
dog shall be declared a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog if:
      A.   The dog was used by a law enforcement or military official for
legitimate law enforcement or military purposes;
      B.   The threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person:
         (1)   Who was committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other
tort upon the premises lawfully occupied by the owner of the dog; or
         (2)   Who was provoking, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or
who can be shown to have repeatedly, in the past, provoked, tormented, abused,
or assaulted the dog; or
         (3)   Who was committing or attempting to commit a crime; or
      C.   The dog was:
         (1)   Responding to pain or injury or protecting its offspring; or
         (2)   Protecting or defending a human being within the immediate
vicinity of the dog from an attack or assault.
   4.   Consequences of Dangerous or Potentially Dangerous Dog Determination.
      A.   If the Chief of Police or his designee determines that a dog is a
potentially dangerous dog under Subsection A of this section, the owner shall
comply with the requirements for keeping and handling potentially dangerous
dogs under Subsections
5-7A-6(A) and (B) of this article, and any other special security or care
requirements which are reasonable.
      B.   If the Chief of Police or his designee determines that a dog is a
dangerous dog under Subsection A of this section, the owner shall comply with
the requirements for keeping and handling dangerous and potentially dangerous
dogs under Subsections
5-7A-6(A) through (C) of this article, and any other special security or care
requirements which are reasonable.
      C.   The Chief of Police or his designee may require impoundment of the
dog if the owner is unable or unwilling to comply with the requirements of
Section
5-7A-6 of this article until the owner of the dog has satisfied all the
requirements of this ordinance. The owner of the dog shall be liable to the
City for the costs of impounding and keeping the dangerous or potentially
dangerous dog whether or not they reclaim the dog.
(Section 5-7A-5 – Ord. 1146 – Jun. 24 Supp.)
5-7A-6 REQUIREMENTS FOR KEEPING DANGEROUS DOGS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
   1.   Requirements for Owner of a Dangerous Dog or Potentially Dangerous Dog.
Within 20 days of a finding that a dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous,
the owner must establish to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police or his
designee that:
      A.   The owner of the dog is eighteen (18) years of age or older;
      B.   The owner of the dog shall present a certificate of insurance issued
by an insurance company licensed to do business in this State, providing
personal liability insurance coverage as in a homeowner’s policy, with a
minimum liability amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for the
injury or death of any person, for damage to property of others and for acts of
negligence by the owner or his or her agents, in the keeping or owning of such
dog. The certificate shall require notice to the City, in conformity with
general City standards for certificates of insurance, if the underlying policy
of insurance is cancelled for any reason. In lieu of such a certificate, a copy
of a current homeowner’s policy designating these requirements shall be
sufficient proof of insurance for purposes of this subsection.
      C.   The dog has a current rabies vaccination and City of Clive pet
license at the owner’s expense;
      D.   The owner has a proper enclosure to prevent the entry of any person
or animal and the escape of said “potentially dangerous dog” as defined in
Section
5-7A-1 of this article;
      E.   The dog has been spayed or neutered at the owner’s expense;
      F.   The dog has been implanted with a microchip containing owner
identification information at the owner’s expense. The microchip information
must be registered with the Chief of Police;
      G.   The dog has been photographed for identification purposes;
      H.   The dog owner has satisfactorily completed a pet safety course
preapproved by the Chief of Police or his designee at the dog owner’s expense;
and
      I.   The owner of the dog has written permission of the property owner or
homeowner’s association where the dangerous dog will be kept, if applicable.
   2.   Potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs confined in a fenced yard must
be continuously monitored by a responsible person to assure the dog does not
escape.
   3.   Requirements for Owner of a Dangerous Dog. In addition to the foregoing
requirements, the owner of a dangerous dog must also comply with the following
additional requirements:
      A.   The owner will maintain the dangerous dog exclusively on the owner’s
property except for medical treatment or examination; and
      B.   The owner of the dangerous dog has posted on the premises a clearly
visible written warning sign that there is a dangerous dog on the property with
a conspicuous warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a
dangerous dog. The sign shall be very visible from the public roadway or fifty
feet (50’), whichever is less.
   4.   Impoundment or Destruction of Animal Authorized. The Chief of Police or
his designee may order the immediate impoundment or humane euthanasia of a
dangerous dog if the owner fails to abide by the conditions for keeping a
dangerous dog.
   5.   Review of Prior Determination. If any dog previously determined to be a
potentially dangerous dog has not exhibited any of the behaviors specified for
a potentially dangerous dog, as set forth in Section
5-7A-1 of this article, definition of “potentially dangerous dog,” within
twelve (12) months since the date of the potentially dangerous dog
determination, then that dog is eligible for a review of the determination with
the potential for lifting the requirements of this article; provided, however,
then that same dog may again be declared a dangerous or potentially dangerous
dog if it again exhibits any of the specified behaviors. Such a review shall be
completed by the Animal Review Board.
(Section 5-7A-6 – Ord. 1146 – Jun. 24 Supp.)
5-7A-7 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY FOR DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
   It shall be unlawful to:
   1.   Keep a dog determined to be dangerous or potentially dangerous contrary
to the requirements of Section
5-7A-6 of this article.
   2.   Permit a potentially dangerous dog to be outside a proper enclosure
unless the potentially dangerous dog is under the control of a “responsible
person” as defined in Section
5-7A-1 of this article, muzzled, and restrained by a substantial lead not
exceeding six feet (6’) in length. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that
will not cause injury to the dog or obscure its vision or interfere with its
respiration but shall prevent it from biting any human being or animal.
   3.   Fail to maintain a dangerous dog exclusively on the owner’s property as
required except for medical treatment or examination. When removed from the
owner’s property for medical treatment or examination, the dangerous dog shall
be caged or under the control of a responsible person, muzzled and restrained
with a substantial lead not exceeding six feet (6’) in length. The muzzle shall
be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or obscure its vision
or interfere with its respiration but shall prevent it from biting any human
being or animal.
   4.   Permit a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog to be kept on a chain,
rope, or other type of leash in the absence of a proper enclosure.
   5.   Fail to notify the Chief of Police or his designee immediately in
person or by telephone upon escape if a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog
is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked another domestic animal, or has
attacked a human being.
   6.   Fail to notify the Clive Police Department within seventy two (72)
hours (3 days) with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of
the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog if the dog has been sold or has been
given away to an owner inside or outside the jurisdiction; and if requested by
the Chief of Police or his designee, the owner must execute an affidavit under
oath setting forth the complete name, address, and telephone number of the
person to whom the dog has been transferred.
   7.   Fail to notify the Clive Police Department within seventy-two (72)
hours (3 days) of a change of address or telephone number by the owner of the
dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.
   8.   Fail to notify the Clive Police Department within seventy-two (72)
hours (3 days) if the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog has died; and if
requested by the Chief of Police or his designee, the owner must execute an
affidavit under oath setting forth the circumstances of the dog’s death.
   9.   Fail to surrender a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog to the Clive
Police Department to arrange for safe confinement pending a disposition of the
case when there is a reason to believe that the dangerous or potentially
dangerous dog poses an imminent threat to public safety.
   10.   Fail to comply with any reasonable special security or care
requirements for a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the Chief of Police
or his designee may have established pursuant to the finding that the dog was
potentially dangerous or dangerous.
(Section 5-7A-7 – Ord. 1146 – Jun. 24 Supp.)
5-7A-8 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 7B
BOW HUNTING IN DESIGNATED URBAN DEER MANAGEMENT ZONE
 
5-7B-1 Designation of Urban Deer Management Zone 5-7B-3 Penalty
5-7B-2 Hunting by Licensed Bow Hunters
 
5-7B-1 DESIGNATION OF URBAN DEER MANAGEMENT ZONE.
   The Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) has determined an area
within the City limits in which there is an overabundance of deer, and the area
has been designated by the IDNR to be the recommended urban deer management
area. The Parks and Recreation Board and the Council shall annually review the
recommended urban deer management area provided by the IDNR.
   The Parks and Recreation Board shall annually recommend to the Council a
designated urban deer management zone within the City’s Greenbelt Park, and the
Council may annually adopt a designated urban deer management zone within the
City’s Greenbelt Park.
5-7B-2 HUNTING BY LICENSED BOW HUNTERS.
   No person shall engage in any hunting activity within the City’s corporate
limits using a rifle, shotgun, bow and arrow or any other means, either on
public or private property, except licensed bow hunters may hunt deer in the
designated urban deer management zone (DMZ) as specifically set forth herein:
   1.   Dates and Hours. Bow hunting in the DMZ shall be restricted to the
dates and hours established annually by the Council.
   2.   Number of Permits. The annual number of permits issued for the DMZ
shall be fixed by the City Manager or their designee.
   3.   Application for Permit; Conditions. All hunters participating in the
program must apply for and receive a City DMZ Hunting Permit (“Clive permit”)
from the City Parks and Recreation Department. Permits are valid for one
hunting season. In order to receive the permit, a hunter must present a valid
State special urban deer license and present proof of the following:
      A.   Successful completion of a onetime bow hunter safety education
course approved by the International Bowhunter Education Foundation (IBEF).
      B.   Successful completion of an authorized archery proficiency test
using the bow with which the hunter proposes to hunt. The test must be taken at
a National Field Archery Association approved indoor lane and administered by a
certified IBEF instructor. Testing must be performed under rules approved by
the Polk County deer management task force. The proficiency test must be
successfully completed each hunting season.
   4.   Compliance with Procedures, Regulations. All hunters hunting under a
City permit shall follow all procedures and regulations established by the IDNR
applicable to deer hunting and special deer management zones. In addition,
hunters shall abide by the following requirements:
      A.   Hunters must meet with the City’s hunter coordinator to review the
rules and boundaries of the DMZ prior to hunting.
      B.   All hunters must check in with the City’s Parks and Recreation
Department prior to entering the DMZ to hunt, and must check out with the
City’s Parks and Recreation Department following access to the DMZ to hunt.
      C.   All shots must be made from an elevated stand and shall not be made
in excess of 25 yards from the hunter’s location. An elevated stand must be a
minimum height of at least six vertical feet off the ground in an artificial or
erected stand, or a natural growth, to ensure that the hunter’s body is not in
contact with the ground and to ensure a downward thrust of the arrow released
by bow hunting.
      D.   Elevated stands shall be portable, and no screw-in steps shall be
allowed.
      E.   Elevated stands shall be located not less than 200 feet from a
residence or residential building, 150 feet from a building in an industrial
district and shall be located not less than 75 feet from any recreational
trail, road, or highway. Stands shall be located in such a manner as to place
the hunter’s back toward the nearest building, recreational trail, road, or
highway when the hunter is in a position to shoot.
      F.   Any hunter shall carry a bow in a case while traveling to and from
the elevated stand site.
      G.   A hunter shall not dispose of deer entrails in a conspicuous place
on public property.
      H.   All deer taken shall be processed for meat or the meat given to
charity.
      I.   State law requires hunters to recover a wounded animal. If a hunter
wounds a deer and is unable to locate the deer, the hunter shall report this to
the City Parks and Recreation Department during regular business hours.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 481A.137)
      J.   While engaged in bow hunting, the hunter shall carry all necessary
State, County, and City hunting licenses and permits.
      K.   Hunters shall report the harvesting of a deer under a City permit to
the City Parks and Recreation Department under policies promulgated by the City
Parks and Recreation Department.
      L.   All hunters must wear blaze orange clothing compliant with Section
481A.122 of the Code of Iowa, while in the DMZ and while traveling to and from
the elevated stand site in the DMZ.
      M.   A hunter may not harvest more than three deer in a single day under
a City permit. A State license shall be required for each deer.
      N.   If it is necessary to cross private property to access the DMZ,
permission must be obtained by the hunter from the property owner who has
agreed to allow access.
      O.   Hunters must remove themselves from any harassment situation and
immediately report the incident to the City Parks and Recreation Department or
the Police Department.
      P.   The City Parks and Recreation Department, upon review and approval
of the City Parks Board, may promulgate additional regulations, not
inconsistent with this section, to administer this program and ensure the
safety of the public.
5-7B-3 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 7C
FEEDING DEER PROHIBITED
 
5-7C-1 Purpose     5-7C-3 Exceptions
5-7C-2 Prohibition 5-7C-4 Penalty
 
5-7C-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public’s health, safety, and
general welfare and the general welfare of the deer by prohibiting residents of
the City from intentionally feeding deer for the following reasons:
   1.   Intentionally feeding deer creates an increased risk of spreading
disease among the deer herd because the deer are concentrated in one place as a
result of intentionally feeding, which promotes contact between a sick animal
and a higher number of healthy animals.
   2.   Intentionally feeding deer creates an increased chance of exposure for
people and pets to deer ticks that carry Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi).
   3.   Intentional feeding of deer leads to reduced fear of humans in the
deer, which leads to increased property damage caused by the deer, car/deer
accidents, and other concerns.
5-7C-2 PROHIBITION.
   1.   No person shall place or allow any feeding device or any fruit, grain,
mineral, plant, salt, vegetable, or other material to be placed outdoors on any
public or private property for the purpose of attracting or feeding deer.
Pursuant to this chapter, a rebuttable presumption is created that the
placement of fruit, grain, mineral, plant, salt, vegetable, or other materials
(“feed materials”) in a drop feeder, deer feeder kit, automatic feeder, or
similar device (“feeding device”) regardless of the height of the fruit, grain,
mineral, plant, salt, vegetable, or other material is for the purpose of
feeding deer.
   2.   Each property owner or occupant of the property shall have the duty to
remove any feed materials placed on the owner’s property in violation of this
chapter. Failure to remove feed materials within 24 hours after notice from the
City shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   3.   Each property owner or occupant of the property shall have the duty to
remove any feeding device placed on the owner’s property to which deer are
attracted or from which deer actually feed. Alternatively, a property owner or
occupant may modify a feeding device or make other changes to the property that
prevent deer from having access to or feeding from the feeding device. Failure
to remove such a feeding device or to make such modifications within 24 hours
after notice from the City shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
5-7C-3 EXCEPTIONS.
   1.   Naturally Growing Materials. This chapter does not apply to naturally
growing materials including, but not limited to, fruit, grain, nuts, seeds, and
vegetables.
   2.   Planted Materials. This chapter does not apply to planted materials
growing in gardens, as standing crops, or in a wildlife food plot.
   3.   Stored Crops. This chapter does not apply to stored crops, provided
that the stored crop is not intentionally made available to deer.
   4.   Incidental Spills. This chapter does not apply to spills of seed
materials intended for planting or to crop materials that have been harvested
if the spills are incidental to normal agricultural operations and such
materials are not intentionally made available to deer.
5-7C-4 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 8
NOISE CONTROL
 
5-8-1 Purpose                      5-8-6 Measurement of Noise and Sound
5-8-2 Scope of Regulations         5-8-7 Noise Permit for Sound Equipment
5-8-3 Definitions                  5-8-8 Other Laws and Ordinances
5-8-4 Noise Disturbance Prohibited 5-8-9 Penalty
5-8-5 Sounds Not Allowed
 
5-8-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the control of
noise pollution in the City thereby protecting the public’s health, safety, and
general welfare.
5-8-2 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   This chapter applies to the control of all noise originating within the
limits of the City, except in the following cases:
   1.   A State or federal agency has adopted a different standard or rule than
prescribed within this chapter which preempts the regulation of noise from a
particular source so as to render this chapter inapplicable; or
   2.   The Council has determined that, by reason of public acceptance of the
activity producing a particular noise or noises, such noise is deemed
acceptable to the residents of the City.
5-8-3 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a
different intention, the following terms have the following meanings.
Definitions of technical terms used in this chapter which are not herein
defined shall be obtained from publications of acoustical terminology issued by
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI):
   1.   “Application” means the application submitted to the City requesting a
noise permit.
   2.   “Emergency” means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving
actual or imminent physical or psychological trauma or property damage which
demands immediate action.
   3.   “Emergency work” means any work performed for the purpose of
alleviating or resolving an emergency.
   4.   “Motor vehicle” means any motor-powered vehicle designed to carry at
least one passenger or driver and of the type typically licensed for use on the
public highways. (Note: “Motor vehicle” includes most motorcycles.)
   5.   “Motorcycle” means any two or three-wheeled motor vehicle.
   6.   “Noise” means any sound which disturbs humans or which causes or tends
to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
   7.   “Noise disturbance” means those sounds defined as “sounds not allowed”
in Section
5-8-5 of this chapter.
   8.   “Person” means, unless used in such a manner to denote only a human
being, any firm, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, association,
joint stock company, trust, or other association or entity, City, County, or
State government and subdivisions or agencies thereof, and the federal
government and subdivisions and agencies thereof.
   9.   “Powered model vehicle” means any self-propelled, airborne, waterborne,
or landborne model plane, vessel, or vehicle which is not designed to carry
persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car, or
rocket.
   10.   “Public right-of-way” means the traveled portion of any street or
alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by the City or other
governmental entity.
   11.   “Real property boundary” means an imaginary line along the ground
surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by
one person from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding
real property division.
   12.   “Recreational vehicle” means any motor powered vehicle designed to
carry at least one passenger or driver and equipped for use in racing or other
recreational events or uses off of public right-of-way on public or private
property; except, however, for the purposes of this chapter, any such vehicle
which is licensed for use on the public highways is deemed a “motor vehicle”
(or “motorcycle” if two or three wheeled) and not a “recreational vehicle.”
(Examples of recreational vehicles are snowmobiles, minibikes, stockcars, or
motorboats.)
   13.   “Residential property” means any property on which is located a
building or structure used, wholly or partially, for living or sleeping
purposes.
   14.   “Sound” means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement,
particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces
that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound
may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity,
and frequency.
   15.   “Sound equipment” means any loudspeaker, amplifier, or other device
for producing, reproducing, or amplifying sound; except, however, “sound
equipment” does not include sirens and other equipment used to alert persons to
the existence of an emergency; equipment used by law enforcement and other
public safety officials in the performance of their official duties; church
carillons, bells, or chimes; mobile radio or telephone signaling devices; or
automobile and truck radios or players of recorded music used and intended for
the use and enjoyment of the occupants of the vehicle, provided that the sound
emitted from the vehicle does not exceed 70 dB(A) or 80 dB(C) when measured at
a distance of 25 feet.
   16.   “Sound level meter” means an instrument, including a microphone,
amplifier, output meter, and weighting networks, that is sensitive to pressure
fluctuations. The output meter reads sound pressure level in decibels when
properly calibrated and the instrument is of Type 2 or better as specified in
American National Standards Institute, USA standard specification for general
purpose sound level meters (S1.4-1971), and preferred center frequencies for
acoustical measurements (S1.6-1960), or any subsequent nationally adopted
standard superseding such standards. A “weighted sound level” or “sound level”
means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter
using the A weighting network. The level so read shall be designated as dB(A)
or dBA. C “weighted sound level” or “sound level” means the sound pressure
level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the C weighting
network. The level so read shall be designated as dB(C) or dBC. “Decibel” means
a logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure often used in describing the
amplitude of sound and is denoted as dB.
   17.   “Weeknight” means the days of the week Sunday through Thursday
evening.
   18.   “Weekend night” means the days of the week Friday or Saturday evening.
5-8-4 NOISE DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully make, continue, cause, or allow
any noise disturbance within the City.
5-8-5 SOUNDS NOT ALLOWED.
   1.   Noise Disturbance Described. The term “noise disturbance” means any of
the following sounds:
      A.   Alarm Testing. The sound emitted by the intentional sounding
outdoors of any privately owned fire alarm, burglar alarm, siren, whistle, or
similar stationary emergency signaling device for the essential testing of such
device, when conducted between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
      B.   Automobile Radios. The sound emitted by an automobile or truck
radio, tape deck, or compact disc player, or other such standard equipment used
and intended for the use and enjoyment of such vehicle’s occupants while such
vehicle is on the public right-of-way, provided that the sound emitted from the
vehicle does not exceed 70 dB(A) or 80 dB(C) when measured at a distance of 25
feet.
      C.   Chain Saws. The sound emitted by motor powered tree trimming
equipment operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      D.   Construction Noise. The sound made by privately owned and operated
tools or equipment in erection, demolition, excavation, drilling, or other such
construction work which is received between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. at the real property boundary of residential property.
      E.   Engine Brake Noise. The sound made by an engine brake device of a
diesel engine truck.
      F.   Engine Repairs and Testing. The sound made by the repairing,
rebuilding, modifying, or testing a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle which
is received between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. at the real property
boundary of residential property.
      G.   Injurious or Disturbing Sounds Generally. Any sound which endangers
or injures the health, safety, or welfare of a human being, disturbs a
reasonable human being of normal sensitivities, or causes or tends to cause, an
adverse physiological or physical effect on human beings, or devalues or
injures property.
      H.   Lawn and Garden Equipment. The sound emitted by motor powered,
muffler equipped lawn and garden equipment operated between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      I.   Loading and Unloading. The sound made by outdoor loading, unloading,
opening, closing, or handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
trash cans, containers, receptacles, or dumpsters which are received at the
real property boundary of residential property between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
      J.   Musical Instruments. The sound made by a drum, horn, reed, or string
instrument, or other musical instrument or device which is received between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. at the real property boundary of residential
property.
      K.   Noisy Exhaust System. The sound made by a motor vehicle or a
recreational vehicle whose exhaust system is defective or has been modified by
the installation of a muffler cutout or bypass.
      L.   Off Road Motorcycle and Recreational Vehicle Noise. The sound made
on private or City-owned property other than a public right-of-way by a
motorcycle or recreational vehicle and received between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. at the real property boundary of residential property, provided;
however, the sound made by a motorcycle when traveling from private property to
a public right-of-way, or vice versa, in pursuance of normal ingress or egress
for purposeful transportation is not a “noise disturbance” unless made so by
some provisions of this section.
      M.   Powered Model Vehicles. The sound made by the operation of a powered
model vehicle which is received between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.at
the real property boundary of residential property.
      N.   Racing. The sound made by a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle on
private property or public right-of-way during any racing event or time trial,
whether organized or unorganized.
      O.   Screeching Tires. The sound made by the intentional screeching or
squealing of the tires of a motor vehicle.
      P.   Selling by “Hawking” or “Barking.” The sound of selling by shout or
outcry when made within the area of the City-zoned residential or commercial.
      Q.   Sound Equipment. The sound made by sound equipment (see definition
of “sound equipment” under Section 5-8-3 of this chapter) operated upon the
public right-of-way, in any building, or upon any public or private premises
shall be classified as a noise disturbance if either: a) the sound is in excess
of the maximum permitted levels shown in the chart below when measured at the
property boundary, or anywhere within the property, of a receiving land use, or
if in a park, approximately 200 feet from the source of the sound or, when a
complaint is received, at the nearest boundary of the property where the
complaining party was disturbed; or b) the sound is of a nature that cannot
accurately be measured by a sound level meter, and such sound is disturbing to
a reasonable human being of normal sensitivities.
 
Maximum Permitted Levels
Receiving Land Use Maximum dB Permitted
Residential        60 dBA or 70 dBC between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
                   50 dBA or 60 dBC between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Commercial         70 dBA or 80 dBC
Industrial         75 dBA or 85 dBC
Park               60 dBA or 70 dBC
 
      R.   Wind Energy Systems. The sound made by wind energy systems shall be
classified as a noise disturbance if either: a) the sound is in excess of 55
dBA when measured at the property boundary at the nearest boundary of the
property where the complaining party was disturbed or anywhere within the
property of a receiving use, or b) the sound is of a nature that cannot
accurately be measured by a sound level meter, and such sound is disturbing to
a reasonable human being of normal sensitivities.
   2.   Noise Permit. Sound in excess of the maximum permitted levels shall not
be a noise disturbance if such sound is emitted in accordance with a noise
permit issued by the City.
5-8-6 MEASUREMENT OF NOISE AND SOUND.
   The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound level meter
meeting the standards prescribed by the American National Standards Institute.
The instruments shall be maintained in calibration and good working order. A
calibration check shall be made of the system at the time of any noise
measurement. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper
representation of the noise source. The microphone shall be positioned so as
not to create an unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured noise. A
windscreen for the microphone shall be used when required. The measurement
shall be an A or C weighted, slow response sound level.
5-8-7 NOISE PERMIT FOR SOUND EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall use, operate, or cause to be used or operated any sound
equipment upon the public right-of-way, in any building, or upon any public or
private premises, if the sound is in excess of the maximum permitted levels
under Section
5-8-5(1)(Q) of this chapter when measured at the property boundary, or anywhere
within the property, of a receiving land use, or if in a park, approximately
200 feet from the source of the sound or, when a complaint is received, at the
nearest boundary of the property where the complaining party was disturbed,
unless such person has obtained a noise permit in accordance with this section,
and the actual use or operation of such sound equipment is not inconsistent
with statements made in the application, the conditions imposed in the sound
equipment permit, or the limitations specified in Subsection D of this section.
Any person who operates any sound equipment in violation of this section, and
without obtaining a noise permit, shall be subject to having the event stopped
or the sound equipment turned off or reduced to a legal level. Such remedy
shall be in addition to any other rights and remedies of the City. A noise
permit shall not be transferable, and it shall be conspicuously displayed on or
adjacent to the sound equipment.
   1.   Application for Permit. Applications for noise permits shall be made in
writing to the Clerk or Deputy City Clerk and shall contain the following
information:
      A.   Name, address, phone number(s), and signature of applicant.
      B.   The purpose for which the sound equipment will be used.
      C.   The location where the sound equipment will be used.
      D.   The number of days of use and proposed hours of operation of the
sound equipment.
      E.   A general description of the sound equipment, including the license
number of any motor vehicle upon which it is to be operated.
      F.   Any other information as may be required by the Clerk or Deputy City
Clerk.
   2.   Permit Fee.
      A.   A permit fee shall be paid by the applicant for the permit, with the
amount of the fee determined in accordance with an established fee schedule,
which fee schedule may be modified from time to time with the approval of the
Council.
      B.   No fee is required for a noise permit issued to City, State, or
federal government or any governmental subdivision or agency thereof.
   3.   Issuance Of Permit.
      A.   Applications for noise permits shall be reviewed and then issued or
denied by either the Clerk or their designee. The applicant may appeal the
denial of a noise permit by filing a written request for appeal with the Clerk
or their designee, requesting that the denial of the application for noise
permit be reviewed by the Council at the Council’s next regularly scheduled
meeting. The City shall consider the following factors in connection with the
issuance of a noise permit:
         (1)   The location of the proposed event or source of the noise in
relation to surrounding residences or businesses;
         (2)   The time of day and day of the week for which the permit is
requested. The City shall not issue a noise permit that extends after 10:00
p.m. on a weeknight or after 11:00 p.m. on a weekend night or on the night of a
holiday, except in unusual circumstances, for good cause shown and approval by
the Council;
         (3)   The duration of the activity for which the noise permit is
requested;
         (4)   Whether the applicant has misrepresented any information in past
noise permits;
         (5)   Whether the applicant has failed to comply with conditions set
forth in prior noise permits that have been issued by the City;
         (6)   Whether the applicant has had prior violations of the noise
ordinance; and
         (7)   Such other considerations as are advisable to protect the
health, welfare, and quality of life for the residents and businesses of the
City.
      B.   No person or establishment may be granted a noise permit between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. more often than three times in any calendar
year, except in unusual circumstances, for good cause shown and approval by the
Council.
   4.   Limitations.
      A.   Any other language in this section to the contrary notwithstanding,
a sound equipment permit shall not be issued if:
         (1)   The sound to be emitted by the sound equipment is other than
human speech or music.
         (2)   The sound equipment is to be operated for commercial advertising
purposes or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to any
building, structure, or vehicle for monetary profit or for the purpose of
advertising such sound equipment.
         (3)   The sound to be emitted by the sound equipment would be a noise
disturbance under Section
5-8-5 of this chapter (other than Subsection Q of said section).
      B.   A noise permit issued in violation of this subsection is void and of
no force and effect.
   5.   Conditions.
      A.   When a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter, the sound levels
listed in the following table shall be the maximum levels permitted when
measured at the edge of the City street, the alley right-of-way or the property
line, whichever reasonably appears to be nearest to the source of the sound, or
if in a park, approximately 200 feet from the source of the sound:
 
Maximum Permitted Levels
Receiving Land Use Maximum dB Permitted
Residential        70 dBA or 80 dBC between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
Commercial         75 dBA or 85 dBC
Industrial         75 dBA or 85 dBC
Park               70 dBA or 80 dBC
 
      B.   When granting the permit, the Council may impose lower sound level
limits based upon the location and length of the proposed event for which the
permit is requested, and the Council or City staff may impose other reasonable
conditions and requirements to be met or fulfilled by the noise permit holder
preliminary to or at the time of the use or operation of the sound equipment.
Such conditions shall be those necessary or advisable to protect the health,
welfare, and quality of life of the residents of the City and may include,
without limitation, restrictions on the time of day the sound equipment can be
used or operated and restrictions on the length of time that the sound
equipment may be used or operated. The permit holder shall be responsible for
monitoring the level of sound to ensure that the conditions of the permit are
not violated.
   6.   Noncompliance by Permittee; City Authority. Should the person holding a
permit not attentively observe all limitations and restrictions found in this
chapter and in the noise permit, the City authorities shall be authorized to
stop such permitted event or to turn the sound equipment off or reduce it to
the level authorized by the noise permit.
5-8-8 OTHER LAWS AND ORDINANCES.
   No provisions of this chapter should be construed to legalize or permit
sounds, devices, or activities made unlawful by other ordinances of the City or
State or federal statutes.
5-8-9 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 9
ALARM SYSTEMS
 
5-9-1 Definitions                    5-9-4 Nonliability of City
5-9-2 Purpose                        5-9-5 Penalty
5-9-3 Enforcement and Administration
 
5-9-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Alarm company” means a business providing among its services alarm
sales, installation, service, monitoring, or billing of alarm users or the
service of receiving on a continuous basis, through trained employees,
emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter immediately relaying the
message by live voice to the emergency dispatch center or such other places as
directed by the City.
   2.   “Alarm Review Board” means a three-member committee comprised of one
representative of the Police Department, one representative of the Fire
Department, and one resident selected and appointed by the Mayor, to serve a
four-year term. In the event a vacancy shall occur during the term of any
member, the successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term
in the same manner as the original appointment. Those members from the Police
and Fire Departments shall be appointed by each Department’s Chief.
   3.   “Alarm system” means any device used to detect or prevent intrusion,
criminal activity, or other such emergency situation which, when activated,
causes notification to be made directly or indirectly to the Police Department
or Fire Department, or any such device or system designed primarily for the
purpose of giving an audible or visual signal of an attempted intrusion,
criminal activity, fire, or other such emergency. An alarm system, for the
purpose of this chapter, does not include an alarm installed on a motor
vehicle.
   4.   “Alarm system operator” means an alarm user or other person using an
alarm system.
   5.   “Alarm user” means the person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind in control of any building
who owns, leases, installs, or contracts for, or otherwise obtains an alarm
system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm company to monitor or
service the alarm device, or who owns or operates an alarm system.
   6.   “Building” means any single-family housing, multi-family dwelling,
apartment, commercial business, school, church, religious facility, structure,
or place within the City.
   7.   “Chief” means the Police Chief or Fire Chief or designated
representative who is authorized by the Chief to exercise any power or duty
conferred to the Chief under this chapter.
   8.   “Coordinator” means an individual designated to enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
   9.   “False alarm” means any alarm signal that is activated by error or
mistake, system malfunction, malicious misuse, or on purpose, when an emergency
situation requiring a response did not exist at or about the time of the
response. “False alarm” does not include unintentional activations.
      A.   Error or Mistake. Any action by an alarm user, or any action by an
agent or employee of the alarm user, or any other person in the building which
results in the activation of the alarm system when no emergency exists, and no
attempt to cancel the alarm by contacting the 911 call center was made.
      B.   System Malfunction. Any unintentional activation of an alarm system
caused by a mechanical malfunction, flaw in the design, installation, or
maintenance of the alarm system. This does not include any activation caused by
extraordinary violent conditions of nature.
      C.   Malicious Misuse. Any intentional activation of an alarm system when
no emergency exists.
      D.   Unintentional Activation. Any system activation that did not
constitute an emergency; however, the system operated properly based on
conditions or human actions at that time. (Examples include smoke detector
activation from burned food, children activating a pull station, unintentional
security system activation with prompt follow up to the 911 call center, or
extraordinary violent conditions of nature.)
The burden of proving that such an alarm signal was not a false alarm shall be
on the alarm user.
   10.   “Monitoring” means the process by which an alarm company or its
designated alarm answering service receives signals from an alarm system and
relays an alarm dispatch request to the emergency dispatch center, or other
places as directed by the City, for the purpose of summoning police or fire
personnel to the building.
5-9-2 PURPOSE.
   It is the finding of the Council that false alarms seriously undermine the
morale and safety of Fire and Police Department personnel as well as
unnecessarily expose to danger the citizens of the City who encounter emergency
vehicles responding to false alarms, result in a waste of City resources, and
result in citizens ignoring alarm system signals. The purpose of this chapter
is to provide regulations applicable to alarm systems and to encourage the
effective use of alarm systems. The most significant desired result of this
chapter is to enhance public safety and more efficiently and safely use City
emergency response resources by reducing the number of false alarms received.
5-9-3 ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION.
   1.   Grace Period After Installation of an Alarm System.
      A.   Upon the installation date of a new or replacement alarm system, a
grace period of 14 calendar days will be allowed for the alarm user and alarm
system operators to become familiar with the operations of the alarm system and
to make corrections to the operation of the alarm system. Service charges for
false alarms shall be waived during the grace period, provided the number of
false alarms during the grace period is not excessive. An excessive number of
false alarms is:
         (1)   Equal to three or more false alarms in one calendar day or 24-
hour period.
         (2)   Equal to six or more false alarms in the first 14 calendar days
since installation of the alarm system.
      B.   The appropriate Chief, or Chief’s designated representative, may
waive the service charge fee for an excessive number of false alarms during the
grace period, at their discretion, due to extenuating circumstances as
determined on a case-by-case review.
   2.   Excessive False Alarms; Service Charge Fees.
      A.   Because a false alarm for security, intrusion, robbery, and other
non-fire causes usually requires from one to three police officers to respond
in individual vehicular units, depending on the type of alarm, and a false
alarm for fire suppression or other firefighting incidents usually requires
multiple firefighters from the Fire Department to respond in multiple and
specialized firefighting equipment, depending on the type of alarm, the City
shall assess a service charge fee to any alarm user that generates an
unnecessary number of false alarm responses during a calendar year as listed
below (“false alarm fee”). The alarm user shall pay the City the assessed false
alarm fee within 20 days of the date an invoice is given to the alarm user for
any false alarm created by the alarm user’s alarm system in accordance with the
following schedule:
 
Alarm Fee Schedule
False Alarm Occurrence                                                  Rate
The first and second false alarms during a calendar year                $0.00
The third false alarm during a calendar year                            $75.00
The fourth false alarm during a calendar year                           $100.00
The fifth false alarm and each false alarm thereafter during a calendar $150.00
year
 
      B.   After the second false alarm, the alarm user shall receive a written
notice from the Chief. The notice shall require that by a specified date the
alarm user shall have their alarm system inspected by an alarm company and
alarm user shall review operational procedures with the alarm system operator
and any other individuals having access to the use and operation of the alarm
system. Notice or billing from the City to any alarm user shall be deemed to
have been given or rendered on the date such notice or billing is deposited in
the U.S. mail, first class postage, addressed to the alarm user at the address
shown for the alarm user. The alarm user shall notify the applicable Chief, in
writing, after the inspection by the alarm company has been completed, and
shall provide to the Chief a copy of any report of service, repair or
inspection of the alarm system given by the alarm company. An alarm company
providing an inspection or repair of an alarm system shall notify the Chief in
advance of such service. The alarm company shall be assessed a fee of $100.00
by the City when the Police Department or Fire Department respond to a false
alarm and it is determined by the City that an on-site employee of the alarm
company directly caused the false alarm. In such a circumstance, the false
alarm shall not count against the alarm user.
   3.   Appeal Process for False Alarm Service Charges. An alarm user assessed
a false alarm fee may appeal the false alarm fee in writing to the Alarm Review
Board. The filing of an appeal with the Alarm Review Board stays the assessment
of the false alarm fee until the Alarm Review Board makes a final decision.
      A.   The alarm user shall file a written appeal to the Alarm Review Board
by setting forth the reasons for the appeal within 10 days after receipt of the
false alarm fee invoice. The Alarm Review Board will review relevant
information, including conditions of nature for the date and time of the
occurrence of the false alarm. The Alarm Review Board may reverse the
assessment of the false alarm fee only if there was no false alarm or the false
alarm was not contributed to by the act(s) or omission(s) of the alarm user or
the alarm user’s family, pets, guests, employee(s), or invitees.
      B.   The Alarm Review Board shall notify the alarm user, the alarm
company, and the coordinator of its decision within five working days. The
decision of the Alarm Review Board is final as to administrative remedies of
the City.
5-9-4 NONLIABILITY OF CITY.
   The City shall not be liable for any defects in the operation of any alarm
system, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an
alarm from such a source, for any failure or neglect of any person in
connection with the installation, operation, disconnection, or removal of
equipment, the transmission of alarm signals, or the relaying of such signals
or messages.
5-9-5 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 10
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
 
5-10-1 Scope         5-10-4 Cleanup Required
5-10-2 Definitions   5-10-5 Loss, Burden, or Costs
5-10-3 Notifications 5-10-6 Penalty
 
5-10-1 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall apply to the release of hazardous substances and the
notification, cleanup, and recovery of costs associated with the mitigation of
hazardous conditions.
5-10-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Cleanup” means the removal of the hazardous substances to a place
where the waste will not cause any danger to persons or the environment, in
accordance with the State statutes, rules, and regulations therefor, or the
treatment of the material as defined herein to eliminate the hazardous
condition, including the restoration of the area to a general good appearance
without noticeable odor as far as practicable. “Cleanup” includes all actions
necessary to contain, collect, identify, analyze, treat, disperse, remove, or
dispose of a hazardous substance and to restore the site from which such
hazardous substance was cleaned up.
   2.   “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual,
imminent, or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance:
      A.   Within the City or onto City property located outside the City
which, because of the quantity, strength, and toxicity of the hazardous
substance, its mobility in the environment and its persistence, creates an
immediate potential danger to the public health or safety; or
      B.   Onto land, into the waters within the State or into the atmosphere,
but outside the City, which, because of the quantity, strength, and toxicity of
the hazardous substance, its mobility in the environment and its persistence,
creates an immediate potential danger to the public health or safety of persons
or property within the City. “Hazardous condition” includes any accident
involving hazardous materials required to be reported under Section 321.266(4)
of the Code of Iowa.
   3.   “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety or environment and includes,
but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or
that is an irritant or that, in confinement, generates pressure through
decomposition, heat, or other means. The following are examples of substances
which, in sufficient quantity, may be hazardous: acids; alkalis; explosives;
fertilizers; heavy metals such as chromium, arsenic, mercury, lead and cadmium;
industrial chemicals; paint thinners; paints; pesticides; petroleum products;
poisons; radioactive materials; sludges; and organic solvents. “Hazardous
substance” includes any hazardous waste identified or listed by the
administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the
Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under Section 307 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act of 1976 as amended to January 1, 1977, or any
hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous material designated
by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous Materials Transportation
Act, or any hazardous substance listed under the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980.
   4.   “Responsible person” means the person, whether the owner, agent,
lessor, or tenant, in charge of the hazardous substance being stored,
processed, or handled, or the owner or bailee transporting hazardous wastes or
substances whether on public ways or grounds or on private property where the
spill would cause danger to the public or to any person or to the environment.
   5.   “Treatment” means a method, technique, or process, including
neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical, or biological
character or composition of a hazardous substance so as to neutralize it or to
render the substance nonhazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery,
amenable for storage, or to reduce it in volume. “Treatment” includes any
activity or processing designed to change the physical form or chemical
composition of a hazardous substance to render it nonhazardous.
5-10-3 NOTIFICATIONS.
   When a hazardous condition is created, the responsible person shall notify
the Department of Natural Resources and the Fire Department immediately upon
discovery of the condition but in no instance later than 30 minutes after the
discovery of the hazardous condition. The Fire Chief, once notified of the
hazardous condition, shall immediately notify the Department of Natural
Resources.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.386)
5-10-4 CLEANUP REQUIRED.
   Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the
hazardous substance, or a constituent of the hazardous substance, may enter the
environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including
ground waters, the Fire Chief or the Chief’s designee may remove or provide for
the removal and disposal of the hazardous substance at any time, unless the
Fire Chief or the Chief’s designee determines such removal will be properly and
promptly accomplished by the responsible person. If the responsible party does
not initiate and complete cleanup within the time designated by the Fire
Department, the City may proceed to remedy the hazardous condition by
performing the necessary cleanup services.
5-10-5 LOSS, BURDEN, OR COSTS.
   A responsible person shall be liable to the City for all cleanup costs
incurred by the City, including, but not limited to, fees payable by the City
to any public or private agency for assistance pursuant to any 28E Agreement,
local ordinance, or emergency request of the City, for chemical damage, for
contamination of equipment, and for the use of consumable materials, but shall
not be liable for those losses, burdens, or costs normally associated with
response to fire emergencies which do not involve hazardous conditions. If
charges for such cleanup costs are not paid within 30 days after invoice, the
City may proceed to obtain payment by all legal means. A public or private
agency providing assistance to the City pursuant to any 28E Agreement, local
ordinance, or emergency request of the City may directly bill the responsible
party for the fees for assistance provided in regard to cleanup of a hazardous
substance. The responsible party shall be responsible for the payment of such
fees to same extent as if the fees were billed by the City to the responsible
party.
5-10-6 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 11
ROADSIDE SOLICITATION
 
5-11-1 Purpose     5-11-3 Place of Roadside Solicitation
5-11-2 Definitions 5-11-4 Penalty
 
5-11-1 PURPOSE.
   1.   The Council does hereby find that:
      A.   It is the intent of the Council, by enacting this chapter, to
recognize free speech rights for all citizens while at the same time ensuring
the safety of all citizens on and along the public roadways within the City;
      B.   However, the Council finds that certain types of actions directed at
users of the public roadways in the City and conducted in specific areas within
the City pose an increased safety risk for pedestrians and users of public
roadways within the City, and
      C.   The Council finds that the presence of solicitors in certain
specific areas creates increased safety risks to pedestrians and users of
public roadways within the City, and
      D.   The Council further finds that certain forms of solicitation impede
the orderly flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic along and on the public
roadways within the City, and
      E.   This chapter is not intended to impermissibly limit an individual’s
right to exercise free speech with solicitation; rather it aims to impose
specific time, place, and manner restrictions on solicitation and associated
conduct in certain limited circumstances and in certain locations, and
      F.   In promulgating this chapter, the Council seeks to impose
regulations that are narrowly tailored to serve the aforementioned significant
government interests.
5-11-2 DEFINITIONS.
   No person shall commit harassment.
   1.   Hickman Road, University Avenue, and Ramp Terminal Zones. For the
purpose of this chapter, an area in the City and County comprised of the
following:
      A.   Ramp terminal zones are the off-ramp terminals located where
Interstate 35-80 exits to and intersects with Hickman Road, and where
Interstate 35-80 exits to and intersects with University Avenue, which would
include the entire off-ramp paved surface and the additional area consisting of
16 feet from the edge of the paved surface;
      B.   Hickman Road zone means the area in the City 150 feet east and west
of the ramp terminal zone (area where Interstate 35-80 intersects with Hickman
Road) which would include the entire paved surface of Hickman Road and the
additional area consisting of 16 feet from the edge of the paved surface; and
      C.   University Avenue zone means the area in the City 150 feet east and
west of the ramp terminal zone (area where Interstate 35-80 intersects with
University Avenue) which would include the entire paved surface of University
Avenue and the additional area consisting of 16 feet from the edge of the paved
surface.
   2.   “Person” means and includes both individual persons and organizations.
   3.   “Roadside Solicitation” means any communication made in person
requesting action or inaction by another person. For example, requesting an
immediate donation of money or other thing of value would constitute roadside
solicitation. Purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value, under
circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is
in substance a donation, is a donation for the purpose of this chapter.
However, roadside solicitation does not include passively standing or sitting
with a sign or other indication that one is seeking donations or other action,
without addressing any request to any specific person other than in response to
an inquiry by that person, as long as said individual maintains the distance
set forth in the definition of Hickman Road, University Avenue, and ramp
terminal zones.
5-11-3 PLACE OF ROADSIDE SOLICITATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roadside solicitation when
the person solicited is in any of the following places within the City limits:
   1.   In any vehicle on the street;
   2.   On public property in the “Hickman Road, University Avenue, and ramp
terminal zones,” as defined in Section
5-11-2 of this chapter.
5-11-4 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
TITLE 6 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
6-1-1 Title                          6-1-9 Parking Violations; Vehicle
                                     Unattended
6-1-2 Definitions                    6-1-10 Presumption in Reference to Illegal
                                     Parking
6-1-3 Administration and Enforcement 6-1-11 Simple Notice of Fine
6-1-4 Power to Direct Traffic        6-1-12 Impounding Vehicles
6-1-5 Reports of Traffic Accidents   6-1-13 Notice to Appear; Promise to Appear
6-1-6 Police Officer’s Authority   6-1-14 Violation of Promise to Appear
6-1-7 Obedience to Police Officers   6-1-15 Procedure Not Exclusive
6-1-8 Arrest or Citation
 
6-1-1 TITLE.
   This title may be known and cited as the Clive Traffic Code.
6-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law,
such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are hereby adopted
by reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:
   1.   “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway when 50 percent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300
feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(7))
   2.   “MPH” means miles per hour.
   3.   “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or vehicles organized
for marching or moving on the streets in an organized fashion or manner or any
march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the
public as a parade.
   4.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
   5.   “Police officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   6.   “Pedestrian” means a person afoot or a person using a pedestrian
conveyance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(51))
   7.   “Pedestrian conveyance” means any human-powered device by which a
pedestrian may move other than by walking or by which a pedestrian may move
another person, including but not limited to a wheelchair, stroller,
skateboard, scooter, or other similar device. Pedestrian conveyance also
includes an electric personal assistive mobility device and any other device
used to move a person sitting or standing on the device regardless of whether
the device is powered by an electric motor, so long as the electric motor
produces less than 750 watts. Pedestrian conveyance does not include a bicycle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(51A))
   8.   “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban, or school district, where 40
percent or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of 300 feet or
more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(63))
   9.   “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway for a distance of 200 feet in either direction from a schoolhouse.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(70))
   10.   “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.
   11.   “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
   12.   “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control sign or signal.
   13.   “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in
the business, school, or residence districts.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(78))
   14.   “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the
purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
   15.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway. Vehicle does not
include:
      A.   Any device moved by human power, including a low-speed electric
bicycle.
      B.   Any device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
      C.   Any personal delivery device operated pursuant to Chapter 321O of
the Code of Iowa.
      D.   Any integral part of a truck tractor or road tractor which is
mounted on the frame of the truck tractor or road tractor immediately behind
the cab and which may be used to transport persons and property, but which
cannot be drawn upon the highway by the truck tractor or another motor vehicle.
      E.   Any steering axle, dolly, auxiliary axle, or other integral part of
another vehicle which in and of itself is incapable of commercially
transporting any person or property but is used primarily to support another
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(90))
(Section 6-1-2 – Ord. 1154 – Oct. 24 Supp)
6-1-3 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Provisions of this traffic code and State law relating to motor vehicles and
law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
6-1-4 POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   A police officer, and, in the absence of a police officer, any officer of
the Fire Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the
event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 102.4 and 321.236[2])
6-1-5 REPORTS OF TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the
City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of
Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of police officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.273 and 321.274)
6-1-6 POLICE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.
   A police officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of
the driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic
violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with
reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading, or other manifest
of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration
certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such
vehicle. A police officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require
exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
6-1-7 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested by law
with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
6-1-8 ARREST OR CITATION.
   Whenever a police officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated any provision of the traffic code, such officer may:
   1.   Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person
before a local magistrate; or
   2.   Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate
a uniform traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the State Commissioner
of Public Safety and deliver the original and a copy to the court where the
defendant is to appear, two copies to the defendant and retain the fifth copy
for the records of the City; or
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 805.6 and 321.485)
   3.   Notice to Appear; Promise to Appear. Proceed as provided in Section
6-1-13 of this chapter; or
   4.   Simple Notice of Fine. In the case of violations of Chapter 4 “Parking
Regulations,” of this title, without arresting the person, prepare in
triplicate a simple notice of fine as provided herein. Deliver one copy thereof
to the person so charged, or attach it to the vehicle parked in violation of
such chapter as provided in Section
6-1-9 of this chapter, as a notice of violation and promise to appear; the
original shall be sworn to by the police officer as a complaint and filed in
the office of either the Clerk or the Clerk of the District Court in and for
Polk County or Dallas County as the Council has by resolution, appointed and
directed pursuant to Section
6-1-11 of this chapter; and another copy shall be delivered to and retained by
the Police Department for the records of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 805.6, 805.8, 321.236, and 321.485)
6-1-9 PARKING VIOLATIONS; VEHICLE UNATTENDED.
   When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the traffic code,
and the driver is not present, the simple notice of fine or citation as herein
provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
6-1-10 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
   In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation
occurred, shall be raised by proof that:
   1.   Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information
was parked in violation of the traffic code; and
   2.   Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question.
6-1-11 SIMPLE NOTICE OF FINE.
   1.   Either the Clerk, or the Clerk of the District Court in and for Polk
County or Dallas County, shall, by resolution of the Council, be appointed and
directed to assume the duties and responsibilities connected with the
collection of all fines for violations of Chapter 4 “Parking Regulations” of
this Title, which are charged pursuant to a simple notice of fine under
Subsection
6-1-8(4) of this chapter and are admitted and collected pursuant to this
section and for the administration and processing of those violations which are
so charged, whether or not they are admitted and collected.
   2.   The Clerk shall provide to the Police Department sets of triplicate
simple notices of fines for issuance pursuant to this chapter, each identified
by separate serial numbers on each copy of each notice.
   3.   Any person notified or summoned by a simple notice of fine provided for
in this chapter who desires to enter a plea of guilty to any charge of
violating the parking regulations of this title as stated on the notice, may
pay the penalty provided on the notice to the Clerk of the District Court in
and for Polk County or Dallas County or the City Clerk, as the Council has
appointed and directed by resolution, prior to the designated date of payment
at any of the locations provided for such payment.
   4.   In the event that any person notified or summoned by a simple notice of
fine wishes to admit the violation and pay the penalty provided on the notice
on or before the date designated for such payment pursuant to such notice, the
Clerk or the Clerk of the District Court in and for Polk County or Dallas
County, as the Council has appointed and directed by resolution, is hereby
authorized and directed to receive the amount of such fine on behalf of the
City.
   5.   The Clerk of the District Court in and for Polk County or Dallas County
or the Clerk, as the Council has appointed and directed by resolution, shall
retain the copy of the notice until collection of the fine for an admitted
violation. In the event that such fine is not paid prior to or on the date
designated in the notice, the Clerk or the Clerk of the District Court in and
for Polk County or Dallas County shall deliver the notice to the Clerk of the
District Court in and for Polk County or Dallas County and such violation shall
be filed with the court for purposes of the defendant’s appearance and trial,
and such violation shall be prosecuted as any other traffic violation.
   6.   If any person notified by a simple notice of fine, as provided in this
chapter, has not paid the fine prior to or on the date designated in the
notice, but has executed authority for the entry of a plea of guilty or has
been found guilty of the violation, the Clerk of the District Court in and for
Polk County or Dallas County is hereby authorized and directed to receive the
amount of the fine of the City as established by the court.
   7.   The Clerk of the District Court is authorized to destroy any simple
notice of fine based upon violations of Chapter 4 of this title at any time
after the same shall have been on file in the Clerk’s office for a period of
more than three years.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 805.3 and 321.236)
6-1-12 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
   1.   A police officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be
removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot, highway, or
privately-owned property or area developed as an off-street parking facility to
the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, and to treat the vehicle as an “abandoned vehicle”
pursuant to the provisions of Sections 321.89 and 321.90 of the Code of Iowa,
under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
      A.   Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is upon a roadway and is so
disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons
in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such
an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
      B.   Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended upon a
street and is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or
obstruction to the normal movement of traffic; or when any vehicle is a
habitual violator under Section
6-4-13 of this title; or when any vehicle is and has been in violation of
Section
6-4-7 of this title for more than 24 hours and the owner, lessee, or person in
charge of the privately-owned property or facility has posted a sign or signs
in a conspicuous location indicating that parking is prohibited, except to
customers of the business located on the property or serviced by the facility,
and that vehicles found in violation will be towed away at the owner’s expense.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
      C.   Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban
on parking during snow removal operations.
      D.   Parked Over 24-Hour Period. When any vehicle is left parked upon a
street for a continuous period of 24 hours or more.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   2.   In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver of
any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of the traffic
code shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage, as
well as the fines associated with any outstanding parking tickets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
6-1-13 NOTICE TO APPEAR; PROMISE TO APPEAR.
   1.   Whenever a police officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person
has violated any provision of the traffic code or of Chapter 321 of the Code of
Iowa, punishable as a simple, serious, or aggravated misdemeanor, such officer
may, without arresting the person, either:
      A.   Prepare a written citation to appear in court containing the name
and address of such person, the nature of the offense, the operator or
chauffeur license number, if any, the registration number, if any, of their
vehicle, the time when and place where such person shall appear in court and
the penalty for nonappearance; or
      B.   If the violation charged is of a provision of Chapter 321 of the
Code of Iowa, prepare a memorandum of the alleged traffic violation containing
the name and address of such person, the registration number, if any, of their
vehicle, the offense alleged to have been committed, and such other information
as may be prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety with the concurrence
of the Director of Transportation.
   2.   If the officer prepares either a citation or a memorandum as provided
in this section, the alleged offender shall be requested to sign it. If the
person signs, the person may be released without arrest. In case a citation is
issued, the signing shall constitute a written promise to appear as stated in
the citation. A copy of the citation shall be presented to the person named
therein. The police officer issuing the citation shall cause to be filed a
complaint in the court in which the cited person is required to appear, as soon
as practicable, charging the crime stated in the citation. If a memorandum is
prepared, the original shall be retained by the officer, and a copy shall be
sent to the department, and a copy shall be presented to the person named
therein.
   3.   For preparing the summons or memorandum for a violation of Chapter 321
of the Code of Iowa, there shall be charged to the person named in the summons
or memorandum, upon conviction, a fee of $2.00. The fee shall be assessed as
part of the court costs.
   4.   The number of copies and the form of the citations and memorandums for
violation of Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa, shall be as prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety with the concurrence of the Director of
Transportation.
   5.   This section does not apply to a traffic offense which must be charged
upon a uniform citation and complaint as provided in Section 805.6 of the Code
of Iowa and Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa shall control such procedures. This
section does not apply to violations of parking regulations charged upon a
simple notice of fine as provided in this Code and in Sections 805.8 and
321.236 of the Code of Iowa, and this Code shall control such procedures.
   6.   Any person receiving a simple notice of fine herein provided for in
Subsection
6-1-8(4) of this chapter or a uniform citation and complaint, or knowing that
one such notice or citation and complaint has been attached to any vehicle
owned or controlled by said person, shall appear before the magistrate court at
the place and not later than the time and date specified in this notice.
6-1-14 VIOLATION OF PROMISE TO APPEAR.
   Any person who willfully fails to appear in court as specified in a
citation, a memorandum, a uniform citation, and complaint or a simple notice of
fine, given as provided in this chapter, is guilty of a simple misdemeanor,
punishable in accordance with the standard penalty provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which said
person was cited. Venue shall be in the county where the defendant was to
appear or in the county where said person resides. An appearance in response to
a citation for a violation of this title may be made either in person or by
counsel.
6-1-15 PROCEDURE NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The provisions of the traffic code shall govern all police officers in
making arrests without a warrant for violations of the traffic code for
offenses committed in their presence, but the procedure prescribed herein shall
not be exclusive of any other method prescribed by law for the arrest and
prosecution of a person.
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
6-2-1 Violation of Statutes Adopted by 6-2-9 Excessive Tire Noise
Reference
6-2-2 Speed Regulations                6-2-10 Obstructing View at Intersections
6-2-3 Turning Regulations              6-2-11 Safety Belts
6-2-4 Load and Weight Restrictions     6-2-12 Child Restraint Systems
6-2-5 Vehicles on Sidewalks            6-2-13 Pedestrians
6-2-6 Clinging to Vehicle              6-2-14 Golf Carts
6-2-7 Quiet Zones                      6-2-15 Public Mass Transit Vehicles
6-2-8 Eluding or Attempting to Elude
Pursuing Law Enforcement Vehicle
 
6-2-1 VIOLATION OF STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of
a police officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire, or
who fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following State
statutory laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is
in violation of this section. These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by
reference and are as follows:
   1.   Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
   2.   Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited; exception.
   3.   Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
   4.   Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
   5.   Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.
   6.   Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.
   7.   Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.
   8.   Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
   9.   Section 321.91 – Limitation on liability; penalty for abandonment.
   10.   Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
   11.   Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
   12.   Section 321.104 – Penal offenses against title law.
   13.   Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates permitted.
   14.   Section 321.174 – Operators licensed; operation of commercial
vehicles.
   15.   Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicle with expired license.
   16.   Section 321.180 – Instruction permits, commercial learner’s permits,
and chauffeur’s instruction permits.
   17.   Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged
fourteen through seventeen.
   18.   Section 321.193 – Restrictions on licenses; penalty.
   19.   Section 321.194 – Special minors’ licenses.
   20.   Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service order;
penalties.
   21.   Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s
identification card; penalty.
   22.   Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
   23.   Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain tobacco, tobacco products
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes.
   24.   Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license or when
disqualified; penalties.
   25.   Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
   26.   Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
   27.   Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
   28.   Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
   29.   Section 321.223 – Driver’s license inspection for motor vehicle
rental.
   30.   Section 321.224 – Record kept.
   31.   Section 321.232 – Speed detection jamming devices; penalty.
   32.   Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles, highway use.
   33.   Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
   34.   Section 321.235B – Low-speed electric bicycles.
   35.   Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
   36.   Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
   37.   Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals, or markings.
   38.   Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs, or signals;
unlawful possession; traffic signal preemption devices.
   39.   Section 321.262 – Leaving scene of traffic accident prohibited;
vehicle damage only; removal of vehicles.
   40.   Section 321.263 – Information and aid; leaving scene of personal
injury accident.
   41.   Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
   42.   Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
   43.   Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.
   44.   Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
   45.   Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device while
driving; text-messaging.
   46.   Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.
   47.   Section 321.277A – Careless driving.
   48.   Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
   49.   Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.
   50.   Section 321.284 – Open container in motor vehicles, drivers.
   51.   Section 321.284A – Open container in motor vehicles, passengers.
   52.   Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
   53.   Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
   54.   Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
   55.   Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
   56.   Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
   57.   Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.
   58.   Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
   59.   Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
   60.   Section 321.305 – One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands.
   61.   Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
   62.   Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
   63.   Section 321.309 – Towing.
   64.   Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
   65.   Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
   66.   Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
   67.   Section 321.314 – When signal required.
   68.   Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
   69.   Section 321.316 – Stopping.
   70.   Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
   71.   Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.
   72.   Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
   73.   Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
   74.   Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
   75.   Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
   76.   Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
   77.   Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
   78.   Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
   79.   Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
   80.   Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on
highways.
   81.   Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
   82.   Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
   83.   Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.
   84.   Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
   85.   Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad
train or railroad track equipment.
   86.   Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
   87.   Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
   88.   Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
   89.   Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
   90.   Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
   91.   Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
   92.   Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
   93.   Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
   94.   Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by hazardous
material.
   95.   Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
   96.   Section 321.366 – Acts prohibited on fully-controlled access
facilities.
   97.   Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
   98.   Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
   99.   Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
   100.   Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
   101.   Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
   102.   Section 321.372 – Discharging pupils, stopping requirements;
penalties.
   103.   Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
   104.   Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
   105.   Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
   106.   Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
   107.   Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
   108.   Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
   109.   Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles, motorized bicycles, and
all-terrain vehicles.
   110.   Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
   111.   Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
   112.   Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
   113.   Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
   114.   Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
   115.   Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
   116.   Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
   117.   Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
   118.   Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
   119.   Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
   120.   Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
   121.   Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
   122.   Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
   123.   Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
   124.   Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
   125.   Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
   126.   Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
   127.   Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
   128.   Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
   129.   Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
   130.   Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
   131.   Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
   132.   Section 321.422 – Red light in front, rear lights.
   133.   Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
   134.   Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.
   135.   Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
   136.   Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
   137.   Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, air horns, and bells prohibited.
   138.   Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
   139.   Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
   140.   Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
   141.   Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
   142.   Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
   143.   Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
   144.   Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
   145.   Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
   146.   Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
   147.   Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
   148.   Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
   149.   Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety rules.
   150.   Section 321.449A – Rail crew transport drivers.
   151.   Section 321.449B – Texting or using a mobile telephone while
operating a commercial motor vehicle.
   152.   Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation regulations.
   153.   Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
   154.   Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
   155.   Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles.
   156.   Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
   157.   Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
   158.   Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
   159.   Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
   160.   Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
   161.   Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight; exceptions, penalties.
   162.   Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
   163.   Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
6-2-2 SPEED REGULATIONS.
   1.   General. Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the
same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is
reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface, and width of
the street and of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive
a vehicle on any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to
bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having
the right to assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe
the law.
   2.   State Code Speed Limits. The following speed limits are established in
Section 321.285 of the Code of Iowa, and any speed in excess thereof is
unlawful unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter as a special
speed zone:
      A.   Business District, 20 MPH.
      B.   Residence or school district, 25 MPH
      C.   Suburban district, 45 MPH.
   3.   Cemeteries and Parking Lots. A speed in excess of 15 MPH in any
cemetery or parking lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this
chapter, is unlawful.
   4.   Special Speed Restrictions. In accordance with requirements of the Iowa
Department of Transportation, or whenever the Council shall determine upon the
basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that any speed limit listed
in Subsection 2 of this section is greater or less than is reasonable or safe
under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon
any part of the City street system, the Council shall determine and adopt by
ordinance such higher or lower speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at
such location. The following special speed zones have been established:
      A.   Special 20 Miles MPH Zones. A speed in excess of 20 MPH is unlawful
on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof:
         (1)   Streets within City parks.
      B.   Special 25 MPH Zones. A speed in excess of 25 MPH is unlawful on any
of the following designated streets or parts thereof:
         (1)   Campus Drive.
         (2)   Clark Street, from the east boundary line of N.W. 114th Street
to the east boundary line of Cownie Park Plat, an official Auditor’s plat,
located in and forming a part of the City.
         (3)   Forest Avenue, from the west boundary line of N.W. 114th Street
to the most westerly point thereof lying east of Interstate I-35/I-80.
         (4)   N.W. 114th Street, from the south boundary line of Hickman Road
south to a point located 500 feet south of the south end of the bridge over
Walnut Creek.
      C.   Special 25 MPH School Zones. A speed in excess of 25 MPH is unlawful
on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof during the
designated school speed limit hours as designated by flashing amber lights and
warning signs:
         (1)   Douglas Parkway, from 200 feet west of the Berkshire Parkway
east to corporate limits.
      D.   Special 30 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 30 MPH is unlawful
on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof:
         (2)   N.W. 86th Street, from the south line of University Boulevard to
south line of Hickman Road.
         (1)   Swanson Boulevard, from the west line of N.W. 86th Street west
to a point located at the west property line of 9289 Swanson Boulevard and
Swanson Boulevard.
      E.   Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 35 MPH is unlawful
on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof:
         (1)   Alice’s Road, from 280th Street north to a point two-tenths of a
mile south of Meredith Drive.
         (2)   Douglas Parkway, from east corporate limits to west corporate
limits.
         (3)   Hickman Frontage Road, from the east line of N.W. 111th Street
to the west line of N.W. 108th Street.
         (4)   N.W. 86th Street, from the south corporate limits to the south
line of University Boulevard.
         (5)   N.W. 100th Street, from the south corporate limits to the north
corporate limits.
         (6)   N.W. 114th Street, from the south boundary line of Interstate
Investment Subdivision, an official plat, located in and forming a part of the
City to the north boundary line of University Avenue.
         (7)   N.W. 128th Street, from the south corporate limits to the north
corporate limits.
         (8)   N.W. 142nd Street.
         (9)   N.W. 156th Street, from the south corporate limits north to the
north corporate limits.
         (10)   Polk County, to the north boundary line of University Avenue.
         (11)   Swanson Boulevard, from the east line of N.W. 100th Street east
to a point located at the west property line of 9289 Swanson Boulevard and
Swanson Boulevard.
         (12)   University Avenue, from the east corporate limits to a point
located 700 feet west of the intersection with the southbound exit ramp of
Interstate I-35/I-80.
         (13)   University Boulevard, from the eastern terminus thereof west to
the east line of N.W. 86th Street.
      F.   Special 40 MPH Speed Zones. Based upon State Department of
Transportation study and recommendation, a speed in excess of 40 miles per hour
is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof:
         (1)   Hickman Road from a point located 1,300 feet west of the
intersection with N.W. 86th Street to the east corporate limits.
      G.   Special 45 MPH Speed Zones. Based upon State Department of
Transportation study and recommendation, a speed in excess of 45 MPH is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof:
         (1)   Hickman Road or U.S. Highway 6 from a point located 565 feet
west of the intersection with N.W. 128th Street east to a point located 250
feet west of the intersection with N.W. 111th Street.
         (2)   Hickman Road or U.S. Highway 6 from a point located 650 feet
west of the intersection with N.W. 100th Street to a point located 1,300 feet
west of the intersection with N.W. 86th Street.
      H.   Special 50 MPH Speed Zones. Based upon State Department of
Transportation study and recommendation, a speed in excess of 50 miles per hour
is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof:
         (1)   Hickman Road, also known as U.S. Highway 6 from a point located
250 feet west of the intersection with N.W. 111th Street east to a point
located 650 feet west of the intersection with N.W. 100th Street.
         (2)   Hickman Road, also known as U.S. Highway 6 from a point located
565 feet west of the intersection with N.W. 128th Street west to the west
corporate limits.
      I.   Special 65 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 65 MPH is unlawful
on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof:
         (1)   Interstate I-35/I-80 from the south corporate limits to the
north corporate limits.
   5.   Minimum Speed. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance
with law.
6-2-3 TURNING REGULATIONS.
   1.   Authority to Mark. The City Manager may cause markers, buttons, or
signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and
direct, as traffic conditions require, that a different course from that
specified by the State law be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections,
and when markers, buttons, or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall
turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such
markers, buttons, or signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
   2.   U-Turns. It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn at any one of the
following places:
      A.   Any location other than an intersection.
      B.   An intersection that is controlled with automatic traffic signals.
      C.   Any location where a sign prohibiting U-turns is posted.
   3.   Right Turn On Red Signal Prohibited. Vehicular traffic facing a steady
red signal shall not proceed or make a right turn at locations when appropriate
signs are in place.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.257[2])
   4.   No Turns Permitted. When appropriate signs are in place, no driver
shall make either a right or left turn at the following locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
      A.   8737 University Avenue. Vehicles exiting 8737 University Avenue onto
N.W. 86th Street shall not turn left onto N.W. 86th Street.
      B.   Hickman Frontage Road. Vehicles traveling west on Hickman Frontage
Road shall not turn left at N.W. 86th Street.
      C.   N.W. 86th Street. Vehicles traveling north on N.W. 86th Street shall
not turn left at the entrance to 8737 University Avenue.
6-2-4 LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   1.   Temporary Embargo. If the Council declares an embargo when it appears
by reason of deterioration, rain, snow, or other climatic conditions that
certain streets will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in
excess of an amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated
on streets so designated by such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.471 and 472)
   2.   Permits for Excess Size and Weight. The Director of Public Works may,
upon application and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special permit in
writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination
of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the maximum specified by
State law or the City over those streets or bridges named in the permit which
are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the City is responsible
for maintenance. A fee shall be paid by the applicant for the permit, with the
amount of the fee determined in accordance with an established fee schedule,
which fee schedule may be modified from time to time with the approval of the
Council. Immediately upon issuing such permit, the Director of Public Works
shall notify the Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.473 and 321E.1)
   3.   Truck Traffic Prohibited:
      A.   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall
operate any motor truck licensed to carry more than 10 tons upon any of the
following streets or parts of streets:
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.473 and 475)
- NONE -
      B.   The Council may, by motion, grant special permission allowing a
person to operate motor trucks where prohibited by Subsection 3A of this
section for a period of not more than one year per request, provided the person
establishes each of the following:
         (1)   Denial of special permission for such usage would prohibit all
motor truck access to the person's real property.
         (2)   Denial of special permission for such usage would create an
unreasonable hardship to the person and the person's real property.
   4.   Load Limits On Bridges. Where it has been determined that any City
bridge has a capacity less than the maximum permitted on the streets of the
City, or on the street serving the bridge, the Director of Public Works may
cause to be posted and maintained signs on said bridge and at suitable
distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load
limits, and no person shall drive a vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded, upon
said bridge in excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
   5.   Truck Routes. Truck route regulations are established as follows:
      A.   Definitions. For use in this subsection, the following terms are
defined:
         (1)   “Light delivery truck,” “panel delivery truck,” “delivery
truck,” or “pickup truck” means any motor vehicle designed to carry not more
than 2,000 pounds of merchandise or freight of any kind.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[5])
         (2)   “Motor truck” means every motor vehicle designed primarily for
carrying livestock, merchandise, freight of every kind, or over nine persons as
passengers, except light delivery trucks, panel delivery trucks, delivery
trucks, and pickup trucks.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[4])
      B.   Truck Routes Designated. Motor trucks, as defined in Subsection (5)
(A)(2) of this section, having no fixed terminal within the City or making no
scheduled or definite stops within the City for the purpose of loading or
unloading shall travel over or upon the following streets within the City and
none other:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
         (1)   Hickman Road.
         (2)   Interstate 35/80 from the south corporate limits to the north
corporate limits.
         (3)   University Avenue.
         (4)   University Boulevard.
         (5)   N.W. 86th Street.
      C.   Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any “motor truck,” as defined in
Subsection (5)(A)(2) of this section, having a fixed terminal, making a
scheduled or definite stop within the City for the purpose of loading or
unloading, shall proceed over or upon the designated routes set out in this
section to the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and shall
proceed thereto, load or unload and return, by the most direct route, to its
point of departure from said designated route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
      D.   Employer’s Responsibility. The owner, or any other person, employing
or otherwise directing the driver of any motor truck shall not require or
knowingly permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner
contrary to this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
      E.   Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to fire
apparatus, school buses, and other motor vehicles owned and operated by a
governmental agency, road machinery, implements of husbandry temporarily moved
upon a highway, or to a vehicle operated under the terms of a special permit
issued as provided in this title.
6-2-5 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area
except at a driveway.
6-2-6 CLINGING TO VEHICLE.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all
passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
in-line skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or themselves to any
vehicle upon a roadway.
6-2-7 QUIET ZONES.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
6-2-8 ELUDING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE PURSUING LAW ENFORCEMENT VEHICLE.
   It is unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to willfully fail to bring
the motor vehicle to a stop or otherwise elude or attempt to elude a marked or
unmarked official law enforcement vehicle driven by a police officer after
being given a visual and audible signal to stop. The signal given by the police
officer shall be by flashing red light, or by flashing red and blue lights, and
siren.
6-2-9 EXCESSIVE TIRE NOISE.
   No person shall skid, slide, or spin the tires of the motor vehicle which
said person is operating so as to cause the emission of excessive or unusual
noise when the same is not necessary for the safe operation of the vehicle
6-2-10 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.
   It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard, or other object to
obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear
view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such
obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be
abated in the manner provided by Title 5 Chapter 6 of this Code.
6-2-11 SAFETY BELTS.
   1.   Required Use. The driver and front seat occupants of a type of motor
vehicle subject to registration pursuant to Section 321.18 of the Code of Iowa,
except a motorcycle or motorized bicycle as defined in Section 321.1 of the
Code of Iowa, shall each wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt or
safety harness any time the vehicle is in forward motion on a street or
highway, except that a child under six years of age shall be secured as
required in Section
6-2-14 of this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.445[2])
   2.   Exceptions. Subsection 1 of this section does not apply to:
      A.   The driver or front seat occupants of a motor vehicle which is not
required to be equipped with safety belts or safety harnesses under rules
adopted by the State Department of Transportation.
      B.   The driver and front seat occupants of a motor vehicle who are
actively engaged in work which requires them to alight from and re-enter the
vehicle at frequent intervals, provided the vehicle does not exceed 25 MPH
between stops.
      C.   The driver of a motor vehicle while performing duties as a letter
carrier for the United States Postal Service. This exemption applies only
between the first delivery point after leaving the post office and the last
delivery point before returning to the post office.
      D.   Passengers on a bus.
      E.   A person possessing a written certification from a physician on a
form provided by the State Department of Transportation that the person is
unable to wear a safety belt or safety harness due to physical or medical
reasons. The certification shall specify the time period for which the
exemption applies. The time period shall not exceed 12 months, at which time a
new certification may be issued.
      F.   Front seat occupants of an authorized emergency vehicle while they
are being transported in an emergency. However, this exemption does not apply
to the driver of the authorized emergency vehicle.
   3.   Failure to Use Safety Belts. The driver and the front seat passengers
may each be charged separately for improperly used or unused equipment under
this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.445[3])
6-2-12 CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEMS.
   1.   Children Under Three. A child under three years of age who is being
transported in a motor vehicle subject to registration which has a gross weight
of 10,000 pounds or less as specified by the manufacturer, except a school bus
or motorcycle as defined in Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa, shall be secured
during transit by a child restraint system which meets Federal Motor Vehicle
Safety Standards and the system shall be used in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions. A person who is first charged for a violation of
this subsection and who has not purchased or otherwise acquired a child
restraint system shall not be convicted if the person produces in court, within
a reasonable time, proof that the person has purchased or otherwise acquired a
child restraint system which meets Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards.
   2.   Children Over Three But Under Six. A child, at least three years of age
but under six years of age, who is being transported in any such motor vehicle
described in Subsection 1 of this section shall be secured during transit by
either a child restraint system that meets Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standards and is used in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, or by
a safety belt or safety harness of a type approved under Section 321.445 of the
Code of Iowa.
   3.   Exceptions. This section does not apply to the following:
      A.   Police officers acting on official duty;
      B.   Transportation of children in 1965 model year or older vehicles or
authorized emergency vehicles; and
      C.   Transportation of a child who has been certified by a physician
licensed under Chapter 148, 150, or 150A of the Code of Iowa, as having a
medical, physical, or mental condition which prevents or makes inadvisable
securing the child in a child restraint system, safety belt, or safety harness.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.446)
6-2-13 PEDESTRIANS.
   1.   Pedestrian Use of Roadway. No person shall stand in a roadway,
including the roadway medians, curbs, traffic islands, and shoulders, for the
purpose of soliciting a ride, employment, or business from the occupant of any
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
   2.   Pedestrian Crossing. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point
other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
   3.   Pedestrian Crossings Established. Pedestrian crossings controlled by
traffic control signals are hereby established at the intersections of the
following designated streets:
      A.   Intersection of N.W. 86th Street (Clive Road) and Franklin Avenue.
      B.   Intersection of N.W. 86th Street (Clive Road) and Harbach Boulevard.
      C.   Intersection of N.W. 100th Street and University Avenue.
      D.   Intersection of University Avenue and N.W. 90th Street.
   4.   Pedestrian Traffic Control Legend. Whenever pedestrians are controlled
by a traffic control signal at a pedestrian crossing, the following words shall
be used and said words shall indicate the following:
      A.   Walk. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
pedestrian crossing within the marked crosswalk.
      B.   Don’t Walk. Pedestrians facing the signal shall stop before entering
the street and shall not cross the street until “Walk” is shown.
   5.   Pedestrian Right-of-Way. The driver of any vehicle which is required to
stop at a pedestrian crossing by a traffic control signal shall bring such
vehicle to a full stop at a point 10 feet from the approach side of the marked
crosswalk in accordance with such traffic control signal and shall yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians within the crosswalk.
   6.   Duty of Drivers. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, every
driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian within a marked crosswalk at a pedestrian crossing and shall
exercise due care upon observing any child or confused or incapacitated person
within or in the vicinity of the marked crosswalk of a pedestrian crossing and
shall yield the right-of-way to them.
   7.   Turning Through Crosswalks. No driver of a vehicle traveling on a
street which intersects a street upon which a pedestrian crossing is located
within close proximity of such pedestrian crossing shall turn a vehicle through
the marked crosswalk when the traffic control signal controlling the pedestrian
crossing exhibits the word “Walk.”
6-2-14 GOLF CARTS.
   1.   Operation on City Streets by Person with Disabilities. A person with
disabilities, as defined by Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa, possessing a
valid motor vehicle operator’s license issued pursuant to Chapter 321 of the
Code of Iowa, may operate a golf cart on City streets except Hickman Road,
University Avenue, University Boulevard, and N.W. 86th Street during daylight
hours and subject to the following conditions:
      A.   Identification. A person with a disabilities permit issued pursuant
to Section 321L.2 of the Code of Iowa, shall be prominently displayed on the
golf cart at all times during operation.
      B.   Registration. Operation shall not commence until the person with
disabilities has registered their name, address, operator’s license number,
person with disabilities identification number, and a brief description of the
golf cart to be operated with the Police Department.
      C.   Equipment. The golf cart shall be equipped with a slow-moving
vehicle sign, bicycle safety flag, adequate brakes, and reflectorized warning
devices on the front and rear.
   2.   Street Crossings. Authorized persons operating golf carts pursuant to
Subsection 1 of this section shall be allowed to cross University Boulevard but
shall cross Hickman Road, University Avenue, and N.W. 86th Street only at
intersections controlled by traffic control signal lights.
   3.   Motor Vehicle Law. Persons authorized to operate golf carts pursuant to
Subsection 1 of this section shall obey all statutes and ordinances governing
the operation of motor vehicles.
   4.   Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter
for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of
this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
6-2-15 PUBLIC MASS TRANSIT VEHICLES.
   1.   Conduct Prohibited. No person, while a passenger on any vehicle which
transports members of the public at-large from place to place in consideration
for the payment of a fare, shall intentionally do any of the following acts:
      A.   Smoke or possess any lighted or smoldering pipe, cigar, or
cigarette;
      B.   Consume any beverages, food, or alcohol;
      C.   Deface, damage, alter, destroy, write upon, or soil any part of such
vehicle;
      D.   Spit, urinate, or defecate in or upon or from any part of such
vehicle;
      E.   Throw, deposit, or place any paper, bottles, cans, or any other
garbage or solid waste in or upon such vehicle;
      F.   Throw any object of any kind within such vehicle or out any door or
window of such vehicle;
      G.   Play or operate any radio, television, tape players, record player,
or similar electronic sound amplification device unless it is played through an
earphone;
      H.   Bring any pet or animal onto such vehicle other than a seeing eye
dog accompanying a blind person or an animal in a cage or held exclusively on
the lap of a rider;
      I.   Stand or remain in front of any white line marked on the forward end
of the floor of such vehicle after being asked to step back by the driver;
      J.   Enter such a vehicle through the rear door unless authorized to do
so by the driver or other transit authority employee;
      K.   Interfere in any way with the bus driver’s operation of such
vehicle; or
      L.   Make loud and raucous noise which causes unreasonable distress to
another person, engage in fighting or violent behavior, or in any manner
disrupt or impede the safe operation of such vehicle.
   2.   Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter
for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of
this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
 
6-3-1 Installation  6-3-4 Standards
6-3-2 Crosswalks    6-3-5 Compliance
6-3-3 Traffic Lanes
 
6-3-1 INSTALLATION. The City Manager shall cause to be placed and maintained
traffic control devices when and as required under this traffic code or under
State law, or emergency or temporary traffic control devices for the duration
of an emergency or temporary condition as traffic conditions may require to
regulate, guide, or warn traffic. The City Manager shall keep a record of all
such traffic control devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
6-3-2 CROSSWALKS.
   The City Manager is hereby authorized, subject to approval of the Council by
resolution, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate traffic control
devices at intersections where, due to traffic conditions, there is particular
danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and at such other places
as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 372.13[4] and 321.255)
6-3-3 TRAFFIC LANES.
   The City Manager is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street
pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent with the
traffic code of the City. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall
be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such
vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing
another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 372.13[4] and 321.255
6-3-4 STANDARDS.
   Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by the
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
6-3-5 COMPLIANCE.
   No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, unless at the time otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to
the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under
Section 321.231 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
 
6-4-1 Park Adjacent to Curb                6-4-8 Truck Parking Limited
6-4-2 Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal 6-4-9 Snow and Ice Removal
6-4-3 Parking Prohibited                   6-4-10 Fire Lanes
6-4-4 Persons with Disabilities Parking    6-4-11 Controlled Access Facilities
6-4-5 No Parking Zones                     6-4-12 Penalty
6-4-6 Parking Limited to Specified Hours   6-4-13 Habitual Violators
6-4-7 Illegal Off-Street Parking
 
6-4-1 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement
and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of, but not
closer than two inches to the curb or edge of the roadway. It is also unlawful
to drive any vehicle against or upon any curb so as to damage any part thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
6-4-2 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than 24 hours
or for any of the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   1.   Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale;
   2.   Repairing. For lubricating, repairing, or for commercial washing of
such vehicle, except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency;
   3.   Advertising. Displaying advertising;
   4.   Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a
duly established marketplace or when so authorized or licensed under this Code.
6-4-3 PARKING PROHIBITED.
   1.   Prohibited Places. No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the
following places:
      A.   Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[5])
      B.   Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any
divided street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
      C.   Mailboxes. Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday
through Saturday, within 20 feet on either side of a mailbox which is so placed
and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
      D.   Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[1])
      E.   Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[2])
      F.   Intersection. Within, or within 30 feet of an intersection of any
street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])
      G.   Fire Hydrant. Within five feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[4])
      H.   Stop Sign or Signal. Within 10 feet upon the approach to any
flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the
side of a roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[6])
      I.   Railroad Crossing. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red
light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[8])
      J.   Fire Station. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within 75 feet of said entrance when properly signposted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[9])
      K.   Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[10])
      L.   Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[11])
      M.   Signs. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or
parking of vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13 and 14])
      N.   Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when
standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or
when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be
painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])
      O.   Churches, Nursing Homes, and Other Buildings. A space of 50 feet is
hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theater, auditorium,
hotel having more than 25 sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab
stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people
are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor
vehicle shall be left standing, parked, or stopped except in taking on or
discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is
necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
      P.   Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or
private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
      Q.   In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that any
part of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the
markings designating such space.
      R.   Parking or Terrace. Upon the parking or terrace, designated as that
unpaved area between the curb line and the sidewalk line, except when duly
approved by resolution of the Council. Parking may be permitted at such
locations when requested in writing by property owners. Each such location must
be properly marked by approved metal signs at the extremities of such location.
The expense of such signs shall be borne by property owners.
   2.   East-West Streets. On the north side of all streets going east and
west, except in those locations set forth below where parking is prohibited on
the south side of the street:
      A.   Bay Hill Court.
      B.   Bay Hill Drive.
      C.   Forest Avenue between N.W. 105th Street and N.W. 109th Street.
      D.   Hawthorn Drive between N.W. 137th Street and N.W. 142nd Street.
      E.   Hazelwood Drive between N.W. 128th Street and N.W. 131st Street.
      F.   Hickory Avenue between Country Club Boulevard and N.W. 132nd Street.
      G.   Hickory Court.
      H.   Lake Pointe Drive between Willow Drive and N.W. 142nd Street.
      I.   Lakeview Drive between Country Club Boulevard and N.W. 149th Street.
      J.   Lincoln Avenue between N.W. 128th Street and N.W. 131st Street.
      K.   Ricardo Road between N.W. 104th Street and Rio Valley Drive.
      L.   Ridgeview Drive between N.W. 152nd Street and N.W. 155th Street.
      M.   Sheridan Avenue between N.W. 156th Street and Berkshire Parkway.
      N.   South Shore Drive between Lake Pointe Drive and N.W. 142nd Street.
      O.   Summit Drive between N.W. 138th Street and N.W. 152nd Street.
      P.   Sunset Terrace between N.W. 102nd Street and Rio Valley Drive.
      Q.   Walnut Ridge Circle.
      R.   Walnut Ridge Drive between N.W. 108th Street and N.W. 109th Street.
      S.   Wellington Ridge Drive from N.W. 123rd Street, west to its western
terminus.
      T.   Wildwood Drive from N.W. 142nd Street west to N.W. 148th Street and
from N.W. 156th Street west to N.W. 159th Street.
      U.   Woodcrest Drive from N.W. 149th Street, west to its western
terminus.
      V.   Woodlands Parkway between N.W. 128th Street and Cedarwood Avenue.
   3.   North-South Streets. On the west side of all streets going north and
south, except in those locations set forth below where parking is prohibited on
the east side of the street:
      A.   Country Club Boulevard between University Avenue and Hickman Road.
      B.   Dover Bay Drive.
      C.   Lake Pointe Drive between University Avenue and Bay Hill Drive.
      D.   N.W. 75th Street between University Avenue and Harbach Boulevard.
      E.   N.W. 80th Court between Garrison Road and Northwest Drive.
      F.   N.W. 81st Street between University Boulevard and Harbach Boulevard.
      G.   N.W. 85th Street between Clark Street and Harbach Boulevard.
      H.   N.W. 90th Street between University Avenue and Indian Hills Drive.
      I.   N.W. 93rd Court.
      J.   N.W. 94th Street.
      K.   N.W. 97th Street between Lincoln Avenue and Clark Street.
      L.   N.W. 98th Street between Lincoln Avenue and Sunset Terrace.
      M.   N.W. 100th Place between Lincoln Avenue and N.W. 101st Street.
      N.   N.W. 102nd Street between N.W. 101st Street and Clark Street.
      O.   N.W. 104th Street between University Avenue and Rio Valley Drive.
      P.   N.W. 109th Street between Walnut Ridge and University Avenue.
      Q.   N.W. 121st Court.
      R.   N.W. 122nd Street.
      S.   N.W. 123rd Street.
      T.   N.W. 129th Street.
      U.   N.W. 131st Street.
      V.   N.W. 132nd Street between Cedarwood Avenue and Hickory Avenue.
      W.   N.W. 135th Street.
      X.   N.W. 136th Street.
      Y.   N.W. 138th Street between University Avenue and Lake Pointe Drive.
      Z.   N.W. 139th Street between Hawthorn Drive and Summit Drive.
      AA.   N.W. 140th Street between Hawthorn Drive and Summit Drive.
      BB.   N.W. 141st Street between Hawthorn Drive and Summit Drive.
      CC.   N.W. 145th Street between Hawthorn Drive and Summit Drive.
      DD.   N.W. 148th Street between Summit Drive and Wildwood Drive.
      EE.   N.W. 150th Court.
      FF.   N.W. 151st Court.
      GG.   N.W. 152nd Street.
      HH.   N.W. 155th Street.
      II.   N.W. 157th Street between Sheridan Avenue and the north corporate
limits.
      JJ.   N.W. 159th Street between Wildwood Drive and Hickman Road.
      KK.   N.W. 160th Street between Sheridan Avenue and the north corporate
limits.
      LL.   N.W. 161st Street between Sheridan Avenue and the north corporate
limits.
      MM.   N.W. 166th Street between Horton Drive and N.W. 165th Street.
      NN.   N.W. 168th Street between Douglas Parkway and Baxter Drive.
      OO.   N.W. 177th Court north of Baxter Drive.
      PP.   N.W. 177th Street north of Phoenix Drive.
      QQ.   N.W. 178th Court north of Baxter Drive.
      RR.   N.W. 178th Street north of Madison Drive.
6-4-4 PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.
   The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of
persons with disabilities parking spaces:
   1.   Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be
established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa
and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish
any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining
Council approval.
   2.   Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking
space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of
a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code
of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
      A.   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit.
      B.   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or
being transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa.
      C.   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section
321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.
   3.   Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a
wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
      A.   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must
comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa when
utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
      B.   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone that is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa.
6-4-5 NO PARKING ZONES.
   No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of the following
specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace
officer or traffic control signal:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   1.   No Parking On Certain Streets and Near Certain Intersections. On
streets intersecting with the following designated streets, except N.W. 81st
Street intersection with University Boulevard, no one shall park within 100
feet of such intersections, nor shall they park upon the following designated
streets:
      A.   Douglas Parkway.
      B.   Hickman Court.
      C.   Hickman Road.
      D.   N.W. 86th Street.
      E.   N.W. 94th Street.
      F.   N.W. 100th Street.
      G.   N.W. 111th Street.
      H.   N.W. 114th Street.
      I.   N.W. 118th Street.
      J.   N.W. 128th Street.
      K.   N.W. 142nd Street.
      L.   N.W. 156th Street.
      M.   Stratford Drive.
      N.   University Avenue.
      O.   University Boulevard.
   2.   No Parking In Specific Areas.
      A.   Berkshire Parkway from Hickman Road north to Alice’s Road.
      B.   Clark Street from a point 115 feet east of N.W. 102nd Street west to
115 feet west of N.W. 102nd Street.
      C.   Clark Street from a point 120 feet east of N.W. 101st Street west to
130 feet west of N.W. 101st Street.
      D.   Country Club Boulevard from a point 165 feet north of Hickman Road
south to Hickman Road.
      E.   Country Club Boulevard from a point 300 feet north of University
Avenue south to University Avenue.
      F.   Forest Avenue from N.W. 114th Street west to its terminus in the
11500 block of Forest Avenue including the cul-de-sac.
      G.   Harbach Boulevard from N.W. 84th Street west to N.W. 86th Street.
      H.   Lake Pointe Drive from a point 220 feet north of University Avenue
south to University Avenue.
      I.   Lake Shore Drive from a point 85 feet west of Woodlands Parkway east
to Woodlands Parkway.
      J.   N.W. 80th Place from a point where the south curb line of Garrison
Road intersects with N.W. 80th Place, north to Hickman Road.
      K.   N.W. 81st Street from a point 143 feet north of University Boulevard
south to University Boulevard.
      L.   N.W. 90th Street from a point 150 feet north of University Avenue
south to University Avenue.
      M.   N.W. 92nd Court from a point 385 feet north of Swanson Boulevard
south to Swanson Boulevard.
      N.   N.W. 93rd Court at Clark Street for 50 feet on either side of the
persons with disabilities west sidewalk ramp.
      O.   N.W. 99th Court from Clark Street to Colby Avenue.
      P.   N.W. 104th Street from a point 250 feet north of University Avenue
south to University Avenue.
      Q.   N.W. 108th Street from Hickman Road south to the cul-de-sac in the
2100 block of N.W. 108th Street.
      R.   N.W. 121st Street from University Avenue north to Stratford Drive.
      S.   N.W. 123rd Street from a point 400 feet south of Woodlands Parkway
north to Woodlands Parkway.
      T.   N.W. 123rd Street from a point 620 feet north of University Avenue
south to University Avenue.
      U.   N.W. 124th Court from Stratford Drive north to include the cul-de-
sac.
      V.   N.W. 124th Street from University Avenue north to Stratford Drive.
      W.   N.W. 138th Street from University Avenue north to Lake Pointe Drive.
      X.   N.W. 149th Street from a point 140 feet north of Hickman Road south
to Hickman Road.
      Y.   N.W. 152nd Street from a point 150 feet south of Buena Vista Drive
north to Buena Vista Drive.
      Z.   N.W. 159th Street from a point 60 feet north of Wildwood Drive south
to Wildwood Drive.
      AA.   N.W. 161st Street from Hickman Road north to Sheridan Avenue.
      BB.   Sheridan Avenue from a point 610 feet east of Berkshire Parkway
west to Berkshire Parkway.
      CC.   Swanson Boulevard from N.W. 86th Street west to N.W. 100th Street.
      DD.   Wildwood Drive from a point 50 feet east of N.W. 159th Street west
to 159th Street.
      EE.   Woodlands Parkway from a point 515 feet west of N.W. 128th Street
east to N.W. 123rd Street.
      FF.   Woodlands Parkway from Lake Shore Drive north to Hickman Road.
6-4-6 PARKING LIMITED TO SPECIFIED HOURS.
   1.   No Parking 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. No person shall stop, stand, or park
a vehicle in any of the following specifically designated streets or portions
of streets between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the direction of a police officer or traffic control device:
      A.   Indian Hills Drive from N.W. 94th Court to N.W. 92nd Street.
   2.   No Parking 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. No person shall stop, stand, or park
a vehicle in any of the following specifically designated streets or portions
of streets between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the direction of a police officer or traffic control device:
      A.   Clark Street from a point 229 feet west of N.W. 100th Street east to
N.W. 100th Street.
6-4-7 ILLEGAL OFF-STREET PARKING.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle upon privately-owned property
or area developed as an off-street parking facility without the consent of the
owner, lessee, or person in charge of the privately-owned property or facility.
Persons who stop, stand, or park a vehicle upon privately owned property or
area developed as an off-street parking facility where such property is used
for business purposes or such facility primarily serves a business premises
shall be presumed to be in violation hereof when the business located on said
property or served by said facility is not open to serve customers or members
of the general public. A violation of this section shall place any such vehicle
in the status of an illegally parked vehicle, and, upon complaint of the owner,
lessee, or person in charge of the privately-owned property or facility, the
vehicle may be dealt with pursuant to Chapter 1 of this title. In the event the
owner, lessee, or person in charge of the privately owned property or facility
requests that a vehicle located thereon be impounded pursuant to Section
6-1-12 of this title, said owner, lessee, or person in charge of the privately
owned property or facility shall make such request in writing and further agree
in writing to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City, its elected
officials, officers, agents, employees, and police officers from and against
any and all claims, demands, or causes of action that assert any liability for
injury or damage caused by, arising out of, or in any way related to such
impoundment, including reasonable attorney fees incurred thereby in connection
with any such claim, demand, or cause of action.
6-4-8 TRUCK PARKING LIMITED.
   No person shall park a: a) motor truck, b) semi tractor or trailer (whether
or not the trailer is attached thereto), or c) other motor vehicle with a
trailer attached thereto, if the truck has a freight capacity greater than one
ton, except when such vehicles are actually engaged in the delivery or
receiving of merchandise or cargo, on any streets abutting property zoned R-1,
R-2, R-3, R-4, or R-5, as defined in the Zoning Code (Title 11 of this Code)
for the City. While actually delivering or receiving merchandise or cargo, such
vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a manner which will not interfere with
other traffic. The provisions of this section shall not apply to pickup, light
delivery, or panel delivery trucks.
6-4-9 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
   No person shall park, abandon, or leave unattended any vehicle on any public
street, alley, or City owned off-street parking area during any one of the
following times or periods:
   1.   When snow or freezing rain (ice) is falling on such street.
   2.   When snow is drifting onto such street.
   3.   The 24-hour period immediately following the end of any such snowfall
or icing event (a 48-hour period if such snow or ice has not been removed from
such street, curb to curb).
   4.   The 24-hour period immediately following the end of any such drifting
of snow (a 48-hour period if such snow has not been removed from such street,
curb to curb).
   5.   The 24-hour period beginning one hour after a police officer, the City
Manager, or the Director of Public Works has requested that such vehicle be
removed from such street so that the snow or ice currently existing thereon can
be removed if such request shall have been made to the owner of such vehicle,
to an employee or a partner of such owner, to such owner's spouse or adult
child if they reside with such owner, to the person last driving such vehicle
or to the person in whose care the vehicle was then entrusted.
6-4-10 FIRE LANES.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a fire lane as provided
herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236)
   1.   Fire Lanes Established. The Fire Chief may designate fire lanes on any
private road or driveway where deemed necessary to assure access to property or
premises by authorized emergency vehicles.
   2.   Signs and Markings. Wherever a fire lane has been designated, the
Police Chief shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be placed
identifying such fire lanes and the parking prohibition established by this
section.
   3.   Exception. The provisions of this section do not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles.
6-4-11 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES.
   Parking restrictions on controlled access facilities are as specified in
Chapter 6 of this title.
6-4-12 PENALTY.
   The standard penalty provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code shall apply to violations in this chapter, except for such
violations which constitute scheduled violations within the meaning of Section
805.8 of the Code of Iowa, or for such violations charged, admitted, and
collected pursuant to a simple notice of fine as established by Chapter 1 of
this title, or for those violations of Sections
6-4-4,
6-4-9, or
6-4-10 of this chapter. In the event a violation of this chapter constitutes a
scheduled violation within the meaning of Section 805.8 of the Code of Iowa,
the penalty provided in that section shall control. In the event a violation of
this chapter constitutes a violation charged, admitted, and collected pursuant
to a simple notice of fine as established by Chapter 1 of this title, the fine
shall be as follows:
 
Parking Regulations Fine Schedule
Violation                                                             Fee
Violation of Section                                                  $100.00
6-4-4 of this chapter regarding parking for persons with disabilities
Violation of Section                                                  $25.00
6-4-9 of this chapter regarding snow and ice removal
Violation of Section                                                  $50.00
6-4-10 of this chapter regarding fire lanes
Violation of all other parking regulations                            $15.00
 
Provided, however, in the event such violation is charged but not admitted and
collected pursuant to a simple notice of fine, the standard penalty provided in
Section
1-4-1 of this Code shall apply. The fine for violation of a parking regulation
charged under a simple notice of fine shall be increased by $5.00 if such fine
is not paid within 30 days of the date upon which the violation occurred.
6-4-13 HABITUAL VIOLATORS.
   Any vehicle on which four or more overtime or illegal parking citations or
complaints from the City have been issued and have become delinquent shall be
deemed to be a habitual violator. For purposes of this chapter, a delinquent
parking citation or complaint is one which has not been paid within 30 days of
the date upon which the violation occurred. No person shall park a vehicle and
permit it to remain standing upon any public street or public-metered lot or
City-owned parking facility in the City when there are four or more delinquent
parking citations or complaints from the City outstanding against that vehicle.
A violation of this section shall place such vehicle in the status of an
illegally parked vehicle, and the vehicle may be dealt with pursuant to Section
6-1-12 of this title.
CHAPTER 5
STOP OR YIELD STREETS AND INTERSECTIONS
 
6-5-1 Through Streets Designated  6-5-5 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk; Right-
                                  of-Way
6-5-2 Stop Required               6-5-6 Stop When Traffic Obstructed
6-5-3 Four-Way Stop Intersections 6-5-7 Pedestrians' Right-of-Way
6-5-4 Yield Required              6-5-8 Official Traffic Controls and
                                  Pedestrian Controls
 
6-5-1 THROUGH STREETS DESIGNATED.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop, unless a yield is permitted or the
intersection is controlled by official traffic controls as designated by this
chapter, at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or
before entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersecting roadway where
the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before
entering an intersection with the following designated through streets:
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.322 and 321.345)
   1.   Alice’s Road from the south corporate limits to the north corporate
limits.
   2.   Berkshire Parkway from Alice’s Road west to Westgate Drive.
   3.   Berkshire Parkway from Hickman Road north to Alice’s Road.
   4.   Boston Parkway from N.W. 156th Street west to its terminus.
   5.   Buffalo Road from the east corporate limits to the west corporate
limits.
   6.   Country Club Boulevard from University Avenue to Hickman Road.
   7.   Douglas Parkway from the east corporate limits to the west corporate
limits.
   8.   Harbach Boulevard from N.W. 78th Street to N.W. 86th Street.
   9.   Hawthorn Drive from N.W. 142nd Street west to N.W. 152nd Street.
   10.   Hickman Road from the east corporate limits to the west corporate
limits.
   11.   Lake Pointe Drive from University Avenue to South Shore Drive/Willow
Drive.
   12.   Meredith Drive from the east corporate limits to the west corporate
limits.
   13.   N.W. 80th Place from Hickman Road to Harbach Boulevard.
   14.   N.W. 86th Street from University Avenue to Hickman Road.
   15.   N.W. 100th Street from University Avenue to Hickman Road.
   16.   N.W. 114th Street from University Avenue to Hickman Road.
   17.   N.W. 123rd Street from University Avenue to Woodlands Parkway.
   18.   N.W. 128th Street from University Avenue to Hickman Road.
   19.   N.W. 142nd Street from University Avenue to Hickman Road.
   20.   N.W. 152nd Street from Hickman Road to the north corporate limits.
   21.   N.W. 156th Street from the south corporate limits to the north
corporate limits.
   22.   Sheridan Avenue from N.W. 156th Street to Berkshire Parkway.
   23.   University Avenue from the east corporate limits to N.W. 78th Street.
   24.   University Avenue from N.W. 86th Street west to the west corporate
limits.
   25.   University Boulevard from N.W. 78th Street to N.W. 86th Street.
   26.   Westgate Drive from south corporate limit north to its terminus.
   27.   Woodlands Parkway from N.W. 123rd Street to N.W. 128th Street.
6-5-2 STOP REQUIRED.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop at the first opportunity at either the
clearly marked stop line, or before entering the crosswalk, or before entering
the intersection, or at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before
entering the following intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.322 and 321.345)
   1.   Ashleaf Court. Vehicles traveling east on Ashleaf Court shall stop at
Cedarwood Avenue.
   2.   Ashleaf Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Ashleaf Drive shall stop at
Cedarwood Avenue.
   3.   Baxter Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Baxter Drive shall stop at
N.W. 177th Street/Court.
   4.   Baxter Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Baxter Drive shall stop at
N.W. 178th Street/Court.
   5.   Beechwood Avenue. Vehicles traveling west on Beechwood Avenue shall
stop at N.W. 152nd Street.
   6.   Boston Parkway. Vehicles traveling east on Boston Parkway shall stop at
N.W. 152nd Street.
   7.   Buena Vista Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Buena Vista Drive shall
stop at N.W. 152nd Street.
   8.   Campbell Park Recreation Area. Vehicles exiting Campbell Park
recreation area shall stop at N.W. 123rd Street.
   9.   Carpenter Avenue. Vehicles traveling north on Carpenter Avenue shall
stop at Clark Street.
   10.   Cedarwood Avenue. Vehicles traveling north on Cedarwood Avenue shall
stop at Woodlands Parkway.
   11.   Clark Street. Vehicles traveling on Clark Street shall stop at N.W.
91st Street.
   12.   Clark Street. Vehicles traveling west on Clark Street shall stop at
N.W. 93rd Court.
   13.   College Drive. Vehicles traveling south on College Drive shall stop at
Harbach Boulevard.
   14.   Country Club Boulevard: Vehicles traveling north on Country Club
Boulevard shall stop at Hickman Road.
   15.   Drake Court. Vehicles traveling west on Drake Court shall stop at N.W.
78th Street.
   16.   Drake Street Vehicles traveling east on Drake Street shall stop at
N.W. 78th Street.
   17.   Elmcrest Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Elmcrest Drive shall stop
at N.W. 104th Street.
   18.   Elmcrest Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Elmcrest Drive shall stop
at N.W. 109th Street.
   19.   Forest Avenue. Vehicles traveling west on Forest Avenue shall stop at
N.W. 109th Street.
   20.   Harbach Boulevard. Vehicles traveling on Harbach Boulevard shall stop
at N.W. 78th Street.
   21.   Harbach Boulevard. Vehicles traveling west on Harbach Boulevard shall
stop at Swanson Boulevard.
   22.   Hawthorn Circle. Vehicles traveling east on Hawthorn Circle shall stop
at N.W. 159th Street.
   23.   Hawthorn Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Hawthorn Drive shall stop
at N.W. 159th Street.
   24.   Hazelwood Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Hazelwood Drive shall stop
at N.W. 131st Street.
   25.   Hickman Frontage Road. Vehicles traveling east on Hickman Frontage
Road shall stop at N.W. 108th Street.
   26.   Indian Hills Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Indian Hills Drive
shall stop at N.W. 96th Street.
   27.   Lake Shore Drive. Vehicles traveling on Lake Shore Drive shall stop at
Lakeview Drive.
   28.   Lincoln Avenue. Vehicles traveling west on Lincoln Avenue shall stop
at N.W. 131st Street.
   29.   Maddox Parkway. Vehicles traveling north on Maddox Parkway shall stop
at Swanson Boulevard.
   30.   Madison Circle. Vehicles traveling west on Madison Circle shall stop
at N.W. 169th Street.
   31.   Maple Street. Vehicles traveling on Maple Street shall stop at
Devonshire Parkway.
   32.   N.W. 90th Court. Vehicles traveling on N.W. 90th Court shall stop at
Indian Hills Drive.
   33.   N.W. 92nd Court. Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 92nd Court shall
stop at Swanson Boulevard.
   34.   N.W. 93rd Court. Vehicles traveling on N.W. 93rd Court shall stop at
Indian Hills Drive.
   35.   N.W. 94th Court. Vehicles traveling north on N.W. 94th Court shall
stop at Indian Hills Drive.
   36.   N.W. 99th Court. Vehicles traveling on N.W. 99th Court shall stop at
Clark Street.
   37.   N.W. 80th Place. Vehicles traveling north on N.W. 80th Place shall
stop at Hickman Road.
   38.   N.W. 80th Place. Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 80th Place shall
stop at Harbach Boulevard.
   39.   N.W. 90th Street. Vehicles traveling north on N.W. 90th Street shall
stop at Indian Hills Drive.
   40.   N.W. 90th Street. Vehicles traveling on N.W. 90th Street shall stop at
Franklin Avenue.
   41.   N.W. 91st Street. Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 91st Street shall
stop at Indian Hills Drive.
   42.   N.W. 94th Street. Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 94th Street shall
stop at Swanson Boulevard.
   43.   N.W. 103rd Street. Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 103rd Street shall
stop at Clark Street.
   44.   N.W. 105th Street. Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 105th Street shall
stop at Clark Street.
   45.   N.W. 106th Street. Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 106th Street shall
stop at Clark Street.
   46.   N.W. 107th Street. Vehicles traveling on N.W. 107th Street shall stop
at Clark Street.
   47.   N.W. 108th Street: Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 108th Street shall
stop at Clark Street.
   48.   N.W. 122nd Street. Vehicles traveling on N.W. 122nd Street shall stop
at Sunset Terrace.
   49.   N.W. 152nd Street. Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 152nd Street shall
stop at Wildwood Drive.
   50.   N.W. 153rd Street. Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 153rd Street shall
stop at Boston Parkway.
   51.   N.W. 164th Street. Vehicles traveling on N.W. 164th Street shall stop
at Tanglewood Drive.
   52.   N.W. 174th Street. Vehicles traveling north on N.W. 174th Street shall
stop at Aurora Drive.
   53.   Ricardo Road. Vehicles traveling east on Ricardo Road shall stop at
N.W. 104th Street.
   54.   Ridgeview Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Ridgeview Drive shall stop
at N.W. 152nd Street.
   55.   Rosewood Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Rosewood Drive shall stop
at N.W. 149th Street.
   56.   Rosewood Drive. Vehicles traveling on Rosewood Drive shall stop at
N.W. 152nd Street.
   57.   Summit Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Summit Drive shall stop at
N.W. 149th Street.
   58.   Sunset Terrace. Vehicles traveling on Sunset Terrace shall stop at
N.W. 103rd Street.
   59.   Sunset Terrace. Vehicles traveling on Sunset Terrace shall stop at
N.W. 104th Street.
   60.   Sunset Terrace. Vehicles traveling west on Sunset Terrace shall stop
at N.W. 131st Street.
   61.   Walnut Ridge Circle. Vehicles traveling on Walnut Ridge Circle shall
stop at N.W. 131st Street.
   62.   Walnut Ridge Road. Vehicles traveling on Walnut Ridge Road shall stop
at N.W. 108th Street.
   63.   Wildwood Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Wildwood Drive shall stop
at N.W. 149th Street.
   64.   Wildwood Park Entrance. Vehicles exiting Wildwood Park shall stop at
Wildwood Drive.
   65.   Woodcrest Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Woodcrest Drive shall stop
at N.W. 149th Street.
   66.   Woodcrest Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Woodcrest Drive shall stop
at Lakeview Drive.
6-5-3 FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop at the first opportunity at either the
clearly marked stop line or before entering the crosswalk or before entering
the intersection or at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before
entering the following designated four-way stop intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.322 and 321.345)
   1.   Clark Street and N.W. 92nd Street. All vehicles approaching the
intersection of Clark Street and N.W. 92nd Street shall stop before entering
such intersection.
   2.   Clark Street and N.W. 104th Street. All vehicles approaching the
intersection of Clark Street and N.W. 104th Street shall stop before entering
such intersection.
   3.   Clark Street and N.W. 109th Street. All vehicles approaching the
intersection of Clark Street and N.W. 109th Street shall stop before entering
such intersection.
   4.   Country Club Boulevard and Lake Shore Drive. All vehicles approaching
the intersection of Country Club Boulevard and Lake Shore Drive shall stop
before entering such intersection.
   5.   Dellwood Drive and Devonshire Parkway. All vehicles approaching the
intersection of Dellwood Drive and Devonshire Parkway shall stop before
entering such intersection.
   6.   Douglas Parkway and Berkshire Parkway. All vehicles approaching the
intersection of Douglas Parkway and Berkshire Parkway shall stop before
entering such intersection.
   7.   Franklin Avenue and N.W. 82nd Street. All vehicles approaching the
intersection of N.W. 82nd Street and Franklin Avenue shall stop before entering
such intersection.
   8.   Indian Hills Drive and N.W. 92nd Street. All vehicles approaching the
intersection of N.W. 92nd Street and Indian Hills Drive shall stop before
entering such intersection.
   9.   Lake Pointe Drive and South Shore Drive/Willow Drive. All vehicles
approaching the intersection of Lake Pointe Drive and South Shore Drive/Willow
Drive shall stop before entering such intersection.
   10.   Sunset Terrace and N.W. 123rd Street. All vehicles approaching the
intersection of N.W. 123rd Street and Sunset Terrace shall stop before entering
such intersection.
6-5-4 YIELD REQUIRED.
   Every driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow to a speed
reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety, shall stop
at the first opportunity at either a clearly marked stop line, or before
entering a crosswalk, or before entering the intersection or traffic circle, or
at the point nearest the intersecting roadway, or where the driver has a view
of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway or within a traffic circle.
After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle on the intersecting roadway which has entered the intersection, or an
approaching vehicle within a traffic circle, or which is approaching so closely
as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving
across or within an intersection or a traffic circle. Drivers shall yield in
accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.322 and 321.345)
   1.   Alice Avenue. Vehicles traveling east on Alice Avenue shall yield at
N.W. 82nd Street.
   2.   Berkshire Parkway. Vehicles traveling on Berkshire Parkway shall yield
at Boston Parkway.
   3.   Berkshire Parkway. Vehicles traveling on Berkshire Parkway shall yield
at Sheridan Avenue.
   4.   Berkshire Parkway. Vehicle traveling west on Berkshire Parkway shall
yield at Westgate Drive.
   5.   Boston Parkway. Vehicles traveling on Boston Parkway shall yield at
Berkshire Parkway.
   6.   Boston Parkway. Vehicles traveling on Boston Parkway shall yield at
N.W. 156th Street.
   7.   Carpenter Avenue. Vehicles traveling west on Carpenter Avenue shall
yield at N.W. 94th Court.
   8.   Clark Street. Vehicles traveling east on Clark Street shall yield at
N.W. 84th Street.
   9.   Clark Street. Vehicles traveling on Clark Street shall yield at N.W.
101st Street.
   10.   Clark Street. Vehicles traveling on Clark Street shall yield at N.W.
102nd Street.
   11.   Franklin Avenue: Vehicles traveling east on Franklin Avenue shall
yield at N.W. 81st Street.
   12.   Hickman Frontage Road. All vehicles turning right from Hickman Road at
10930 Hickman Road shall yield to vehicles on the Hickman Frontage Road before
entering roadway.
   13.   Madison Drive. Vehicles traveling on Madison Drive shall yield at
Westgate Drive.
   14.   N.W. 101st Street. Vehicles traveling on N.W. 101st Street shall yield
at Clark Street.
   15.   N.W. 102nd Street. Vehicles traveling on N.W. 102nd Street shall yield
at Clark Street.
   16.   N.W. 156th Street. Vehicles traveling on N.W. 156th Street shall yield
at Boston Parkway.
   17.   Northwest Drive. Vehicles traveling on Northwest Drive shall yield at
N.W. 81st Street.
   18.   Northwest Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Northwest Drive shall
yield at N.W. 82nd Street.
   19.   Sheridan Avenue. Vehicles traveling west on Sheridan Avenue shall
yield at Berkshire Parkway.
   20.   Westgate Drive. Vehicles traveling on Westgate Drive shall yield at
Berkshire Parkway.
   21.   Westgate Drive. Vehicles traveling on Westgate Drive shall yield at
Madison Drive.
6-5-5 STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK; RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk
area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when said driver
can do so without danger to pedestrian traffic, and said driver shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which said driver’s
vehicle is entering. The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway
from a private road or driveway shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to
driving on said highway and shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on said highway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
6-5-6 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
6-5-7 PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver
of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need
be, to so yield to a pedestrian or a person riding a bicycle crossing the
roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
(Section 6-5-7 – Ord. 1154 – Oct. 24 Supp.)
6-5-8 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROLS AND PEDESTRIAN CONTROLS.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop at the first opportunity at either the
clearly marked stop line or before entering the crosswalk or before entering
the intersection or at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before
entering the following intersections, and every driver and pedestrian shall
observe and comply with the directions provided by official traffic control
signals at the following intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.322 and 321.256)
   1.   Intersection of Country Club Boulevard and University Avenue.
   2.   Intersection of Hickman Road and the northbound exit-entrance ramps to
Interstate 35/80.
   3.   Intersection of Hickman Road and the southbound exit-entrance ramps to
Interstate 35/80.
   4.   Intersection of N.W. 12th Avenue (commonly known as University Avenue)
and the northbound entrance ramp of Interstate 35/80.
   5.   Intersection of N.W. 12th Avenue (commonly known as University Avenue)
and the southbound exit ramp of Interstate 35/80.
   6.   Intersection of N.W. 94th Court and University Avenue.
   7.   Intersection of N.W. 82nd Street and Hickman Road.
   8.   Intersection of N.W. 86th Street and Alice Avenue.
   9.   Intersection of N.W. 86th Street and Dahl's Driveway.
   10.   Intersection of N.W. 86th Street and Franklin Avenue.
   11.   Intersection of N.W. 86th Street and Harbach Boulevard.
   12.   Intersection of N.W. 86th Street and Hickman Road.
   13.   Intersection of N.W. 86th Street and University Avenue.
   14.   Intersection of N.W. 86th Street and University Boulevard.
   15.   Intersection of N.W. 88th Street and University Avenue.
   16.   Intersection of N.W. 90th Street and University Avenue.
   17.   Intersection of N.W. 100th Street and Clark Street.
   18.   Intersection of N.W. 100th Street and Hickman Road.
   19.   Intersection of N.W. 100th Street and Lincoln Avenue.
   20.   Intersection of N.W. 100th Street and Swanson Boulevard.
   21.   Intersection of N.W. 100th Street and University Avenue.
   22.   Intersection of N.W. 102nd Street and University Avenue.
   23.   Intersection of N.W. 104th Street and Hickman Road.
   24.   Intersection of N.W. 104th Street and University Avenue.
   25.   Intersection of N.W. 107th Street and University Avenue.
   26.   Intersection of N.W. 111th Street and Hickman Road.
   27.   Intersection of N.W. 111th Street and University Avenue.
   28.   Intersection of N.W. 114th Street and Forest Avenue.
   29.   Intersection of N.W. 114th Street and University Avenue.
   30.   Intersection of N.W. 118th Street and Hickman Road.
   31.   Intersection of N.W. 118th Street and University Avenue.
   32.   Intersection of N.W. 123rd Street and University Avenue.
   33.   Intersection of N.W. 128th Street and Hickman Road.
   34.   Intersection of N.W. 128th Street and Sunset Terrace.
   35.   Intersection of N.W. 128th Street and University Avenue.
   36.   Intersection of N.W. 128th Street and Woodlands Parkway.
   37.   Intersection of N.W. 138th Street and University Avenue.
   38.   Intersection of N.W. 142nd Street and Hickman Road.
   39.   Intersection of N.W. 142nd Street and University Avenue.
   40.   Intersection of N.W. 156th Street and Hickman Road.
   41.   Intersection of Patricia Drive and Hickman Road.
CHAPTER 6
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
 
6-6-1 Exercise of Police Power 6-6-6 Unlawful Use of Controlled Access Facility
6-6-2 Definition               6-6-6 Parking Restricted
6-6-3 Right of Access Limited  6-6-7 Penalty
6-6-4 Access Controls Imposed
 
6-6-1 EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER.
   This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City
under Chapter 306A of the Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public
peace, health, safety, and for the promotion of the general welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1)
6-6-2 DEFINITION.
   The term “controlled access facility” means a highway or street especially
designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or occupants of
abutting land or other persons have no right or easement, or only a controlled
right or easement of access, light, air, or view by reason of the fact that
their property abuts upon such controlled access facility, or for any other
reason.
6-6-3 RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED.
   No person has any right of ingress or egress to or from abutting lands onto
or across any controlled access facility, except at such designated points at
which access is permitted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)
6-6-4 ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED.
   There are hereby fixed and established controlled access facilities within
the City, described as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3)
   1.   Project U-6-4(4) - 40-77. On the Primary Road System extension
improvement, Project U-6-4(4) - 40-77, Primary Road U.S. 6, within the City,
described as follows:
On Hickman Road (U.S. 6) from the west corporation line to the east corporation
line regulating access to and from abutting properties along said highway all
in accordance with the plans for such improvement identified as project U-6-4
(4) - 40-77, on file in the office of the Clerk.
6-6-5 UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3 and 321.366)
   1.   Cross Dividing Line. Drive a vehicle over, upon, or across any curb,
central dividing section, or other separation or dividing line on such
controlled access facilities.
   2.   Turns. Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn except through an
opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section, separation, or
line.
   3.   Use of Lanes. Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane provided for
that purpose and in the proper direction and to the right of the central
dividing curb, separation, section, or line.
   4.   Enter Facility. Drive any vehicle into the controlled access facility
from a local service road except through an opening provided for that purpose
in the dividing curb or dividing section or dividing line which separates such
service road from the controlled access facility property.
6-6-6 PARKING RESTRICTED.
   The parking of vehicles on or along controlled access facilities is
restricted as follows:
   1.   Minor Street Approaches. Parking shall be prohibited on all minor
street approaches for a distance of 100 feet in advance of the stop sign.
   2.   Minor Street Exits. Parking shall be prohibited on the exit side of a
minor street for a distance of 100 feet.
   3.   Hickman Road. Parking is prohibited on that portion of Hickman Road
(U.S. 6) lying within the corporate limits of the City from the west
corporation line to the east corporation line.
   4.   Service Roads. Parking is prohibited on the following service roads:
      A.   From N.W. 114th Street (State Farm Road) easterly to the street
connection at station 586+79.
      B.   From station 644+32 easterly 640 feet to the street connection at
station 650+72.
      C.   From N.W. 86th Street (Clive Road) (station 665+65) easterly 330
feet to station 668+95. This street is approximately 210 feet south of and
parallel to Hickman Road (U.S. 6).
   5.   N.W. 86th Street. Parking is prohibited on N.W. 86th Street (Clive
Road) from Hickman Road (U.S. 6) south 500 feet.
   6.   N.W. 82nd Street. Parking is prohibited on N.W. 82nd Street from
Hickman Road (U.S. 6) south 150 feet.
6-6-7 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 7
BICYCLE REGULATIONS AND REGISTRATION
6-7-1 Definitions                       6-7-11 Place of Riding
6-7-2 Alteration of Serial Frame Number 6-7-12 Bicycle Lanes
6-7-3 Sirens and Whistles Prohibited    6-7-13 Emerging from Alley or Driveway
6-7-4 Lamps and Reflectors              6-7-14 Operation on Sidewalk
6-7-5 Stopping                          6-7-15 Clinging to Other Vehicles
6-7-6 Applicability of Motor Vehicle    6-7-16 Following Emergency Vehicles
Laws
6-7-7 Obedience to Signals              6-7-17 Parking
6-7-8 Improper Riding                   6-7-18 Reckless Operation
6-7-9 Carrying Packages                 6-7-19 Violations; Penalty
6-7-10 Control with Hands on Handlebars
 
6-7-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Bicycle” means either of the following:
      A.   A device having up to four wheels and having at least one saddle or
seat for the use of a rider which is propelled by human power.
      B.   A device having up to four wheels with fully operable pedals and an
electric motor of one horsepower or less.
   2.   “Multi-use trail” means a way or place, the use of which is controlled
by the City as an owner of real property, or under the control of the City by
easement, designated by the multi-use recreational trail maps, as approved by
resolution by the Council, and no multi-use trail shall be considered as a
street or highway.
6-7-2 ALTERATION OF SERIAL FRAME NUMBER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove,
destroy, mutilate, or alter the manufacturer’s serial frame number of any
bicycle.
6-7-3 SIRENS AND WHISTLES PROHIBITED.
   A bicycle shall not be equipped with and a person shall not use upon a
bicycle any siren or whistle. This section shall not apply to bicycles ridden
by peace officers in the line of duty.
6-7-4 LAMPS AND REFLECTORS.
   1.   Every bicycle ridden at any time from sunset to sunrise and at such
other times when conditions such as fog, snow, sleet, or rain provide
insufficient lighting to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the
highway at a distance of 300 feet ahead shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of at least 300 feet to
the front.
   2.   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a
red light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear; except that a red
reflector may be used in lieu of a rear light.
   3.   Equivalent equipment such as headlamps and red light attachments to the
arm or leg may be used in lieu of a lamp on the front and a red light on the
rear of the bicycle, provided such equipment is visible from a distance of at
least 300 feet to both the front and rear of the bicycle.
   4.   A peace officer riding a police bicycle is not required to use either
front or rear lamps if duty so requires.
6-7-5 STOPPING.
   Every bicycle used upon the City streets, sidewalks, highways, park roads,
or multi-use trails shall be able to come to a complete stop within a safe
distance.
6-7-6 APPLICABILITY OF MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS.
   Every person operating a bicycle upon the City streets, highways, park
roads, or multi-use trails shall be subject to this chapter and other City
traffic ordinances and the State statutes applicable to the drivers of motor
vehicles, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to
those provisions of ordinances and statutes which by their nature can have no
application or those provisions for which specific exceptions have been set
forth regarding police bicycles.
6-7-7 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.
   Every person operating a bicycle shall obey the directions of official
traffic signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to other vehicles,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer, and shall obey direction signs
relative to turns permitted, unless such person dismounts from the bicycle,
when they shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.
6-7-8 IMPROPER RIDING.
   1.   A person propelling a bicycle on any street, sidewalk, highway, park
road, or multi-use recreational trail, shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached to the bicycle and shall not use
a bicycle to carry more persons at one time than the number of persons for
which the bicycle is designed and equipped.
   2.   This section does not apply to the use of a bicycle in a parade or
special event authorized by the City.
6-7-9 CARRYING PACKAGES.
   No person operating a bicycle upon a street, sidewalk, highway, park road,
or multi-use trail shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents
the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
6-7-10 CONTROL WITH HANDS ON HANDLEBARS.
   The operator of a bicycle upon a street, sidewalk, highway, park road, or
multi-use trail shall keep the bicycle under control at all times and at all
times during operation shall have one or both hands upon the handlebars and the
feet engaged with the braking device if the braking device is designed to be
actuated by the feet.
6-7-11 PLACE OF RIDING.
   1.   Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway at a speed less than the
normal speed of traffic moving in the same direction shall ride as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway except under any of
the following situations:
      A.   When overtaking and passing another bicycle vehicle proceeding in
the same direction.
      B.   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private
road or driveway.
      C.   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions (including, but not
limited to, fixed, or moving objects, vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, animals,
surface hazards, or substandard width lanes) that make it unsafe to continue
along the right-hand curb or edge. For purposes of this section, a “substandard
width lane” is a lane that is too narrow for a bicycle and a vehicle to travel
safely side by side within the lane.
      D.   A facility that would allow bicycle traffic on the left side of the
roadway.
   2.   Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway which carries traffic in
one direction only and has two or more marked traffic lanes, may ride as near
the left-hand curb or edge of such roadway as practicable.
   3.   When so riding upon any multi-use trail with other cyclists, there
shall not be more than two abreast.
   4.   This section does not apply to the use of a bicycle in a parade or
special event authorized by the City.
6-7-12 BICYCLE LANES.
   1.   Whenever a bicycle lane has been established on a roadway, any person
operating a bicycle upon the roadway moving in the same direction may ride
within the bicycle lane.
   2.   Any person operating a bicycle within a bicycle lane may move out of
the lane when overtaking and passing another bicycle, vehicle, or pedestrian
within the lane or about to enter the lane if such overtaking and passing
cannot be done safely within the lane.
   3.   No person operating a bicycle shall leave a bicycle lane until the
movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after giving an
appropriate signal.
   4.   No person shall drive a motor vehicle in a bicycle lane established on
a roadway except as follows:
      A.   To park where parking is permitted.
      B.   To enter or leave the roadway.
      C.   To prepare for a turn within a distance of 200 feet from the
intersection.
6-7-13 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on
the sidewalk or sidewalk area and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
6-7-14 OPERATION ON SIDEWALK.
   Bicycles may be operated upon the public sidewalks in a careful and prudent
manner, except where signs are erected to prohibit riding on the sidewalk.
Every person lawfully operating a bicycle upon a public sidewalk, shall yield
the right-of-way when approaching a pedestrian and shall give an audible signal
before overtaking and passing.
6-7-15 CLINGING TO OTHER VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle on a street, sidewalk, highway, park road,
or multi-use trail shall attach the bicycle or themselves to any moving vehicle
by towrope, handgrip, or otherwise.
6-7-16 FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   No person riding a bicycle shall follow closer than 500 feet of an emergency
vehicle as defined by Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa, which has emergency
lights or siren activated, and shall not stop, park, or leave a bicycle within
500 feet of an emergency vehicle stopped in response to an emergency.
6-7-17 PARKING.
   No person shall leave a bicycle lying on its side on any sidewalk, or shall
park a bicycle on a sidewalk in any other position, so that there is not an
adequate path for pedestrian traffic.
6-7-18 RECKLESS OPERATION.
   No person shall operate a bicycle with willful or wanton disregard for the
safety of persons or property.
6-7-19 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 8
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
 
6-8-1 Purpose                    6-8-6 Hours of Operation
6-8-2 Definitions                6-8-7 Thaw Ban
6-8-3 General Regulations        6-8-8 Negligence
6-8-4 Operation of Snowmobiles   6-8-9 Accident Reports
6-8-5 Operation of ATVs And UTVs 6-8-10 Penalty
 
6-8-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles, off-road utility vehicles, and snowmobiles within the City.
6-8-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized vehicle, with not less
than three and not more than six non-highway tires, that is limited in engine
displacement to less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to
less than 1,200 pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled
by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
   2.   “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat
or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering
control and that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain.
“Off-road motorcycle” includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a
certificate of title and registered for highway use under Chapter 321 of the
Code of Iowa, but which contains design features that enable operation over
natural terrain. An operator of an off-road motorcycle is also subject to the
provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
   3.   “Off-road utility vehicle” or “UTV” means a motorized vehicle, with not
less than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized tracks,
that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled
by the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for control. “Off-road
utility vehicle” or “UTV” includes the following vehicles:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
      A.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 1” includes vehicles with a total
dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
      B.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 2” includes vehicles, other than
Type 1 vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less and a width of
65 inches or less.
      C.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 3” includes vehicles with a total
dry weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches, or
both.
An operator of an UTV is also subject to the provisions of this chapter
governing the operation of ATVs.
   4.   “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs less than 1,000
pounds, that uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a
width of 48 inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis, or tread, and
is designed for travel on snow or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-
terrain vehicle that has been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type
tracks, or treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
6-8-3 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle, or off-road utility
vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa, or a
snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of
the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource
Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their registration,
numbering, equipment, and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G and Ch. 321I)
6-8-4 OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.
   The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as
to where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:
   1.   Streets. Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets which have not
been plowed during the snow season.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])
   2.   Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only
under the following circumstances:
      A.   Direct Route. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street within the
City for the sole and exclusive purpose of using the most direct roadway for
the ingress to and egress from the City. No snowmobile shall be driven on any
roadway solely for entertainment or pleasure.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
      B.   Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an
emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the
roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
      C.   Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a
prohibited street, provided all of the following occur:
         (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to
the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a
quick and safe crossing;
         (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
street;
         (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
         (4)   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
   3.   Railroad Right-of-Way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a
railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing, and notwithstanding any
other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])
   4.   Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails
except where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4g])
   5.   Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any
park, playground or upon any other City owned property without the express
permission of the City.
   6.   Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the
sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for
purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is
authorized by this chapter.
6-8-5 OPERATION OF ATVS AND UTVS.
   The operators of ATVs and UTVs shall comply with the following restrictions
as to where ATVs and UTVs may be operated within the City:
   1.   Streets. ATVs and UTVs may be operated on roadways or highways in
accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa. A City may regulate the
operation of registered ATVs and UTVs and may designate streets under the
jurisdiction of the City within its corporate limits, and two-lane primary and
secondary road extensions in the City, which may be used for the operation of
such vehicles. In designating such streets, the City may authorize ATVs and
UTVs to stop at service stations or convenience stores along a designated
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 and 3])
   2.   Trails. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except
where designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])
   3.   Railroad Right-of-Way. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way. An ATV or UTV may be driven directly across a
railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any
other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])
   4.   Parks and Other City Land. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated in any
park, playground, or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City.
   5.   Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated upon the
public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and
the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”
   6.   Direct Crossing. An ATV or UTV may make a direct crossing of a highway
that is not part of the interstate road system provided all of the following
occur:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[5])
      A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing.
      B.   The ATV or UTV is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way of the highway.
      C.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
      D.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or highway.
The crossing is made from a street, roadway, or highway on which the ATV or UTV
is authorized to operate to a street, roadway, or highway on which such vehicle
is authorized to operate.
6-8-6 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No ATV, UTV, or snowmobile shall be operated in the City between the hours
of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except for emergency situations or for loading and
unloading from a transport trailer.
6-8-7 THAW BAN.
   Snowmobiles shall not be operated during a publicized thaw ban in areas
posted to prohibit such operation.
6-8-8 NEGLIGENCE.
   The owner and operator of an ATV, UTV, or snowmobile are liable for any
injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV, UTV, or
snowmobile. The owner of an ATV, UTV, or snowmobile shall be liable for any
such injury or damage only if the owner was the operator of the ATV, UTV, or
snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the
owner’s consent to operate the ATV, UTV, or snowmobile at the time the injury
or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321G.18 and 321I.19)
6-8-9 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   Whenever an ATV, UTV, or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in
injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500.00 or more,
either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify
a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with
State law.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321G.10 and 321I.11)
6-8-10 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 9
ABANDONED VEHICLES
 
6-9-1 Definitions                    6-9-6 Disposal of Totally Inoperable
                                     Vehicles
6-9-2 Authority to Take Possession   6-9-7 Proceeds from Sales
6-9-3 Notice by Mail                 6-9-8 Duties of Demolisher
6-9-4 Fees for Impoundment           6-9-9 Penalty
6-9-5 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles  
 
6-9-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1])
   1.   “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
      A.   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than 24 hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more wheels or
other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
      B.   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more
than 24 hours.
      C.   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private
property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property
for more than 24 hours.
      D.   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police
authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of 10 days. However, a police
authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the 10 day period by
commencing the notification process.
      E.   Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority
to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
      F.   A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the
Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment
fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out
the impoundment order.
   2.   “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of
Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap, or
scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
   3.   “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or establishment,
motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
   4.   “Police authority” means the Iowa state patrol or any law enforcement
agency of a County or City
6-9-2 AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION.
   A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request
of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic,
shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take
into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The police authority
may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a private
entity, equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving,
storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles. If a police authority employs a
private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police authority shall
provide the private entity with the names and addresses of the registered
owners, all lien holders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle
or the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
6-9-3 NOTICE BY MAIL.
   1.   A police authority or private entity that takes into custody an
abandoned vehicle shall send notice by certified mail that the vehicle has been
taken into custody, no more than 20 days after taking custody of the vehicle.
Notice shall be sent to the last known address of record of the last known
registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known
claimant to the vehicle.
   2.   Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. The notice shall include all
of the following:
      A.   A description of the year, make, model and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle.
      B.   The location of the facility where the vehicle is being held.
      C.   Information for the persons receiving the notice of their right to
reclaim the vehicle and personal property contained therein within 10 days
after the effective date of the notice. Persons may reclaim the vehicle or
personal property upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges
resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of
the notice required pursuant to this section.
      D.   A statement that failure of the owner, lienholders, or claimants to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the
time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders, and claimants
of all right, title, claim, and interest in the vehicle or personal property.
      E.   A statement that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property
is deemed consent for the police authority or private entity to sell the
vehicle at a public auction or dispose of the vehicle to a demolisher and to
dispose of the personal property by sale or destruction.
   3.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity
without a police authority’s initiative, the notice shall state that the
private entity may claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90
(1) of the Code of Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the vehicle.
   4.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a police authority
or by a private entity hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that
any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who
disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police
authority or private entity, or of the assessment of fees and charges provided
by this section, may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority
to contest those matters.
   5.   If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise
their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the 10-day
reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders, or claimants shall no longer have
any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal
property.
   6.   A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right,
title, claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders, or claimants after the
expiration of the 10-day reclaiming period.
   7.   If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the
identities and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders,
notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area
where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of
notice under Subsection 2 of this section. The published notice may contain
multiple listings of abandoned vehicles, but shall be published within the same
time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed
notice in Subsection 2 of this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
6-9-4 FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.
   The owner, lien holder, or claimant shall pay $10.00 if claimed within five
days of impounding, plus $2.50 for each additional day within the reclaiming
period, plus towing charges, if stored by the City, or towing and storage fees,
if stored in a public garage, whereupon said vehicle shall be released. The
amount of towing charges, and the rate of storage charges by privately owned
garages, shall be established by such facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
6-9-5 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided in this chapter,
the police authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether
or not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall
dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
6-9-6 DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found
any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle
whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of such motor
vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without notification
procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more wheels or
other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police
authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant
shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate and shall
surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
6-9-7 PROCEEDS FROM SALES.
   Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the
expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification
required, in accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner
of the motor vehicle or entitled lien holder for 90 days, and then shall be
deposited in the state road use tax fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails
to realize the amount necessary to meet costs, the police authority shall apply
for reimbursement from the department of transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
6-9-8 DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.
   Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor
vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or otherwise demolish such
motor vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or demolish
a vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for
the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
6-9-9 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
TITLE 7 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS
7-1-1 Excavations                      7-1-10 Traveling on Barricaded Streets
                                       or Alleys
7-1-2 Vacation and Disposal of Streets 7-1-11 Use of Parking
7-1-3 Street Grades                    7-1-12 Use for Business Purposes
7-1-4 Naming of Streets                7-1-13 Washing Vehicles
7-1-5 Railroad Regulations             7-1-14 Burning Prohibited
7-1-6 Removal of Warning Devices       7-1-15 Maintenance of Parking or Terrace
7-1-7 Obstructing or Defacing          7-1-16 Dumping of Snow
7-1-8 Debris Deposits Prohibited       7-1-17 Underground Irrigation Systems in
                                       Parking
7-1-9 Playing In Streets               7-1-18 Penalty
 
7-1-1 EXCAVATIONS.
   Except to install a mailbox, no person shall dig, excavate or in any manner
disturb any street, parking, or alley except in accordance with the following:
† 7
   1.   Permit Required. No excavation shall be commenced without first
obtaining a permit therefore. A written application for such permit shall be
filed with the City and shall contain the following:
      A.   An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in
front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
      B.   A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is
to be made;
      C.   The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and
restoration of the street or alley surface; and
      D.   Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
   2.   Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner
which will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the
uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street.
   3.   Barricades, Fencing, and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing, and
warning lights meeting standards in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and as otherwise specified by the City shall be so placed as to protect
the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or
maintaining adequate barricades, fencing, or warning lights shall be paid to
the City by the permit holder/property owner.
   4.   Insurance Required. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of
insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance
in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents
and employees for the following minimum amounts:
      A.   Bodily Injury - $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
      B.   Property Damage - $50,000.00 per accident.
   5.   Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the
condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner
satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the permit holder/property owner.
   6.   Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City.
Backfill shall not be deemed completed, nor resurfacing of any improved street
or alley surface begun, until such backfill is inspected and approved by the
City. The permit holder/property owner shall provide the City with notice at
least 24 hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is desired.
   7.   Completion by City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be
discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of 24 hours after the
approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the City
has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and charge any expenses
therefor to the permit holder/property owner.
   8.   Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the
excavation shall be borne by the permit holder or property owner. The permit
holder and owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
   9.   Notification. At least 48 hours prior to the commencement of the
excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, the person
performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and
provide the center with the information required under Section 480.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
   10.   Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application, a permit shall be
issued. A separate permit shall be required for each excavation.
 
Notes
7 † EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Title 10, Chapter 11 of this code.
7-1-2 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS.
   1.   Power to Vacate. When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in
the best interest of the City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or
any public grounds, the Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])
   2.   Planning and Zoning Commission. Any proposal to vacate a street, alley,
portion thereof, or any public grounds shall be referred by the Council to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for its study and recommendation prior to
further consideration by the Council. The Commission shall submit a written
report including recommendations to the Council within 30 days after the date
the proposed vacation is referred to the commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   3.   Notice of Vacation Hearing. The Council shall cause to be published a
notice of public hearing of the time at which the proposal to vacate shall be
considered.
   4.   Findings Required. No street, alley, portion thereof, or any public
grounds shall be vacated unless the Council finds that:
      A.   Public Use. The street, alley, portion thereof, or any public ground
proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore,
its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified.
      B.   Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of
property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
   5.   Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys. When, in the judgment of the
Council, it would be in the best interest of the City to dispose of a vacated
street or alley, portion thereof or public ground, the Council may do so in
accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
   6.   Disposal by Gift Limited. The City may not dispose of real property by
gift except to a governmental body for a public purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7[3])
EDITOR’S NOTE
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public
grounds and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED           ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
49            December 7, 1967                
51            March 21, 1968                  
72            November 20, 1969               
82            July 2, 1970                    
126           November 2, 1972                
131           March 29, 1973                  
142           August 16, 1973                 
146           September 6, 1973               
210           May 27, 1977                    
344           May 20, 1986                    
370           April 2, 1987                   
411           August 18, 1988                 
438           April 27, 1989                  
439           April 27, 1989                  
449           October 5, 1989                 
456           March 15, 1990                  
463           August 2, 1990                  
469           October 4, 1990                 
483           March 28, 1991                  
489           May 16, 1991                    
536           March 4, 1993                   
585           November 17, 1994               
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
 
7-1-3 STREET GRADES.
   1.   Established Grades. The grades of all streets, alleys, and sidewalks,
which have been heretofore established by ordinance are hereby confirmed,
ratified, and established as official grades.
   2.   Record Maintained. The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established
grades and furnish information concerning such grades upon request.
   3.   Datum Plane. The United States coast and geodetic survey datum plane
shall be used as the reference plan in establishing all elevations and grades
within the City. The official benchmark system shall be on file in the office
of the Global Information Systems (GIS) Coordinator.
EDITOR’S NOTE 
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted, establishing street or sidewalk grades and remain
in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED           ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
57            August 19, 1968                 
62            December 19, 1968               
70            October 9, 1969                 
77            May 21, 1970                    
135           July 19, 1973                   
151           October 4, 1973                 
185           August 7, 1975                  
186           August 7, 1975                  
228           November 16, 1978               
347           June 19, 1986                   
371           April 30, 1987                  
403           June 2, 1988                    
404           June 2, 1988                    
405           June 2, 1988                    
409           July 21, 1988                   
466           September 6, 1990               
521           August 20, 1992                 
569           June 2, 1994                    
571           June 22, 1994                   
572           June 22, 1994                   
596           June 15, 1995                   
662           January 8, 1998                 
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
 
7-1-4 NAMING OF STREETS.
   1.   Naming New Streets. New streets shall be assigned names in accordance
with the following:
      A.   Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are
natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the
existing street.
      B.   Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a
subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
      C.   Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be
referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
   2.   Changing Name of Street. The Council may, by resolution, change the
name of a street.
   3.   Recording Street Names. Following official action naming or changing
the name of a street, the Mayor and Clerk shall file a copy thereof with the
County Recorder, County Auditor, and County Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
7-1-5 RAILROAD REGULATIONS.
   1.   Definitions. For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
      A.   “Operator” means an individual, partnership, corporation, or other
association which owns, operates, drives, or controls a railroad train.
      B.   “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[29])
   2.   Obstructing Streets.
      A.   Operators shall not operate any train in such a manner as to prevent
vehicular use of any highway, street, or alley for a period of time in excess
of 10 minutes, except:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)
         (1)   Comply With Signals. When necessary to comply with signals
affecting the safety of the movement of trains.
         (2)   Avoid Striking. When necessary to avoid striking any object or
person on the track.
         (3)   Disabled. When the train is disabled.
         (4)   Safety Regulations: When necessary to comply with governmental
safety regulations including, but not limited to, speed ordinances and speed
regulations.
         (5)   In Motion: When the train is in motion, except while engaged in
switching operations.
         (6)   No Traffic: When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use
the crossing.
      B.   An employee is not guilty of a violation of this subsection if the
employee’s action was necessary to comply with the direct orders or
instructions of a railroad corporation or its supervisors. Guilt is then with
the railroad corporation.
   3.   Crossing Maintenance. Operators shall construct and maintain good,
sufficient, and safe crossings over any street traversed by their rails.
(Bourett vs. Chicago & N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 [1943])
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)
7-1-6 REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.
   It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy, or
carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard, or other
article or thing, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected, or placed
thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places
in said street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
7-1-7 OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.
   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface, or injure any street or
alley in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
7-1-8 DEBRIS DEPOSITS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any
glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, leaves, grass, or any other debris or any other substance likely to
injure any person, animal, or vehicle or which, if washed into the storm sewer,
could contaminate waterways or clog the storm sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
7-1-9 PLAYING IN STREETS.
   It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets or
alleys, except in the areas blocked off by resolution of the City for such
purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
7-1-10 TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREETS OR ALLEYS.
   It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street
or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed
thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer, or
member of the Fire Department.
7-1-11 USE OF PARKING.
   It is unlawful to park, store, place, temporarily or permanently, any car,
truck, vehicle, junk, or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind
upon any street parking without permission of the Council.
7-1-12 USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.
   It is unlawful to park, store, or place, temporarily or permanently, any
machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale, or offering
same for sale without permission of the Council.
7-1-13 WASHING VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk or street for the
purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck, equipment, or any vehicle
of any kind.
7-1-14 BURNING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or other combustible
material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
7-1-15 MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE.
   It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain
that portion of the public right-of-way outside the lot and property lines and
inside the curb lines of the public streets (the “public parking”), except that
the abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or
deadwood on the public parking. The public parking area shall be planted
entirely with: a) turf grass; b) approved vegetative ground cover; c) permitted
plantings, as planted and maintained at a height not to exceed 48 inches in an
area located within 36 inches of a single mailbox that is used for U.S. mail
delivery; or d) approved landscape materials or permitted plantings, as
authorized in a right-of-way landscaping permit approved by the Public Works
Director, consistent with the standards set forth in this section.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the public parking must be easily traversable by
individuals and any materials or plantings placed in the public parking may
not: a) interfere with the ability of individuals to freely enter or exit their
vehicles from or onto the public parking; b) interfere with the ability of
motorists to see vehicles or pedestrians on the public right-of-way, including
the public sidewalk or trail; or c) interfere with the use, maintenance of
utilities, or drainage of the right-of-way, all as determined by the Public
Works Director or their designee. The term “approved vegetative ground cover”
means a ground cover that does not grow higher than 10 inches and is of a
species approved by the Public Works Director. The term “permitted plantings”
means nonwoody, thornless plantings. The term “approved landscape materials”
means permeable landscape materials such as pebbles, wood chips, or such other
permeable materials as are approved from time to time by the Public Works
Director. Maintenance of the public parking includes timely mowing, trimming of
any permitted trees, shrubs, and plantings, and picking up litter.
Specifically, but not by way of limitation of the foregoing, the property owner
shall maintain all grass areas or approved vegetative ground cover in the
public parking to a height or length not to exceed 10 inches, except as
otherwise specifically allowed in this section. In the event the City or any
public utility shall disturb the public parking for utilities or street work,
the City or public utility shall restore any turf grass area to a similar
condition existing prior to the disturbance, by reseeding such turf grass area.
The City or public utility shall have no duty to replace any plantings, bushes,
or vegetation in the public parking other than turf grass.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c and e])
7-1-16 DUMPING OF SNOW.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be
thrown, pushed, or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters,
or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a
hazardous condition therein; or to push, throw, place, or cause to be thrown,
pushed, or placed such ice or snow onto any adjoining property not owned by
such person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
7-1-17 UNDERGROUND IRRIGATION SYSTEMS IN PARKING.
   Abutting property owners may install and maintain underground lawn
irrigation systems in the parking, provided that all related equipment, except
necessary and direct connections from the water supply to the underground
irrigation system, is located solely in an area within one foot of the street
side of the sidewalk, or between five and six feet of the property line in
areas where sidewalks are not installed. Abutting property owners acting
pursuant to these provisions do so at their own risk and without any right,
title, or interest in the parking or in the free use and enjoyment of the
parking for the purpose allowed in this section. Abutting property owners
acting pursuant to this section should take notice of the fact that
installations in the parking will be subject to damage or destruction at any
time that the City or a person with a utility easement deems it necessary to
enter upon the parking for construction, maintenance, or any other purpose.
Removal of underground lawn irrigation systems may be required at any time by
the City.
7-1-18 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 2
SIDEWALK/SHARED USE PATH REGULATIONS
7-2-1 Definitions                           7-2-9 Openings and Enclosures
7-2-2 Duty of Abutting Property Owners      7-2-10 Fires or Fuels on Sidewalks
7-2-3 Performance by City                   7-2-11 Defacing
7-2-4 Right to Specially Assess Reserved    7-2-12 Debris on Sidewalks
7-2-5 Sidewalk Standards                    7-2-13 Merchandise Display
7-2-6 Removal of Snow and Ice Accumulations 7-2-14 Sales Stands
7-2-7 Awnings                               7-2-15 Effect Upon Other Laws
7-2-8 Encroaching Steps                     7-2-16 Penalty
 
7-2-1 DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are
defined:
   1.   “Bicycle/recreational trail” means a PCC, blacktop, or gravel bicycle/
recreational route developed primarily for outdoor recreational purposes.
Trails are largely designed for pedestrians and other users to “experience” the
outdoors and may be used by a variety of users, but they are not primarily
designed for transportation purposes.
   2.   “Property” means land situated in the City, whether or not improved
with buildings or other structures.
   3.   “Property owner” means a person who, alone or with another person or
other persons, holds the legal title to property; except, however, where
property has been sold on contract to a person who has the present right to
possess the property and the contract has been filed for record in the office
of the Polk County Recorder or the Dallas County Recorder, the person so
purchasing the property, whether alone or with another person or other persons,
is the “property owner” and not the person retaining bare legal title to the
property as security for the balance of the purchase price.
   4.   “Public sidewalk” means a portion of a street between the curb line, or
the lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property line or within
easements on private property that is paved or improved and intended for use by
pedestrians. In accordance with Section 12-5-9 of this Code, a public sidewalk
must be a minimum of four feet in width. A sidewalk’s primary purpose is to
provide pedestrians with connections to neighborhoods, shopping centers,
businesses, and other venues of interest.
   5.   “Shared use path” means a paved pathway, typically from eight to 12
feet in width, physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic within the
roadway right-of-way or within an easement adjacent to the roadway right-of-
way. Primarily used by pedestrians and bicyclists, shared use paths are also
used by joggers, skaters, wheelchair users (both nonmotorized and motorized). A
shared use path’s primary purpose is to provide pedestrians with connections to
trails, other neighborhoods, shopping centers, businesses, and other venues of
interest. In addition, the shared use path may be used for recreational
purposes.
   6.   “Trailhead” means an outdoor system developed to serve as an access
point to a bicycle/recreational trail which generally includes an area to park
vehicles and typically is a beginning or ending point of a bicycle/recreational
trail. The junction of two or more trails, where no other access point is
provided to the trails, is not a trailhead.
7-2-2 DUTY OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS.
   Every property owner is required to maintain, at their own expense, the
public sidewalk, shared use path, or public right-of-way on that length and
side of the public street or streets to which said property owner’s property
abuts in accordance with the City’s sidewalk/shared use path/public right-of-
way inspection and repair policy (“repair policy”) approved by the Council.
This obligation to maintain includes, without limitation, the duty to keep the
public sidewalk, shared use path, or public right-of-way open and in a safe
condition free of defects, debris, nuisances, obstructions, or any other
hazard, snow and ice, and other obstacles as required by this chapter, and in a
reasonable state of repair so as not to present a hazard to persons using the
public sidewalk, shared use path, or public right-of-way. Provided, however,
that this section shall not be construed to require a property owner to take
any action with respect to a public sidewalk, shared use path, or public right-
of-way when said action is made necessary by the excavation or other activity
of the City or a public utility. The abutting property owner may be liable for
damages caused by the failure to use reasonable care in the removal of snow or
ice from the sidewalks.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(c))
(Section 7-2-2 – Ord. 1155 – Feb. 25 Supp.)
7-2-3 PERFORMANCE BY CITY.
   If the property owner does not perform an action required by this chapter,
and more particularly set forth in the repair policy, within a reasonable time,
the Council may cause such required action to be performed and assess the costs
and expenses therefor against the abutting property for collection in the same
manner as property taxes. Provided, however, no such assessment shall be made
for the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of a public sidewalk unless the
City has served upon the person shown by the records of the Polk County Auditor
or the Dallas County Auditor to be the owner of the abutting property, by
certified mail, a notice requiring said person to repair, reconstruct, or
replace the public sidewalk within 45 days from the date said notice is mailed.
For a shared use path, the City shall perform the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of the shared use path in accordance with the repair policy and the
property owner shall be responsible to pay to the City the cost of repairing,
reconstructing, or replacing that portion of the shared use path which is equal
in width to the minimum width of a sidewalk under this Code, as such amount is
reasonably determined by the City Engineer. The remaining cost of
reconstructing or replacing the shared use path shall be borne by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 364.12[2d and e])
7-2-4 RIGHT TO SPECIALLY ASSESS RESERVED.
   The City is not prevented by this chapter from paying for or recouping the
costs and expenses of repairing, reconstructing, or replacing the public
sidewalk, the portion of the public shared use path equal in width to the
minimum width of a sidewalk under this Code or the public parking by special
assessment where otherwise authorized by City ordinance and the laws of the
State.
7-2-5 SIDEWALK STANDARDS.
   Public sidewalks/shared use paths repaired, replaced, or constructed within
the City shall meet the standards for such construction adopted by resolution
of the Council.
7-2-6 REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE ACCUMULATIONS.
   The owner, lessee, occupant, or person in charge of property abutting
sidewalks and shared use paths shall remove snow and ice accumulations from
sidewalks and from a portion of shared use paths equal in width to the minimum
width of a sidewalk under this Code within 24 hours after a snowfall or the
deposit or formation of ice thereon.
7-2-7 AWNINGS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any
sidewalk or shared use path unless all parts of the awning are elevated at
least eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk or shared use path and the
roof or covering is made of duck, canvas, or other suitable material supported
by iron frames or brackets securely fastened to the building, without any posts
or other device that will obstruct the sidewalk or shared use path or hinder or
interfere with the free passage of pedestrians.
7-2-8 ENCROACHING STEPS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any
building upon any part of any sidewalk or shared use path without permission by
resolution of the Council.
7-2-9 OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.
   It is unlawful for a person to:
   1.   Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any
cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk or shared use path, or
to enclose any portion of a sidewalk or shared use path with a railing without
permission by resolution of the Council.
   2.   Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating, or cover to any vault on
any sidewalk or shared use path except while in actual use with adequate guards
to protect the public.
   3.   Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings
on or within six feet of any sidewalk or shared use path.
7-2-10 FIRES OR FUELS ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or
shared use path or to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk or
shared use path.
7-2-11 DEFACING.
   It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint, or writing
on any sidewalk or shared use path.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
7-2-12 DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk or shared
use path any glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage,
rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris, or any other substance likely to
injure any person, animal, or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
7-2-13 MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.
   It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk or shared
use path, any goods or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as
to interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the
sidewalk or shared use path; in no case shall more than three feet of the
sidewalk next to the building be occupied for such purposes.
7-2-14 SALES STANDS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand
for the sale of fruit, vegetables, candy, soft drinks, or other substances or
commodities on any sidewalk or shared use path without first obtaining a
written permit from the Council.
7-2-15 EFFECT UPON OTHER LAWS.
   This chapter shall not be construed to allow any use of the public sidewalk,
shared use path, or the public parking that is otherwise prohibited by the laws
of the State or by other ordinances of the City or to lessen the duty of care
otherwise imposed upon property owners by the laws of the State.
7-2-16 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 3
DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION
 
7-3-1 Permit Required        7-3-5 Curb Removal
7-3-2 Time of Completion     7-3-6 Protection Provided
7-3-3 Application for Permit 7-3-7 Compliance
7-3-4 Additional Regulations 7-3-8 Penalty
 
7-3-1 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall create a new ingress or egress for the establishment of a
driveway onto private property from a public thoroughfare or make any curb cuts
or remove any curbs without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Community Development Department.
7-3-2 TIME OF COMPLETION.
   All construction commenced pursuant to said permits authorizing curb cuts or
curb removal shall be completed as follows:
   1.   Summer Construction. All such construction commenced hereunder after
March 15 and on or before September 15 of any year shall be completed no later
than 30 days after commencement of said construction, or October 15 of that
year, whichever comes first.
   2.   Winter Construction. All such construction commenced after October 15
and before March 15 of any year shall be completed no later than 72 hours after
commencement of said construction.
7-3-3 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   The application for said permit shall contain a rough drawing showing said
proposed ingress or egress for the establishment of a driveway and for any curb
cut or curb removal and its location with reference to the public right-of-way
and the lot lines of property owned by said applicant.
7-3-4 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   The Council may, from time to time, prescribe regulations providing for
restrictions, limitations, and conditions for the granting of such new ingress
or egress and driveways onto private property from a public thoroughfare and
the size thereof.
7-3-5 CURB REMOVAL.
   1.   Residential. All curbs removed in a residential area shall be ground
off and not sawed. Only in special circumstances will sawing be allowed and
must be approved by the Director of Public Works. When sawing is allowed, it
shall be done with a concrete saw. All curbs shall be cut to the closest
longitudinal joint if less than 42 inches or a minimum 18 inches on a
longitudinal line from the back of curb. Other requirements shall also be
subject to the City’s standard specifications adopted by the Council.
   2.   Commercial. All curbs removed in a commercial area shall be made by
sawing the curb and street to the nearest longitudinal joint on the public
street. Other requirements shall also be subject to the City’s standards
specifications adopted by the Council.
7-3-6 PROTECTION PROVIDED.
   All openings in the curb and the street and all work performed therein
shall, during the progress of the work, be protected as prescribed by the MUTCD
(Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices).
7-3-7 COMPLIANCE.
   The person receiving said permit must comply completely with the regulations
or requirements of the permit when issued, and any deviation therefrom shall
subject the party obtaining the permit to penalty.
7-3-8 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 4
MAILBOXES
 
7-4-1 Purpose                 7-4-5 Curbside Mailbox Requirements
7-4-2 Definitions             7-4-6 Custom-Built Mailbox Requirements
7-4-3 Visibility; Obstruction 7-4-7 Responsibilities of Property Owner
7-4-4 Cluster Style Mailboxes  
 
7-4-1 PURPOSE.
   The City’s right-of-way is held by the City primarily for the purpose of
pedestrian and vehicular passage and for the City’s provision of essential
public safety services, including police, fire, and emergency medical response
services, and public health services, including sanitary sewer, water, and
storm drainage. The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for
mailboxes in order to maintain the safety and the visual character of the
City’s right-of-way.
7-4-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Breakaway support” means a supporting post which shall be no larger
than a four-inch by four-inch wood post or a metal post with a strength no
greater than a two-inch diameter schedule 40 steel pipe and which is buried no
more than 24 inches deep. Such a support post shall not be set in concrete
unless specifically designed as a breakaway support system as defined in “A
Guide For Erecting Mailboxes On Highways,” published by the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, May 24, 1984
(AASHTO).
   2.   “Clear zone” means an unobstructed flat area adjacent to the traveled
portion of a roadway that is used for the recovery of errant vehicles.
   3.   “Cluster style mailbox” means a style whereby mailboxes, meeting the
specifications of the United States Postal Service (USPS) with the inscription
plainly legible “U.S. MAIL” and “APPROVED BY THE POSTMASTER GENERAL,” are
assembled and grouped together on a single area of land so that they are
regarded as one unit. Cluster style mailboxes must be manufactured cluster
style mailboxes approved by both the City and the USPS.
   4.   “Curbside mailbox” means a mailbox consisting of a lightweight sheet
metal or plastic box meeting the specifications of the United States Postal
Service (USPS) with the inscription plainly legible “U.S. MAIL” and “APPROVED
BY THE POSTMASTER GENERAL,” which is erected at the edge of a roadway or
curbside of a street and is mounted on a breakaway support post, and is
intended or used for the collection of mail and is to be served by a mail
carrier from a vehicle.
   5.   “Custom-built mailbox” means a mailbox erected at the edge of a roadway
or curbside of a street constructed using materials that do not meet the
definition of a “curbside mailbox” and “breakaway support.”
7-4-3 VISIBILITY; OBSTRUCTION.
   All mailboxes must be erected:
   1.   Away from the intersection of any street and in no case closer than 75
feet measured from the centerline of the intersecting street, in order to
prevent obstruction of free and clear vision; and
   2.   Away from any location where, by reason of the position, shape, or
color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any
authorized traffic control device.
7-4-4 CLUSTER STYLE MAILBOXES.
   1.   New Developments. All new residential or commercial developments
constructed after the enactment of the regulations contained in this chapter
(October 2, 2003) which are situated on any public cul-de-sac, street, avenue,
or other roadway that is maintained by the City and receive curbside delivery
of mail shall have cluster style mailboxes. Any housing development constructed
and already receiving mail service before the regulations in this chapter are
enacted is not required to have cluster style mailboxes.
   2.   Requirements. Cluster style mailboxes serving housing developments
situated on any public street or roadway shall be located between the sidewalk
and curb, outside of the three-foot clear zone. Cluster style mailboxes shall
not be installed anywhere within a cul-de-sac bulb. Cluster style mailboxes
shall have a four-foot concrete access from the public street and the public
sidewalk. The location of the cluster style mailboxes shall not exceed 600 feet
from the property line of those residents served by that cluster style mailbox.
Cluster style boxes shall be located on property lines on the same side as what
the future no parking areas will be. The location of the cluster style mailbox
is to be approved by the City and by the USPS.
   The cost of installation, including, but not limited to, box units and
concrete pad, shall be borne by the developer, and subsequent maintenance shall
be carried out by the USPS.
   No driveway or street access shall be constructed within five feet of a
cluster style mailbox.
7-4-5 CURBSIDE MAILBOX REQUIREMENTS.
   While curbside mailboxes may be installed in developments constructed and
already receiving mail service before the adoption of this chapter (October 2,
2003), the mailbox owner must comply with the following installation
requirements:
   1.   The bottom of the mailbox shall be 42 inches from the top of curb. On
streets without curbs, the bottom of the mailbox shall be 48 inches from the
edge of pavement, as defined by USPS installation requirements.
   2.   Lateral placement of the mailbox shall be six inches to eight inches
from the face of the curb, as defined by USPS installation requirements.
   3.   The mailbox support post shall be of a “breakaway support” design, as
defined by AASHTO.
   4.   The post-to-box attachment shall be of sufficient strength to prevent
the box from separating from the post if a vehicle strikes the post.
   5.   Property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the curbside
mailbox.
7-4-6 CUSTOM-BUILT MAILBOX REQUIREMENTS.
   A custom-built mailbox may be installed in developments constructed and
already receiving mail service before the adoption of this chapter (October 2,
2003) if an application for approval of a custom-built mailbox is submitted to
the City for review and is approved. A custom-built mailbox must conform to the
following requirements and the rules set forth in the application:
   1.   The structure supporting the mailbox shall be at least 12 inches from
the back of curb.
   2.   The mailbox structure shall not exceed the dimensions of two feet in
width, two feet in depth, five feet in height.
   3.   The mailbox structure shall be located on a two-foot, six-inch wide by
two-foot, six-inch deep by four-inch thick concrete pad. The mailbox structure
shall not be permanently affixed to the concrete pad in an attempt to make
structure rigid.
   4.   The local postmaster shall approve and sign off on the application
before submittal to the City.
   5.   Property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the custom-
built mailbox. If the mailbox is damaged beyond use by the City, a standard
“curbside mailbox” and breakaway post as defined in this chapter will be
provided or the property owner can be reimbursed up to a maximum replacement
amount set by Council in a fee schedule. If the property owner performs the
replacement, reimbursement will not exceed the established cost for a standard
curbside mailbox and breakaway post. Property owner must submit an application
for a custom-built mailbox with the City prior to making any needed repairs.
7-4-7 RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROPERTY OWNER.
   Any type of mailbox located in the City right-of-way is subject to damage or
destruction, at any time, as a result of the City or a person with a utility
easement entering upon the City right-of-way to construct, repair, or maintain
the utilities located in the City right-of-way or as a result of the City
engaging in activities to maintain the public street or right-of-way, such as
snow removal, pavement repair, or street cleaning. If a curbside or cluster
style mailbox located in the City right-of-way is damaged during such
activities, the City or the utility that damaged the mailbox shall replace said
mailbox with a mailbox of the same design, if it has been approved for
installation by the USPS with the proper markings inscribed “U.S. Mail” and
“Approved By The Postmaster General,” and if it is still available for purchase
and complies with this chapter. Property owner may choose to be reimbursed in
full or have the City reinstall a new mailbox meeting stated requirements. If
the property owner chooses to purchase an approved mailbox and be reimbursed,
the City will install the mailbox at the property owner’s request.
CHAPTER 5
TREES
 
7-5-1 Definitions           7-5-6 City Abatement; Assessment of Cost
7-5-2 Planting Restrictions 7-5-7 Removal of Trees and Stumps
7-5-3 Public Tree Care      7-5-8 Landscape Plan
7-5-4 Tree Topping          7-5-9 Penalty
7-5-5 Duty to Trim           
 
7-5-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “dbh” means a commonly used term referring to the diameter of a tree at
breast height (four and one-half feet).
   2.   “Park trees” means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody
vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the
City, or to which the public has free access as a park.
   3.   “Parking” means that part of the street right-of-way in the City not
covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line; or, on
unpaved streets, that part of the street right-of-way lying between the lot
line and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic.
   4.   “Private trees” means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody
vegetation on private property to which the City has no responsibility.
7-5-2 PLANTING RESTRICTIONS.
   No trees, shrubs, bushes, or woody vegetation shall be planted in any
parking or within island medians of divided streets unless otherwise permitted
by the Council.
7-5-3 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   Except as limited by Section
7-5-2 of this chapter, the City has the right to plant, prune, maintain, and
remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the lines of all streets, avenues,
stands, and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
7-5-4 TREE TOPPING.
   It is unlawful as a normal practice for any person or City department to top
any street tree on public property. “Topping” is defined as the severe cutting
back of limbs to stubs within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove
the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms,
diseases, or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from
this chapter at the determination of the City.
7-5-5 DUTY TO TRIM.
   1.   Private Trees. Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-
of-way within the City shall prune the branches so that such branches do not
obstruct the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street
intersection and so that there is a clear space of eight feet above the surface
of the sidewalk and 15 feet above the traveled surface of the street. Said
owners shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees, or broken or
decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The City
has the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes
with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight, interferes
with the visibility of any traffic control device or sign, or violates the
terms of this subsection.
   2.   Trees in Parking. In the case of trees existing in the parking, the
owner or person in possession of the abutting property shall keep the trees on,
or overhanging the street, trimmed so that all branches will be at least 15
feet above the surface of the street and eight feet above the sidewalks.
7-5-6 CITY ABATEMENT; ASSESSMENT OF COST.
   If the abutting property owner or person in possession of the abutting
property fails to trim the trees as required in Subsection
7-5-5(2) of this chapter, the City may serve notice on the abutting property
owner requiring the property owner to do so within 30 days. If the property
owner fails to trim the trees within that time, the City may perform the
required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
7-5-7 REMOVAL OF TREES AND STUMPS.
   1.   Dead or Diseased Tree Removal on Private Property. The owner or person
in possession of private property shall remove any trees constituting a hazard
to life or property, or trees harboring insects or disease which constitute a
potential threat to other trees within the City located on the private property
within the City. If the owner or person in possession fails to remove any such
tree, the City may serve notice on the property owner requiring the property
owner to do so within 30 days. If the property owner fails to remove any such
tree within that time, the City may perform the required action and assess the
costs against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a
property tax.
   2.   Removal of Stumps. All stumps of park trees and trees in the parking
shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump
does not project above the surface of the ground, except trees in the Greenbelt
Park.
7-5-8 LANDSCAPE PLAN.
   1.   Submission of Plan; Required Information. In connection with the
submission of a site plan, site plan amendment, or preliminary plat for
approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Council, the applicant
shall submit a landscape plan, which must contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
      A.   The location of all existing trees four inches in diameter or
larger, when measured at the dbh, on public or private property, specifying the
size, species, and condition of such existing trees (any such existing trees to
be removed shall be noted);
      B.   The location of all new plant material to be planted on the
property, shown by size and species; and
      C.   A landscape plan filed in connection with a preliminary plat need
only show the outline of existing trees and foliage, clarifying the drip line
area of trees with the use of “clouded” areas of individual or clumping of
trees.
   2.   Preliminary Plat Evaluation; Considerations. In evaluating any
preliminary plat or site plan for approval, the Commission and the Council
shall consider the following issues addressed by the landscape plan:
      A.   Whether an excessive or unnecessary number of existing trees are to
be removed, taking into consideration the City’s goal of preserving existing
trees and any reasonable alternatives available to the developer;
      B.   All site plans in zoning districts shall be planted with a variety
of trees and shrubs which are substantial in size and number, and are in
accordance with the City’s policy on recommended trees;
      C.   Whether the applicant has provided for the replacement of existing
trees to be removed, at other locations on the property;
      D.   Whether the landscaping provides a visual buffer, where necessary,
from the surrounding property, including headlight screening for streets; and
      E.   Whether the streets, sidewalks, and lots are laid out in a manner to
preserve existing trees, where feasible, and whether the applicant has provided
for fencing off or protecting trees during construction, to the extent
feasible.
   3.   Protection of Existing Trees Not Being Removed. Any and all existing
trees which are not to be removed pursuant to the landscape plan shall be
clearly identified and, prior to the issuance of a grading permit, shall be
protected at the construction site by fencing located around the drip line of
the tree, where feasible, maximizing the protection of the root zone area of
the tree. The foregoing fencing requirements may be waived or modified by the
City if the trees to be saved are not located in an area where construction is
occurring.
   4.   Council Approval Before Permit Issuance. Prior to the issuance of any
grading permit or demolition permit for the development of any property that
will require site plan or plat approval, the applicant shall disclose to the
City whether any existing tree, four inches in diameter or larger, when
measured at the dbh, are to be removed. If any such trees are to be removed,
the City shall not issue a grading permit or demolition permit until a site
plan or preliminary plat has been approved by the Council. This is not to
include occupied single-family dwellings, duplexes, or townhouses. Prior to the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, a new residential unit shall have, at a
minimum, two trees not less than one inch in diameter.
   5.   Illegal Tree Removal; Remedial Action. If any trees are removed in
violation of an approved site plan or plat, the owner or developer shall plant
three times such number of trees, of equal caliper, on such plat or site plan.
If it is impractical to replace such a tree with an equal caliper tree, then
several trees of a smaller caliper, totaling, in aggregate, the caliper of the
improperly removed tree, shall be required. The specific number and size of
such trees shall be determined by the City. For purposes of example only, if
one eight-inch caliper tree is improperly removed, the City may require: 1)
that three eight-inch caliper trees be planted; 2) that six four-inch caliper
trees be planted; or 3) that 12 two-inch caliper trees be planted. If it is
impractical to place all of such trees on that particular plat or site plan,
the City may require that some of the trees be planted on public property, such
as in a park.
   6.   Diseased or Damaged Plantings; Replacement. If any trees, vegetation,
or other landscape materials shown on an approved landscape plan shall become
diseased or substantially damaged at any time after the landscape plan is
approved, the owner of the property shall promptly replace such trees,
vegetation, or landscape material to bring the property in compliance with the
landscape plan.
7-5-9 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC PARKS
7-6-1 Purpose                    7-6-11 Parent or Guardian Responsibility
7-6-2 Definitions                7-6-12 Curfew
7-6-3 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-6-13 Facility Reservations
7-6-4 Fires                      7-6-14 Shelter House Occupancy
7-6-5 Littering                  7-6-15 City Maintenance Responsibilities
7-6-6 Camping Areas              7-6-16 Bicycle and Recreational Trails
7-6-7 Destruction of Natural     7-6-17 Temporary Fence for Construction
Environment                      on Adjoining Property
7-6-8 Prohibited Activities      7-6-18 Jumping from Bridges
7-6-9 Buildings and Animals      7-6-19 Penalty
7-6-10 Signs and Notices          
 
7-6-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park
facilities by the general public by establishing rules and regulations
governing the use of park facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
7-6-2 DEFINITIONS.
   Terms used herein shall be given their common and ordinary meanings. The
term “motor vehicle” includes every vehicle which is self-propelled, but not
operated upon railroad tracks.
7-6-3 MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC.
   1.   Motor Vehicle Use Restrictions. No person shall operate a motor vehicle
within any City park except upon designated access roads for the purpose of
traveling to and from designated parking areas, and no person shall introduce,
place, or cause to be introduced or placed, any motor vehicle or any vehicle
capable of self-propulsion within any City park except upon designated access
roads or designated parking areas. Exception: The provisions of this subsection
do not apply to motorized wheelchairs being used to transport persons with
disabilities.
   2.   Speed Limit. Any person driving a motor vehicle within a City park
shall drive same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than or less than
is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, pedestrians
present, and of any other conditions then existing. No person shall drive a
motor vehicle within a City park at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour.
   3.   Parking. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer, any place other than a designated parking area.
7-6-4 FIRES.
   No fires shall be built within a City park, except in a place provided
therefore, and such fire shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless
it is to be immediately used by some other party. The Council may, from time to
time, prohibit all fires within a City park and post signs stating same which
shall cause the building of any fire to be unlawful.
7-6-5 LITTERING.
   No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter, or
foreign substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that
purpose.
7-6-6 CAMPING AREAS.
   No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in portion prescribed
or designated by the Council.
7-6-7 DESTRUCTION OF NATURAL ENVIRONMENT.
   No person shall, in any manner, deface, injure, destroy, cut, or remove any
tree, shrub, plant, soil, turf, grass, wood, rock, sand, or gravel standing or
growing in any City park; or pick or destroy any fruit or flowers or seeds
growing therein unless authorized to do so by the Council.
7-6-8 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   The following activities are specifically prohibited in a City park:
   1.   Disposing of Materials. The placing or dumping of any organic or
inorganic materials including raked leaves, grass clippings, construction
material, firewood, paint, or any other similar materials.
   2.   Private Improvements. Gardening and other private improvements such as
fences, play equipment, and similar encroachments.
   3.   Disposing of Refuse. Dumping of trash, debris, junk, or similar
disposition of refuse.
   4.   Keg Beer. Kegged beer may not be dispensed, distributed, given away, or
sold in a City park. A waiver of this prohibition may be granted by application
to the Council as part of a special event permit approval process and with
compliance with all other federal and State law.
   5.   Glass Container/Bottles. Glass beverage containers/bottles are
prohibited in all City parks.
7-6-9 BUILDINGS AND ANIMALS.
   No person shall deface, injure, disturb, or interfere with any building or
improvement of any kind made or being made in or about any park, or injure,
remove, disturb, or interfere with birds or animals found or kept therein,
except for bow hunting of deer in the designated urban deer management zone as
authorized in this Code.† 8
 
Notes
8 † EDITOR’S NOTE: See Title 5, Chapter 7B, Section
  5-7B-2.
7-6-10 SIGNS AND NOTICES.
   1.   Posting of Signs. Except for notices and signs authorized by the
Council, no person shall post, fasten, paint, or affix any placards, signs,
notices, or bills within a City park.
   2.   Official Signs and Notices. No person shall, in any manner, deface,
injure, destroy, or remove any signs or notices posted in a City park by the
City.
   3.   Posted Notices. No person shall enter upon portions of any City park or
engage in any activities in disregard of official signs forbidding same.
7-6-11 PARENT OR GUARDIAN RESPONSIBILITY.
   No parent, guardian, or custodian of a minor shall permit or allow such
minor to do any act prohibited by any provision of this chapter.
7-6-12 CURFEW.
   A curfew is in effect from 10:30 p.m. until 5:30 a.m. each day in all City
parks, and it is unlawful for any person to be present within a City park
during such times unless specifically authorized to be present by the Council
or unless performing duties as an agent, employee, or official of the City.
7-6-13 FACILITY RESERVATIONS.
   1.   Advance Reservation for Use. The Parks and Recreation Director shall
establish and maintain a system providing for exclusive use of City park
facilities by advance reservation.
   2.   Reservation Fee. A reservation fee will be required pursuant to
established policies.
   3.   Special Event or Festival Permit:
      A.   If the City grants a special event or festival permit for use of
City park facilities, all persons responsible for organizing and administering
the event must comply with the requirement in the approved permit.
      B.   If the operation of the festival or event does not comply with the
requirements in the approved permit, the City may close or cancel the special
event or festival, and the City may assess fines and fees as provided under the
City ordinances and policies.
7-6-14 SHELTER HOUSE OCCUPANCY.
   It is unlawful to occupy a City park shelter house during a time when a
reservation issued pursuant to Section
7-6-13 of this chapter is in effect, except at the invitation of the
reservation holder.
7-6-15 CITY MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, the City
may control or manage plants, animals, birds, or insects pursuant to
established policies that have been approved by the Council, and the City may
operate vehicles and maintenance equipment and perform maintenance activities
as needed, pursuant to established policies.
7-6-16 BICYCLE AND RECREATIONAL TRAILS.
   1.   Definitions:
      A.   “Bicycle/recreational trail” See Chapter 2, “Sidewalk/Shared Use
Path Regulations” of this title.
      B.   “Shared use path” See Chapter 2, “Sidewalk/Shared Use Path
Regulations” of this title.
      C.   “Trailhead” See Chapter 2, “Sidewalk/Shared Use Path Regulations” of
this title.
   2.   Use Restrictions. For the purposes of this chapter, a bicycle/
recreational trail is subject to all the regulations governing City parks,
whether such trail is owned by the City or held pursuant to an easement. In
City parks where recreational trails are provided, bicycles must be ridden on
designated recreational trails or roadways only. Notwithstanding any provisions
to the contrary in this chapter, however, the curfew for bicycle/recreational
trails shall be in effect from 10:30 p.m. until 5:30 a.m. the following day.
   3.   Maintenance and Liability. The City shall have the sole obligation to
maintain and keep in good repair any City bicycle/recreational trails, whether
such trails are located on land owned by the City or held pursuant to an
easement. The owner of the land on which a City bicycle/recreational trail is
located who has granted the City an easement for a recreational trail (the
“owner”) shall have no maintenance obligations with respect to any such trail.
Except as may be caused by the negligent acts or omissions of the owner, the
owner shall not be liable for injury or property damage arising from the use of
the City bicycle/recreational trail. Except as to the negligent or intentional
acts or omissions of the owner, the City shall indemnify and hold the owner
harmless against any loss, damage, injury. or claim for injury or property
damage arising from the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the users
of the City bicycle/recreational trail.
7-6-17 TEMPORARY FENCE FOR CONSTRUCTION ON ADJOINING PROPERTY.
   Any property owner whose property adjoins a City park must erect a temporary
fence to protect park property during any substantial construction or
development on the adjoining property.
7-6-18 JUMPING FROM BRIDGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to climb upon, hang from, loiter upon,
or jump from any bridge or any portion of a bridge located in public ways or on
public property. A violation of this section is punishable by a municipal
infraction or a simple misdemeanor.
7-6-19 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 7
PUBLIC PROPERTY SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS
 
7-7-1 Applicability                   7-7-8 Insurance Required
7-7-2 Purpose and Intent              7-7-9 Appeal Procedure
7-7-3 Definitions                     7-7-10 Permit Revocation
7-7-4 Application and Permit Required 7-7-11 Violations
7-7-5 Application Requirements        7-7-12 Penalties
7-7-6 Permit Review Process           7-7-13 Exemptions
7-7-7 Fees Required                    
 
7-7-1 APPLICABILITY.
   The following regulations shall apply to special event permit applications
submitted to the City.
7-7-2 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The public right-of-way in possession of the City is primarily for the use
of the public. These regulations prescribe the condition through which special
events of limited duration may be permitted to occur within the City that
involve a request from an individual or organization to use City property or
right-of-way in the conduct or promotion of the event, thereby creating an
anticipated significant impact to the City property or right-of-way, such as
increased vehicle or pedestrian traffic or the closure of a public street, and
it is advisable or necessary to include City staff in the preparation,
planning, coordination, and approval of the requested special event to promote
the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and of the event
participants or attendees.
7-7-3 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   1.   “City property” means the land owned and maintained by the City.
   2.   “Person” means any natural person, their heirs, executors,
administrators, or assigns, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of
any of them.
   3.   “Special event” means an organized and advertised gathering for the
purpose of entertainment, recreation, competition, public rally, parade, or
public march, or festival purposes that will impact City services or public
right-of-way.
   4.   “Street” means that portion of the public right-of-way normally used
for vehicular traffic and including the abutting sidewalk.
7-7-4 APPLICATION AND PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A special event permit shall be required for all events that relate to the
stated purpose and intent of this chapter. A special event permit must be
timely applied for and issued by the City prior to the commencement of the
event. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to engage, sponsor,
or participate in any event described herein without having first applied for
and obtained a permit in accordance with this chapter. Receiving approval of a
special event permit from the City shall not preclude, supersede, circumvent,
or waive the applicant’s responsibility to obtain any additional permits,
licenses, and approvals for other applicable local, State, and federal
regulations. The City reserves the right to impose special guidelines and
restrictions for any special event based upon the nature of the proposed event,
the proposed location of the event, and the anticipated attendance of the
event. The City also reserves the right to temporarily suspend other City Code
requirements for any special event based upon the particular event details.
7-7-5 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   For any special event defined or described within this chapter, the
following information, at a minimum, shall be submitted with the application to
the City:
   1.   A written application for a special event permit shall be submitted to
the City on a form provided by the City. The application must set forth the
following information regarding the proposed special event:
      A.   The name, address, phone number, and e-mail address of the applicant
(s) and sponsor(s) of the event and contact person(s).
      B.   If the proposed special event would be conducted for, on behalf of,
or by an organization, the name, address, and phone number of the headquarters
of the organization and the authorized responsible heads of such organization.
      C.   The date(s) and duration of time for the proposed special event,
specifically identifying the date(s) and duration of time for which the
requested use of the City property or right-of-way would occur.
      D.   An accurate description of that portion of the City property or
right-of-way proposed to be used, including a detailed map. The map should
depict the requested location of any activities, structures, tents, barricades,
parking, traffic control devices, and personnel, signage, trash collection, and
portable restroom facilities necessary for the proposed event.
      E.   The estimated number of participants or attendees.
      F.   The proposed type of special event, described in detail, including a
description of the planned activities and the proposed location.
      G.   Whether the applicant has obtained or will obtain required permits
for any of the following: the sale of alcoholic beverages, tents or
inflatables, amplified sound, fireworks, temporary signs, and any applicable
building permits.
   2.   After the initial filing of the application, City staff may request
additional information from the applicant to determine whether a special event
permit should be issued, including, but not limited to, a crowd control plan.
   3.   All other applications must be submitted not less than 30 calendar days
prior to the proposed start date of the special event, unless the City decides
to waive the deadline. The City reserves the right to reject any applications
that have not been timely submitted to the City.
   4.   Before the City decides to approve the special event permit, the City
may require the applicant to provide notice of the proposed event to all
affected neighboring property owners and known tenants. The City may also
require the applicant to petition or canvass affected neighboring property
owners and known tenants to ascertain whether there is sufficient support for
the proposed event. Alternatively, the City may elect to provide the
notification to the affected neighboring property owners and known tenants
itself and the applicant shall then be responsible for reimbursing the City for
the incurred costs.
7-7-6 PERMIT REVIEW PROCESS.
   1.   A team of City staff that consists of representatives from the
following departments: fire/EMS, public works, City Clerk, community
development, leisure services, and police shall review special event
applications, identify potential issues, and concerns, and work with the
applicant to propose possible solutions to resolve those identified issues and
concerns. Additional City staff from other departments may assist with the
review depending upon the details of the proposed event.
   2.   The leisure services department shall review special event permit
applications for events held exclusively within a City park or greenway in
accordance with City park policies, rules, and regulations that do not require
City staff from multiple departments as part of the planning or execution of
the event and do not cause anticipated significant impact to nearby public
streets or other City property.
   3.   City staff shall consider, at a minimum, the following criteria in
reviewing the special event permit application. City staff reserves the right
to consider additional criteria in its review as deemed necessary.
      A.   Whether the applicant provided all the necessary information.
      B.   Whether the applicant obtained necessary permits or provided
information necessary to apply for required permits involving the sale of
alcoholic beverages, tents or inflatables, amplified sound, fireworks,
temporary signs, and any applicable building permits.
      C.   Whether the applicant previously held events of similar size and
scope within the City, and, if they have held previous events, were they
conducted in a manner that the City would be willing to allow the event to be
held again. Have all fees associated with the previous event been paid in full
and in a timely manner.
      D.   Whether the date, time, size, or location of the event would
substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic in the vicinity of the event's location.
      E.   Whether the event would unduly interfere with proper access for fire
and police protection and other emergency services.
      F.   Whether the estimated number of participants, attendees, or the size
or type of event or equipment is sufficiently large enough to require the
closing of a public street, or if there is an alternative available to closing
a public street.
      G.   Whether another special event permit has already been granted for
substantially the same date, time, or location within the City.
      H.   Whether the size or time of the event would require so great a
diversion of the City Police Department as to prevent normal police protection
throughout the City or at another previously scheduled event in the City.
      I.   Whether City personnel necessary to regulate and monitor the event
can reasonably be made available.
      J.   Whether the event is reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or
property and if there is adequate planning for crowd control of participants or
attendees.
      K.   Whether adequate sanitation or other health facilities will be
available at the event.
      L.   Whether there is a sufficient number of parking places within a
reasonable distance to accommodate the number of vehicles expected.
      M.   Whether the time, size, or nature of the event is compatible with
the normal activity at that location.
      N.   Whether the proposed use or event will likely have a significant
adverse environmental impact.
      O.   Whether negative police reports or other reports of past activities
held or sponsored by the applicant or in the same location merit a
recommendation of denial.
      P.   If required, whether the applicant has obtained the necessary
approval of neighboring residents or businesses.
      Q.   Whether sufficient negative impact from the event on neighboring
properties or individuals warrant denial of the application.
      R.   Whether the applicant, including its employees, agents and
volunteers have violated City Code provisions or City policies at past events.
      S.   Whether the applicant has timely paid the City all fees due and owed
under any City Code provision or City policy.
   4.   The approval or denial of a completed application by the City review
team shall be made to the applicant as soon as reasonably practicable.
   5.   Where the applicant seeks, or where the City staff recommends, lane
closure(s) of arterial or collector streets within the City, as those streets
have been classified by the DOT, such permit may be issued only by the Council.
City staff shall be responsible for the issuance of all other special event
permits unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
7-7-7 FEES REQUIRED.
   1.   The applicant for a special event permit shall pay the applicable
nonrefundable application fee in the amount set in the schedule of fees the
Council has adopted by resolution. The application fee must be paid at the time
of submittal of the application.
   2.   If the permitted event will require the use of any City equipment,
facilities, or services, the applicant shall pay the estimated costs for the
use of the City equipment, facilities, or services in advance of the event if
the City requests advanced payment be made, or the City may direct the
applicant to pay the actual costs for the use of the City equipment,
facilities, or services following the event within 30 calendar days of billing
by the City.
   3.   Where the applicant requests or City staff recommends City sponsorship/
co-sponsorship of an event which would include full or partial waiver of
application and related fees, the proposed fee waiver must receive Council
approval. All other applications may be approved through City staff review,
unless otherwise provided in this Code.
7-7-8 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   1.   The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining insurance coverage for
the special event, in types and amounts as determined by the City. The
applicant shall also provide the City with a certificate of insurance, naming
the City as an additional insured, sufficiently in advance of the scheduled
event.
   2.   The applicant must also sign a hold harmless and indemnification
agreement with the City in which the applicant holds the City harmless and
indemnifies the City of any negligent, reckless, or intentional act
attributable to the applicant or the applicant’s officials, employees, agents,
or volunteers.
7-7-9 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   1.   City staff’s decision to approve or deny a special event permit or deny
City sponsorship of an event may be appealed to the Council by making a written
request to the City Clerk. The appeal will be placed on the agenda for the next
available Council meeting.
   2.   After receiving the appeal and considering any submitted comments, the
Council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of City staff. The
decision of the Council shall be the final determination as to whether or not
the City approves the special event permit.
7-7-10 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   A special event permit for any event in progress may be revoked and the
event terminated by the Police Chief, Fire Chief, City Manager, or their
respective designees, if the safety of the public is imminently endangered by
activities generated during the event or weather conditions at the time of the
event, the participants or attendees engage in violent or destructive behavior
causing injury to person or damage to property, or if there is a major
violation of the conditions of the permit such that the standards of issuance
have not been satisfied.
7-7-11 VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, and
specifically shall not commit any of the following unlawful acts:
   1.   No person shall hold, sponsor, or be in charge of any activity for
which a special event permit is required without possessing a valid special
event permit.
   2.   No person shall violate any condition placed upon a special event
permit.
   3.   No person shall provide false or inaccurate information on a written
application for a special event permit.
7-7-12 PENALTIES.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
7-7-13 EXEMPTIONS.
   1.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring a special event
permit for the following:
      A.   Funeral processions.
      B.   Events conducted entirely on the property of a church, educational
institution, college, or university campus. However, this type of event may
require a temporary site plan that would need to be approved through the
Community Development Department with the City.
      C.   Events conducted on City-owned property subject to a contract,
lease, or agreement. However, this type of event may require a temporary site
plan that would need to be approved through the Community Development
Department with the City.
      D.   Events conducted entirely on property containing an occupied private
residence.
TITLE 8 - PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
 
8-1-1 Definitions                   8-1-7 Water Service Pipes
8-1-2 Superintendent’s Duties     8-1-8 Shutting Off Water Supply
8-1-3 Mandatory Connections         8-1-9 Hydrants
8-1-4 Compliance with Plumbing Code 8-1-10 Unauthorized Use
8-1-5 Plumber Required              8-1-11 Rules and Regulations
8-1-6 Excavations                   8-1-12 Penalty
 
8-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms are defined for use in this chapter pertaining to the
water service system:
   1.   “Customer” means in addition to any person receiving water service from
the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties, the
duties, responsibilities, liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed
shall be joint and several.
   2.   “Superintendent” means the City Director of Public Works.
   3.   “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or community
use.
   4.   “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the building
served.
   5.   “Water system or waterworks” means all public facilities for securing,
collecting, storing, pumping, treating, and distributing water.
8-1-2 SUPERINTENDENT’S DUTIES.
   The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of water service pipes
and their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining
to water services in the City in accordance with this chapter. This chapter
shall apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to
new ones. The Superintendent shall make such rules, not in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation of the
water system, subject to the approval of the Council. In the event of an
emergency, the Superintendent may make temporary rules for the protection of
the system until due consideration by the Council may be had.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
8-1-3 MANDATORY CONNECTIONS.
   All residences and business establishments within the City limits intended
or used for human habitation, occupancy, or use shall be connected to the
public water system, if it is reasonably available and if the building is not
furnished with pure and wholesome water from some other source. Following
installation and availability of a new water main, property owners shall have
one calendar year in which to make the connection to the new water main.
8-1-4 COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE.
   The installation of any water service pipe and any connection with the water
system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether
regulatory, procedural or enforcement provisions, of Division 4, Plumbing rules
and regulations, of the State Building Code.
8-1-5 PLUMBER REQUIRED.
   All installations of water service pipes and connections to the water system
shall be made by a licensed plumber approved by the City.
8-1-6 EXCAVATIONS.
   All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required in making a connection
shall be performed in accordance with applicable excavation provisions as
provided for installation of building sewers or the provisions of Title 7
Chapter 1 and Title 10 Chapter 11 of this Code.
8-1-7 WATER SERVICE PIPES.
   1.   Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation, connection, and maintenance of the water service pipe from the
main to the building served shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation or maintenance of said water service pipe.
   2.   Failure to Maintain. When any portion of the water service pipe which
is the responsibility of the property owner becomes defective or creates a
nuisance and the owner fails to correct such nuisance, the City may do so and
assess the costs thereof to the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3 and h])
8-1-8 SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY.
   After giving reasonable prior written notice and an opportunity for hearing,
all in accordance with the procedure for discontinuing water service under
Chapter 8B of this title, the water service personnel may shut off the supply
of water to any customer because of any substantial violation of this chapter,
or valid regulation under Section
8-1B-4 of this chapter that is not being contested in good faith. The supply
shall not be turned on again until all violations have been corrected.
8-1-9 HYDRANTS.
   1.   Unlawfully Drawing Water From Hydrants. No person, unless specifically
authorized by the City, shall open, or attempt to draw water, from any fire
hydrant for any purpose whatsoever.
   2.   Obstruction of Hydrants:
      A.   Nothing shall be erected or planted which interferes with the use of
a fire hydrant. Sufficient clearance shall be maintained around the hydrant to
permit easy connection of hoses and full circle operation of the hydrant using
regular hydrant wrenches and hose spinners.
      B.   Shrubs, trees, and flower seeds shall not be planted nor permitted
to grow so as to prevent full view of a fire hydrant from the street.
8-1-10 UNAUTHORIZED USE.
   Unauthorized uses of water, such as not using a meter, hooking onto
hydrants, or putting a straight pipe where the meter is, are absolutely
forbidden. The first occasion of a violation of this section will result in a
surcharge of $100.00; the second occasion, a $200.00 surcharge; and after the
third occasion, a meeting with the Council will be required to see if water
should ever be restored.
8-1-11 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The use of the water service system shall further be subject to the City
water department rules and regulations, which may be adopted from time to time
by the Council.
8-1-12 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 1A
WATER METERS
 
8-1A-1 Purpose                           8-1A-8 Maintenance and Testing for
                                         Accuracy
8-1A-2 Water Use Metered                 8-1A-9 Disclaimer
8-1A-3 Fire Sprinkler Systems; Exception 8-1A-10 Irrigation Meters
8-1A-4 Liability                         8-1A-11 Cross Connection Control
8-1A-5 Property of City                  8-1A-12 Rules and Regulations
8-1A-6 Meter Repairs                     8-1A-13 Penalty
8-1A-7 Meter Installation Fee             
 
8-1A-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water and
facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among
customers.
8-1A-2 WATER USE METERED.
   All water furnished customers shall be measured through meters furnished by
the City and installed by the City.
8-1A-3 FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS; EXCEPTION.
   Fire sprinkler systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection
without meters under the direct supervision of the Building Official. No open
connection can be incorporated in the system, and there shall be no valves
except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which must be
sealed open.
8-1A-4 LIABILITY.
   Remote reading devices shall be installed only by the water division. The
City shall not be liable for the defacement or damage of any property caused by
necessary holes, fastenings, or other work required for the installation of
remote reading devices, nor shall the City be liable for any damage to service
pipes or water system valves and equipment.
8-1A-5 PROPERTY OF CITY.
   All meters, fittings, and remote reading devices (touch pad) to be used for
billing purposes must be provided by the City. The City reserves the right to
read, inspect, or test the meter at any reasonable time or with such frequency
as deemed necessary. The property owner pays for the initial cost of the meter
and remote reading device (touch pad), but they remain the property of the
City. Fees shall be established by the Council.
8-1A-6 METER REPAIRS.
   Whenever a water meter or remote reading device (touch pad) owned by the
City is found to be inoperative, the Superintendent shall have it repaired. If
it is found that damage to the meter or remote reading device has occurred due
to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or property owner, or the
meter is not owned by the City, then the property owner shall be liable for the
cost of repairs. Fees shall be established by the Council.
8-1A-7 METER INSTALLATION FEE.
   There shall be a fee charged to the property owner for each new installation
of a water meter and remote reading device (touch pad) in accordance with the
fee schedule established by the Council.
8-1A-8 MAINTENANCE AND TESTING FOR ACCURACY.
   1.   Maintenance Test. Meters may be removed for accuracy testing at the
discretion of the water division after a period of 10 years. Any meter found to
be inaccurate beyond a tolerance of two percent shall be replaced with a new or
rebuilt meter.
   2.   Request for Accuracy Test. The Superintendent shall make a test of the
accuracy of any water meter at any time when requested in writing. A refundable
deposit shall accompany such request. Deposit fee is established by the
Council. If the meter is found to overrun to the extent of two percent or more,
the cost of the test shall be paid by the City and a refund of the meter test
deposit shall be made to the customer. If the meter is found to be accurate or
less than two percent fast, the customer deposit shall be forfeited. The
customer may be liable for any deficiency.
   3.   Non-registering Meter. When a metering system fails to accurately
register the quantity of water supplied, the quantity and charge shall be
determined based upon the average quantity used during a like period of time
prior to meter system failure as determined by the City.
   4.   Maintenance Shut Off. The City reserves the right to shut off the
supply of water to any customer at any time for the purpose of repair or
maintenance of the water system or its components, or for any other necessary
purpose.
8-1A-9 DISCLAIMER.
   The City does not warrant or guarantee a constant supply of water to any
customer and shall not be liable for any damage due to a failure to supply
water for any reason.
8-1A-10 IRRIGATION METERS.
   The installation of water meters and remote reading devices subject to the
applicable provisions of this chapter and the water division rules and
regulations for the purpose of measuring water used for irrigation, swimming
pools, yard, and garden watering, or other uses where the water so used does
not enter the sanitary sewer system is permitted, and no sewer service charge
shall be made for water so used.
8-1A-11 CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL.
   No person shall connect any equipment or mechanism to a water supply line or
use any water treating chemical or substance which could cause pollution of the
water supply unless an approved backflow prevention device is installed and
maintained.† 9
 
Notes
9 † EDITOR’S NOTE: See Title 8 Chapter 1C.
8-1A-12 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The installation and maintenance of water meters and remote reading devices
shall further be subject to the City water division rules and regulations,
which may be updated from time to time by the Council.
8-1A-13 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment not
to exceed 30 days.
CHAPTER 1B
WATER RATES
 
8-1B-1 Service Charges           8-1B-5 Customer Deposits
8-1B-2 Rates for Service         8-1B-6 Lien for Nonpayment
8-1B-3 Billing for Water Service 8-1B-7 Penalty
8-1B-4 Service Discontinued       
 
8-1B-1 SERVICE CHARGES.
   Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the City based upon
use of water as determined by meters provided for in Chapter 1A of this title.
Each location, building, premises, or connection shall be considered a separate
and distinct customer whether owned or controlled by the same person or not.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
8-1B-2 RATES FOR SERVICE.
   Effective May 15, 2025, water service shall be furnished at the following
rates within the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   General Rate. Except as otherwise provided herein, water use shall be
billed at the following general rate: eight dollars and ninety-one cents
($8.91) per one thousand (1,000) gallons used, prorated to the nearest 100
gallons, billed monthly.
   2.   Irrigation Meter Rate. For water use registered by an irrigation meter,
for which no sewer service charge is made, the following rate applies and not
the general rate:
      A.   Residential Customers. Irrigation water use shall be billed at a
rate of 1,000 gallons, prorated to the nearest 100 gallons, as specified in the
following tiered rate chart:
 
1 - 10,000 gallons       $8.91
10,001 to 30,000 gallons $10.25
30,001 + gallons         $13.36
 
      B.   Commercial Customers. Irrigation water use shall be billed at a rate
of 1,000 gallons, prorated to the nearest 100 gallons, as specified in the
following tiered rate chart:
 
0 - 200,000 gallons $10.62
200,001 + gallons   $29.16
 
(Section 8-1B-2 – Ord. 1159 – May 25 Supp.)
8-1B-3 BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE.
   Billing and payment for water service shall be in accordance with the
following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Meters Read. Water meters shall be read on a monthly basis.
   2.   Bills Issued. The Administrative Services Director, or designee, shall
prepare and issue bills for water service on or before the first day of the
month following each monthly billing period.
   3.   Bills Payable. Bills for water service shall be due and payable at the
Utility Billing Office by the 15th of the month following the end of each
monthly billing period.
   4.   Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be considered
delinquent. A one-time late payment penalty of 10 percent of the amount due
shall be added to each delinquent bill. The City Manager is authorized to waive
the penalty in instances where circumstances seem to justify such waiver.
   5.   Returned Checks. A fee, as set forth in the fee schedule established by
Council, shall be charged for all checks not honored by the bank.
8-1B-4 SERVICE DISCONTINUED.
   Water service to delinquent customers shall be discontinued in accordance
with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Notice. Within five days following the date that bills for water
service are due and payable (i.e., the fifteenth day of the month), the Clerk
shall send a written notice to each delinquent customer that water service will
be discontinued if payment, including late payment charges, is not received
within 10 days from the date the notice is mailed. The notice shall afford the
customer the opportunity to request a hearing before the Clerk prior to the
discontinuation of service. Such written notice shall be sent by first class
mail. If the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property
has made a written request for notice, the written notice sent to the customer
shall also be given to the owner or landlord.
   2.   Service Discontinued. If payment is not received within 10 days
following the date the written notice is sent to the customer and payment
arrangements have not been made pursuant to a hearing before the Clerk, the
Public Works Department shall leave a notification card of shutoff of the
supply of water on the premises of any customer who, not having requested a
hearing, has failed to make payment by the date specified in the notice of
delinquency. Twenty-four hours following the delivery of the notification card
to the customer, the Public Works Department shall shut off the supply of
water.
   3.   Fees. The customer shall pay a fee set forth in the fee schedule
established by the Council for the issuance of a notification card to a
delinquent customer regarding the shutoff of the water supply. A turn on fee,
in the amount set forth in the fee schedule established by the Council, shall
be required to be paid before service is restored to a delinquent customer
during regular business hours. If service is restored to a delinquent customer
after regular business hours, the customer shall pay the fees set forth in the
fee schedule established by the Council for restoration of service after
regular business hours.
8-1B-5 CUSTOMER DEPOSITS.
   There shall be required from every customer or prospective customer a
deposit intended to guarantee the payment of bills for service, as follows:
   1.   Residential. For residential users:
      A.   Owner      $50.00
      B.   Renter   100.00
   2.   Commercial:
      A.   For commercial users:
 
Size          Rate
3/4 to 1 inch $50.00
1 1/2 inch    $60.00
2 inch        $90.00
3 inch        $150.00
4 inch        $190.00
6 inch        $310.00
 
      B.   For any commercial and industrial properties where the previous
experience of that building use shows a water bill to be substantially higher
than the deposit shown for that size meter, then the deposit should be
equivalent to one billing period.
   3.   Hydrant Meters. A deposit shall be made for hydrant meters, with the
amount of the hydrant meter deposit determined in accordance with an
established fee schedule, which fee schedule may be modified from time to time
with the approval of the Council.
8-1B-6 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   1.   Owner and Tenant Responsible. The owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for water
service charges to the premises. Water service charges remaining unpaid and
delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the property or premises served and
shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the
same manner as property taxes.
      A.   Water Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to
charges for water service to a residential or commercial rental property where
water service is separately metered and the rates or charges for the water
service are paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives
written notice to the City that the property is residential or commercial
rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The
City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of 90 days of such
services to be paid to the City. When the tenant moves from the rental
property, the City shall refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in
full. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs
related to any of the services.
      B.   Other Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall also not
apply to the charges for any of the services of sewer systems, stormwater
drainage systems, sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste
disposal for a residential rental property where the charge is paid directly to
the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that
the property is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for
the rates or charges for such service. The City may require a deposit not
exceeding the usual cost of 90 days of such services to be paid to the City.
When the tenant moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the
deposit if all service charges are paid in full. The lien exemption does not
apply to delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.
      C.   Written Notice. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name
of the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the residential or
commercial rental property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the
occupancy begins. Upon receipt, the City shall acknowledge the notice and
deposit. A change in tenant for a residential rental property shall require a
new written notice to be given to the City within 30 business days of the
change in tenant. A change in tenant for a commercial rental property shall
require a new written notice to be given to the City within 10 business days of
the change in tenant. A change in the ownership of the residential rental
property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the City
within 30 business days of the completion of the change of ownership. A change
in the ownership of the commercial rental property shall require written notice
of such change to be given to the City within 10 business days of the
completion of the change of ownership.
      D.   Mobile Homes, Modular Homes, and Manufactured Homes. A lien for
nonpayment of utility services described in Paragraphs A and B of this section
shall not be placed upon a premises that is a mobile home, modular home, or
manufactured home if the mobile home, modular home, or manufactured home is
owned by a tenant of and located in a mobile home park or manufactured home
community and the mobile home park or manufactured home community owner or
manager is the account holder, unless the lease agreement specifies that the
tenant is responsible for payment of a portion of the rates or charges billed
to the account holder.
   2.   Lien Notice. A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be
certified to the County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to
certify a lien is given to the customer. If the customer is a tenant and if the
owner or landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the
notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent
to the appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to
certification of the lien to the County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
8-1B-7 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 1C
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL AND CONTAINMENT
 
8-1C-1 Definitions                  8-1C-7 Installation of Backflow Assemblies
8-1C-2 Administrative Authority     8-1C-8 Backflow Prevention Assembly
                                    Technicians
8-1C-3 New Water Services           8-1C-9 Testing of Backflow Prevention
                                    Assemblies
8-1C-4 Existing Water Services      8-1C-10 Repair of Backflow Prevention
                                    Assemblies
8-1C-5 Customer Responsibilities    8-1C-11 Customer Noncompliance
8-1C-6 Required Backflow Prevention 8-1C-12 Shutting Off Water Supply
Assemblies for Containment
                                   8-1C-13 Penalty
 
8-1C-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms are defined for use in this chapter pertaining to cross
connection control and containment:
   1.   “Approved backflow prevention assembly for containment” means a
backflow prevention assembly listed by the University of Southern California -
Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research as having met
the requirements of ANSI-AWWA standard C510-89, double check valve backflow
prevention assemblies or ANSI-AWWA standard C511-89, reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention assemblies, all as amended, for containment. The listing
shall include the limitations of use based on the degree of hazard. The
backflow prevention assembly must also be listed by the International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials.
   2.   “Approved backflow prevention assembly for containment in a fire
protection system” means a backflow prevention assembly to be used in a fire
protection system which meets the requirements of “Factory Mutual Research
Corporation (FM)” and “Underwriters Laboratories (UL),” in addition to the
requirements of “approved backflow prevention assembly for containment” as
defined herein.
   3.   “Auxiliary water supply” means any water supply on or available to the
premises other than the approved water provider of public water such as, but
not limited to, a private well, pond, or river.
   4.   “Containment” means a method of backflow prevention which requires the
installation of a backflow prevention assembly at the water service entrance.
   5.   “Cross connection” means any connection or arrangement between a
potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or tank, receptacle,
equipment, or device, through which it may be possible for non-potable, used,
unclean, polluted, and contaminated water or other substance to enter into any
part of such potable water system under any condition.
   6.   “Customer” means the owner, operator, or occupant of a building or a
property or of a private water system, which has a water service from a public
water system.
   7.   “Degree of hazard” means the rating of a cross connection or water
service, which indicates the potential to cause contamination or pollution.
   8.   “Double check valve backflow prevention assembly” means a backflow
prevention device consisting of two independently acting, internally loaded
check valves, four properly located test plugs and two isolation valves.
(Backflow prevention assembly used for low hazard.)
   9.   “High hazard cross connections” means a cross connection which may
impair the quality of the potable water by creating an actual hazard to public
health through poisoning or through contamination with sewage, industrial
fluids, or waste.
   10.   “Isolation” means a method of backflow prevention in which a backflow
prevention assembly is located at the cross connection rather than at the water
service entrance.
   11.   “Low hazards cross connection” means a cross connection which may
impair the quality of potable water to a degree which does not create a hazard
to public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the
aesthetic qualities of such potable water for domestic use.
   12.   “Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly” means a
backflow prevention device consisting of two independently acting, internally
loaded check valves, a differential pressure relief valve, four properly
located test plugs and two isolation valves. (Backflow prevention assembly used
for high hazard.)
   13.   “Registered backflow prevention assembly technician” means a person
registered with the State Health Department or its successor agency to test or
repair backflow prevention assemblies and to report on the condition of those
assemblies.
   14.   “Thermal expansion” means volumetric increase of water due to heating
resulting in increased pressure in a closed system.
   15.   “Water service” means (depending on the context) the physical
connection between a public water system and a customer’s building, property,
or private water system or the act of providing potable water to a customer.
8-1C-2 ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.
   1.   For the purposes of this section only, the authority having
jurisdiction is the Council acting through the City Public Works Department or
any other authorized City official (“administrative authority”).
   2.   The administrative authority shall have the right to enter any property
to inspect for possible cross connection, upon consent of the customer or upon
a search warrant issued by a court of appropriate jurisdiction.
   3.   The administrative authority may collect fees for the administration of
this program. Fees shall be established by resolution of the Council.
   4.   The administrative authority shall maintain records of cross connection
hazard surveys and of the installation, testing, and repair of all backflow
prevention assemblies installed in this City.
8-1C-3 NEW WATER SERVICES.
   New water services shall comply with the following:
   1.   Plans shall be submitted to the administrative authority for review on
all new water services in order to determine the degree of hazard.
   2.   The administrative authority shall determine the type of backflow
prevention assembly required for containment based on the degree of hazard.
   3.   The administrative authority shall require the installation of the
appropriate backflow prevention assembly for containment before the initiation
of water service.
   4.   All underground lawn irrigation systems shall contain an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow assembly to prevent backflow or back
siphoning to the City water distribution system.
   5.   A permit shall be obtained from the administrative authority for the
installation of all underground lawn irrigation systems.
8-1C-4 EXISTING WATER SERVICES.
   Existing water services shall comply with the following:
   1.   Upgrades of existing water services shall be treated as new water
services for the purpose of this section.
   2.   The administrative authority shall, on the basis of information
received from customers or gathered through on-premises investigations or
surveys, determine the type of backflow prevention assembly required for
containment based on the degree of hazard.
   3.   All underground lawn irrigation systems shall contain an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow assembly to prevent backflow or back
siphoning to the City water distribution system.
   4.   A permit shall be obtained from the administrative authority for the
installation of all underground lawn irrigation systems.
   5.   Within the time frame specified in writing by the administrative
authority, the customer shall install a backflow prevention assembly for
containment required by City.
      A.   For existing water services, the administrative authority may
inspect the premises to determine the degree of hazard. When high hazard cross
connections are found, the administrative authority shall, at its sole
discretion:
         (1)   Develop a schedule of compliance which the customer shall
follow; or
         (2)   Terminate the water service until a backflow prevention assembly
of containment required by the City has been installed.
      B.   Failure of the administrative authority to notify a customer that
the customer is believed to have a high hazard cross connection and that the
customer shall install backflow prevention assemblies for containment in no way
relieves a customer of the responsibility to comply with all requirements of
this section.
8-1C-5 CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Responsibilities of the customer shall be as follows:
   1.   The customer shall prevent pollutants and contaminants from entering
their potable water supply or the City’s water distribution system and shall be
responsible for ensuring that no cross connections exist without approved
backflow protection within their premises starting at the point of service from
the City’s public potable water system.
   2.   The customer shall, at their own expense, cause installation,
operation, testing, and maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies.
   3.   The customer shall ensure that copies of records of the installation
and of all tests and repairs made to the backflow prevention assembly are
delivered to the administrative authority on the approved form within 15 days
after testing or repairs are completed.
   4.   If a backflow incident occurs, the customer shall immediately notify
the administrative authority of the incident and take steps to confine the
contamination or pollution.
8-1C-6 REQUIRED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES FOR CONTAINMENT.
   1.   Water Services.
      A.   An air gap or an approved reduced pressure principal backflow
prevention assembly is required for a water service having one or more cross
connections which the administrative authority has classified as a high hazard.
      B.   An approved double check valve assembly is required for water
services having no high hazard cross connections but having one or more cross
connections which the administrative authority has classified as low hazard.
   2.   Fire Protection Systems.
      A.   A reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed on all new and existing fire protection systems, which the
administrative authority has determined to have any of the following:
         (1)   Direct connections from public water mains with an auxiliary
water supply on or available to the premises for pumper connection.
         (2)   Interconnections with auxiliary supplies such as reservoirs,
rivers, ponds, wells, mills, or other industrial water systems.
         (3)   Use of antifreezes or other additives in the fire protection
system.
         (4)   Combined industrial and fire protection systems supplied from
the public water mains only, with or without gravity storage or pump suction
tanks.
         (5)   Any other facility, connection, or condition which may cause
contamination.
      A.   A double check valve assembly will be required for all other fire
protection systems. The double check valve assembly shall be required on all
new systems at the time of installation and on existing systems at the time
they are upgraded.
      B.   Submittal of proposed backflow prevention devices to the
administrative authority does not relieve the designer or the sprinkler
contractor of the responsibility of submitting plans, including backflow
prevention devices to the Fire Marshal for approval.
8-1C-7 INSTALLATION OF BACKFLOW ASSEMBLIES.
   1.   The required backflow prevention assemblies for containment shall be
installed in the horizontal plumbing immediately following the meter or as
close to that location as deemed practical by the administrative authority. In
any case, it shall be located upstream from any branch piping. Installation at
this point does not eliminate the responsibility of the customer to protect the
water supply system from contamination or pollution between the backflow
prevention assembly and the water main.
   2.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be
installed so as to be protected from flooding.
   3.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall not be
installed in underground vaults or pits.
   4.   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be protected from freezing.
Those devices used for seasonal water services may be removed in lieu of being
protected from freezing; however, the devices must be reinstalled and tested by
a registered backflow prevention technician prior to service being reactivated.
   5.   If hot water is used within the water system, thermal expansion shall
be provided for when installing a backflow prevention assembly for containment.
   6.   Provisions shall be made to convey the discharge of water from reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies to a suitable drain.
   7.   The backflow prevention assemblies shall not be installed in a place
where it would create a safety hazard, such as, but not limited to, over an
electrical panel, or above ceiling level.
   8.   If interruption of water service during testing and repair of backflow
prevention assemblies for containment is unacceptable, another backflow
prevention assembly, sized to handle the temporary water flow need during the
time of test or repair, should be installed in parallel piping.
   9.   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so that they are
accessible for testing as stated in approved plumbing code.
   10.   All shutoff valves shall conform with the current edition of the
“Manual Of Cross Connection Control” (University of Southern California)
requirements for either ball or resilient seat gate valves at the time of
installation. Ball valves shall be used on assemblies installed in piping two
inches and smaller, and resilient seat gate valves on assemblies installed in
piping larger than two inches.
   11.   The administrative authority, prior to installation, shall approve
location and protection of the containment assembly.
8-1C-8 BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TECHNICIANS.
   1.   A backflow prevention assembly technician registered by the State shall
include their registration number on all correspondence and forms required by
or associated with this chapter.
   2.   Noncompliance with any of the following by a registered technician
shall be grounds for reporting such individual to the State Department of
Public Health:
      A.   Improper testing or repair of backflow prevention assemblies.
      B.   Improper reporting of the results of testing or of repairs made to
backflow prevention assemblies.
      C.   Failure to meet registration requirements.
      D.   Related unethical practices or deliberate falsification of
documentation.
8-1C-9 TESTING OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES.
   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested as follows:
   1.   A registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall perform
testing of backflow prevention assemblies. The costs of the testing and
reporting required in this subsection and Subsections 2 through 8 of this
section shall be borne by the customer.
   2.   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation and
tested and inspected at least annually.
   3.   Backflow prevention assemblies, which are in place, but have been out
of operation for more than three months, shall be tested before being put back
into operation. Backflow prevention assemblies used in seasonal applications
shall be tested before operation resumes each season.
   4.   Any backflow prevention assembly which fails a periodic test shall be
repaired or replaced. When water service has been terminated for noncompliance,
the backflow prevention assembly shall be repaired or replaced prior to the
resumption of water service. A registered backflow prevention assembly
technician shall retest backflow prevention assemblies immediately after repair
or replacement.
   5.   Any backflow prevention assembly, which fails a periodic test that has
been installed as part of an underground lawn irrigation system shall be
replaced with approved reduced pressure principle backflow assembly to prevent
backflow or back siphoning.
   6.   The administrative authority may require backflow prevention assemblies
to be tested at any time in addition to the annual testing requirement.
   7.   The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall report the
successful test of a backflow prevention assembly to the customer and to the
City or its authorized designee, as directed by City, within 15 days of the
test. The report shall be in the form and format prescribed by the City, which
may include the submission of the report in an electronic form.
   8.   The administrative authority may require, at the owner’s expense,
additional tests of individual backflow prevention assemblies as it shall deem
necessary to verify test procedures and results.
8-1C-10 REPAIR OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES.
   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be repaired in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Registered backflow prevention assembly technicians shall perform all
repairs to backflow prevention assemblies.
   2.   Any backflow prevention assembly, which fails a periodic test that has
been installed as part of an underground lawn irrigation system that is not
already an approved reduced pressure principle, shall be replaced with approved
reduced pressure principle backflow assembly to prevent backflow or back
siphoning.
   3.   The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall not change
the design, material, or operational characteristics of a backflow prevention
assembly during repair or maintenance, and shall use only original manufacturer
replacement parts.
   4.   The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall report the
repair of a backflow prevention assembly to the customer and to the
administrative authority on the form provided by the administrative authority
within 15 days of the repair. The report shall include the list of materials or
replacement parts used.
   5.   Anytime fire services are discontinued for a period of time longer than
necessary to test the device, the tester is required to notify the Fire
Marshal’s office that the fire services are shut off for repair.
8-1C-11 CUSTOMER NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The water service may be discontinued in the case of noncompliance with this
chapter. Noncompliance includes, but is not limited to, the following:
   1.   Refusal to allow the administrative authority access to the property
for the purpose of performing inspections required by this chapter.
   2.   Removal of a backflow prevention assembly, which has been required by
the administrative authority.
   3.   Bypassing of a backflow prevention assembly, which has been required by
the administrative authority.
   4.   Providing inadequate backflow prevention when cross connections exist.
   5.   Failure to install, test, or properly repair a backflow prevention
assembly, which has been required by the administrative authority.
   6.   Deliberate falsification of documentation concerning the backflow
prevention assemblies or possible cross connections.
   7.   Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
8-1C-12 SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY.
   1.   The administrative authority may deny or discontinue, after written
notice to the customer thereof, the water service to any premises wherein:
      A.   Any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not
installed or maintained as outlined in this chapter.
      B.   It is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or
bypassed.
      C.   An unprotected cross connection exists on the premises.
      D.   The administrative authority is denied entry to determine compliance
with these regulations.
   2.   The administrative authority may immediately deny or discontinue,
without notice to the customer thereof, the water service to any premises
wherein a severe cross connection exists which constitutes an immediate threat
to the safety of the public water system. The administrative authority shall
notify the customer within 24 hours of said denial or discontinuation of
service.
   3.   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the customer
has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with
these regulations, and to the satisfaction of the administrative authority.
   4.   The customer shall pay a fee as set forth in the fee schedule
established by the Council for the turning off and turning on a water service
for noncompliance of this chapter.
8-1C-13 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
CHAPTER 2
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
 
8-2-1 Purpose                   8-2-6 Service Outside City
8-2-2 Definitions               8-2-7 Right of Entry
8-2-3 Director of Public Works  8-2-8 Use of Easements
8-2-4 Prohibited Acts           8-2-9 Special Penalties
8-2-5 Sewer Connection Required  
 
8-2-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter pertaining to sanitary sewers is to establish
rules and regulations governing the treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage
within the City in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
8-2-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the following terms are defined:
   1.   “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in
milligrams per liter or parts per million.
   2.   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building
wall.
   3.   “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the
building wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment
portion of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the
drainage of one building site.
   4.   “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial, or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly discharged into
the public sewer system.
   5.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage,
and sale of produce.
   6.   “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   7.   “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect
and approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the
public sewer system, and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
   8.   “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake, or other body of surface or ground water.
   9.   “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment
and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment,
and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other
facilities serving the equivalent of 15 persons (1,500 gpd) or less.
   10.   “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
   11.   “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   12.   “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories, or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and
industrial waste.
   13.   “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   14.   “Sewage” means a combination of the water carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.
   15.   “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
   16.   “Sewage works or sewage system” means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
   17.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   18.   “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees
levied against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of
said customers by said sewer system.
   19.   “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which
in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24 hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
   20.   “Storm drain or storm sewer” means a sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
   21.   “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of,
or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
   22.   “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
8-2-3 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The Director of Public Works has the following powers and duties related to
the City sewage system:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City sewage system.
   2.   Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   3.   Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage
connections, and manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof.
   4.   Policies. Recommend to the Council policies to be adopted and enforced
to implement the provisions of this chapter regarding the sewage system.
8-2-4 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
   1.   Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment which is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
   2.   Surface Runoff or Ground Water. Connect a roof downspout, sump pump,
exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface runoff or
ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   3.   Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by
authority of the Director of Public Works.
   4.   Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the City, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste.
   5.   Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage
except as provided in this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
   6.   Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City,
or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes,
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
8-2-5 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located,
or may in the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are
hereby required to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities
therein and a building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, such compliance to be completed within 60 days
after date of official notice from the City to do so, provided that said public
sewer is located within 100 feet of the property line of such owner and is of
such design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed
to it.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
8-2-6 SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY.
   The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the City so situated
that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the Council for
permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions
stipulated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 and 3])
8-2-7 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Director of
Public Works or representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or
other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
8-2-8 USE OF EASEMENTS.
   The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
8-2-9 SPECIAL PENALTIES.
   The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of this
chapter:
   1.   Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of
this chapter except Subsections
8-2-4(1), (3), and (4) of this chapter, shall be served by the City with
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable
time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within
the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   2.   Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the time limit provided for in Subsection 1 of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
   3.   Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the City by reason of such violation.
CHAPTER 2A
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
 
8-2A-1 Permit Required         8-2A-6 Sewer Tap
8-2A-2 Plumber Required        8-2A-7 Inspection Required
8-2A-3 Excavations             8-2A-8 Property Owner’s Responsibility
8-2A-4 Connection Requirements 8-2A-9 Abatement Of Violations
8-2A-5 Interceptors Required    
 
8-2A-1 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the City in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Application. Any person desiring to make a connection with the sewer
system shall first file with the City an application therefor, on blanks
furnished by the City, setting forth the location and description of the
property to be connected with the sewer system and for what purpose the sewer
is to be used.
   2.   Plans and Specifications. The permit application shall be supplemented
by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Community Development Director or other duly authorized
employee of the City.
   3.   Classes of Permits. There are three classes of building sewer permits.
      A.   For residential and commercial service.
      B.   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
      C.   For a connection to an existing building sewer already connected to
the public sewer.
   4.   Permit Fee. The person who makes the application shall pay the
following fee to the City to cover the cost of issuing the permit and
supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work:
      A.   One-family: $75.00 plus $10.00 inspection fee;
      B.   Duplex: $150.00 (one sewer allowable) plus $10.00 inspection fee;
      C.   Apartments: $150.00 for the first two units, and $20.00 for each
unit thereafter, plus $10.00 inspection fee;
      D.   All other connections: $75.00 plus $10.00 inspection fee;
      E.   Unusual service connection fees will be determined by the Council
when unusually high water use is anticipated, plus the $10.00 inspection fee.
   5.   Limited Responsibility for Permit Revocation. All sewer connection
permits shall be given upon the express condition that the Council may, at any
time before the work is completed, revoke and annul the same and no party
interested shall have a right to claim damages in consequence of any such
permits being revoked or annulled.
   6.   Bond Required. The person performing the connection shall provide a
surety bond in the sum of $5,000.00 secured by a responsible surety bonding
company authorized to operate within the State, conditioned to indemnify and
hold the City harmless against all losses or damages that may arise from or be
occasioned by the making of connections with the public sewers or excavations
therefor or by carelessness, negligence, or unskillfulness in making the same.
Such bond shall remain in force and must be executed for a period of one year,
except that on such expiration it shall remain in force as to all penalties,
claims, and demands that may have accrued thereunder prior to such expiration.
8-2A-2 PLUMBER REQUIRED.
   All installations of building sewers and connections to the public sewer
shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
8-2A-3 EXCAVATIONS.
   All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required for the installation
of a building sewer shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the
State Plumbing Code and the provisions of Title 7 of this Code of Ordinances.
8-2A-4 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   Any connection with a public sanitary sewer must be made under the direct
supervision of the Inspector and in accordance with the following:
   1.   Old Building Sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test conducted by
the owner and observed by the Inspector, to meet all requirements of this
article.
   2.   Separate Building Sewers. A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every occupied building; except where one building stands
at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court,
yard, or driveway.
   3.   Installation. The connection of the building sewer into the public
sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building Code and Plumbing Code.
All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
   4.   Water Lines. When possible, building sewers should be laid at least 10
feet horizontally from a water service. The horizontal separation may be less,
provided the water service line is located at one side and at least 12 inches
above the top of the building sewer.
   5.   Materials and Methods. The size, slope, alignment, materials of
construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all
conform to the requirements of the Building Code and Plumbing Code.
   6.   Depth. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth of cover above the
sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
   7.   Sewage Lifts. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low
to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the
building sewer.
   8.   Bearing Walls. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to, or within
five feet of, any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened.
   9.   Preparation of Basement or Crawl Space. No connection for any
residence, business, or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be made
unless the basement floor is poured, or in the case of a building with a slab
or crawl space, unless the ground floor is installed with the area adjacent to
the foundation of such building cleared of debris and backfilled. The backfill
shall be well compacted and graded so that the drainage is away from the
foundation. Prior to the time the basement floor is poured, or the first floor
is installed in buildings without basements, the sewer shall be plugged and the
plug shall be sealed. Any accumulation of water in any excavation or basement
during construction and prior to connection to the sanitary sewer shall be
removed by means other than draining into the sanitary sewer.
8-2A-5 INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
   Grease, oil, sludge, and sand interceptors shall be provided by gas and
service stations, convenience stores, car washes, garages, and other facilities
when, in the opinion of the Inspector, they are necessary for the proper
handling of such wastes that contain grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable waste, sand, or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. When required,
such interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the following:
   1.   Design and Location. All interceptors shall conform to Section
8-3A-6, “Installation of Grease Interceptors and Grease Traps,” of this title
to be approved by the Inspector, and shall be located so as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   2.   Construction Standards. The interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and
equipped with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and watertight.
   3.   Maintenance. All such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at
the owner’s expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient operation at
all times.
8-2A-6 SEWER TAP.
   Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the
“Y” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly
located “Y” branch is available, a tapping saddle shall be installed at the
location specified by the Director of Public Works. The public sewer shall be
tapped with a tapping machine and a saddle, appropriate to the type of public
sewer, shall be glued and attached with stainless steel clamps to the sewer. At
no time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a manhole unless
special written permission is received from the Director of Public Works and in
accordance with the direction of the Director of Public Works, if such
connection is approved.
8-2A-7 INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   All connections with the sanitary sewer system, before being covered, shall
be inspected, and approved by the Inspector. As soon as all pipe work from the
public sewer to inside the building has been completed, and before any
backfilling is done, the Inspector shall inspect and test the work as to
workmanship and material; no sewer pipe laid underground shall be covered or
trenches filled until after the sewer has been so inspected and approved. If
the Inspector or other duly authorized representative refuses to approve the
work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the work.
8-2A-8 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building sewer from the public sewer to the building,
including interior piping, shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
8-2A-9 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines, whether located upon
the private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which
construction or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this
chapter, shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within 30 days after date
of official notice from the Building Department of such violation. If not made
within such time, the Director of Public Works shall, in addition to the other
penalties herein provided, have the right to finish and correct the work and
assess the cost thereof to the property owner. Such assessment shall be
collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes.
CHAPTER 2B
PUBLIC SEWER USE
 
8-2B-1 Stormwater               8-2B-5 Special Facilities
8-2B-2 Surface Waters Exception 8-2B-6 Control Manholes
8-2B-3 Prohibited Discharges    8-2B-7 Testing of Wastes
8-2B-4 Restricted Discharges     
 
8-2B-1 STORMWATER.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved
by the Director of Public Works. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged, on approval of the Director of Public Works, to a
storm sewer or natural outlet.
8-2B-2 SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION.
   Special permits for discharging surface waters to a public sanitary sewer
may be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the Director of Public
Works where such discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of
flushing, but any permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time
when deemed to the best interests of the sewer system.
8-2B-3 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   1.   Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel
oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
   2.   Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant,
including, but not limited to, cyanides (CN) in excess of two milligrams per
liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
   3.   Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five
point five or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
   4.   Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities
or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   5.   Excessive BOD, Solids or Flow.
      A.   Any waters or wastes:
         (1)   Having a five day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300
parts per million by weight; or
         (2)   Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids; or
         (3)   Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the
average sewage flow of the City, shall be subject to the review of the Director
of Public Works.
      B.   Where necessary in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, the
owner shall provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may
be necessary to:
         (1)   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by
weight; or
         (2)   Reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight;
or
         (3)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes.
      C.   Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating
to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Director of Public Works, and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
8-2B-4 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
   1.   Substances Restricted. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if
it appears likely in the opinion of the Director of Public Works that such
wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have
an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb,
public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Director of Public Works will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation
to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant,
degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other
pertinent factors. The substances restricted are:
      A.   High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher
than 150 Fahrenheit (65°C).
      B.   Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease,
or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or
600 milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble matter.
      C.   Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees
Fahrenheit (zero and 65°C).
      D.   Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is,
to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than
one-half inch in any dimension.
      E.   Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
      F.   Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the Director of Public Works for such materials.
      G.   Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other
taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits
which may be established by the Director of Public Works as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of State, federal,
or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving
waters.
      H.   Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-
life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director of
Public Works in compliance with applicable State or federal regulations.
      I.   Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of
nine point five.
      J.   Unusual Wastes. Materials which exert or cause:
         (1)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).
         (2)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
         (3)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
         (4)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
      K.   Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers
for their maintenance and repair.
      L.   Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials, or substances
which react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases,
develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable
concentration or create any other condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
      M.   Untreatable Wastes: Waters or wastes containing substances which are
not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
   2.   Powers of Director. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are
proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Subsection 1 of this
section and which, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the Director of Public Works may:
      A.   Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the
public sewage system;
      B.   Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
      C.   Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; or
      D.   Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling
and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of Chapter 2D of this article.
8-2B-5 SPECIAL FACILITIES.
   If the Director of Public Works permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Director of Public Works and subject
to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where
preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters
or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.
8-2B-6 CONTROL MANHOLES.
   When required by the Director of Public Works, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the Director of Public Works. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at
the owner’s expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
8-2B-7 TESTING OF WASTES.
   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater,” published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic
grab samples.)
CHAPTER 2C
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
 
8-2C-1 Construction and Maintenance 8-2C-4 Discharge Restrictions
8-2C-2 Compliance with Regulations  8-2C-5 Systems Abandoned
8-2C-3 Permit Required              8-2C-6 Disposal of Septage
 
8-2C-1 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   1.   System Prohibited. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is
unlawful to construct or maintain any on site wastewater treatment and disposal
system or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
   2.   System Required. When a public sanitary sewer is not available under
the provisions ofSection
8-2-5 of this title, every building wherein persons reside, congregate, or are
employed shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
   3.   Maintenance of System. The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system shall operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at
all times and at no expense to the City.
8-2C-2 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and
requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and
with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the
County Board of Health.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3 and 4])
8-2C-3 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of
Health.
8-2C-4 DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.
   It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch,
stream, pond, lake, natural, or artificial waterway, drain tile, or to the
surface of the ground.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
8-2C-5 SYSTEMS ABANDONED.
   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an
on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section
8-2-5 of this title, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in
compliance with this chapter and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
8-2C-6 DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.
   No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at any
location except an approved disposal site.
CHAPTER 2D
SERVICE RATES AND CONNECTION CHARGES
 
8-2D-1 Sewer Service Charges Required 8-2D-7 Lien for Nonpayment
8-2D-2 Basic Rate                     8-2D-8 Discontinuance of Service
8-2D-3 Minimum Charge                 8-2D-9 Special Agreements Permitted
8-2D-4 Special Rates                  8-2D-10 Annual Revision of Rates
8-2D-5 Private Water Systems          8-2D-11 User Notification
8-2D-6 Payment of Bills               8-2D-12 Inconsistent Agreements or
                                      Contracts
 
8-2D-1 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED.
   Every customer whose premises is served by a connection with the sanitary
sewer system of the City, either directly or indirectly, shall pay to the City
sewer service charges as hereinafter established and specified for the purpose
of contributing toward the costs of construction, maintenance, and operation of
a sewage treatment plant and system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
8-2D-2 BASIC RATE.
   1.   Except as hereinafter noted, effective May 15, 2025, each customer
whose property lies within the corporate limits of the City shall pay to the
City, through its collection agent, the Clive Water Department, at the same
time payment for City water service is made, the following charges:
      A.   A flat sewer availability charge at the rate of nine dollars and one
cent ($9.01) per month, regardless of the amount of consumption by the
customer; and
      B.   A sewage consumption charge computed on water consumption at the
rate of six dollars and eighty-six cents ($6.86) per one thousand (1,000)
gallons of water used, prorated to the nearest 100 gallons, billed monthly.
(Subsection 1 – Ord. 1160 – May 25 Supp.)
   2.   The foregoing consumption rate shall apply if the sewage meets the
standard for domestic and commercial sewage, which is as follows:
      A.   Suspended solids   Not to exceed 400 ppm
      B.   Biochemical oxygen demand   Not to exceed 400 ppm
   3.   If sewage is contributed which does not meet the above standards, there
will be a surcharge where suspended solids or biochemical oxygen demand are in
excess of 400 parts per million. The surcharge shall be computed at the rate of
$0.105 per 1,000 gallons of such sewage contributed.
8-2D-3 MINIMUM CHARGE.
   In no case shall the total minimum charge be less than $14.96 per month,
which amount shall include both the flat sewer availability charge and the
sewage consumption charge. Such amount is necessary to retire the indebtedness,
operation, and maintenance, and reserve necessary for maintaining the sanitary
sewer facility.
8-2D-4 SPECIAL RATES.
   Where, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works and the Council,
special conditions exist to the extent that the application of the sewer
service charges provided in Section
8-2D-2 of this chapter would be inequitable or unfair to either the City or the
customer, a special rate shall be proposed by the Director of Public Works and
submitted to the Council for approval by resolution.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
8-2D-5 PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS.
   Customers whose premises are served by a private water system shall pay
sewer service charges based upon the water used as determined by the Director
of Public Works either by an estimate agreed to by the customer or by metering
the water system at the customer’s expense. Any negotiated or agreed upon sales
or charges shall be subject to approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
8-2D-6 PAYMENT OF BILLS.
   All sewer service charges shall be due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment for water service as contained in Section
8-1B-3 of this title, and the provisions contained in Subsection
8-1B-6(C) of this title relating to notices of delinquency and lien notices
shall also apply in the event of a delinquent sewer charge.
8-2D-7 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   Except as provided for in Section
8-1B-6 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for sewer
service charges to the premises. Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and
delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the property or premises served and
shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the
same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
8-2D-8 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   After giving reasonable notice, the Director of Public Works may discontinue
water service to any customer who has failed to pay the amounts due and owing
under this chapter and who has not contested the payment therefor in good
faith. All rates or charges due and owing under this chapter, if not paid as
provided in this chapter, shall constitute a lien upon the premises served by
any of the services mentioned herein and may be certified to the County
Treasurer and collected in the same manner as taxes.
8-2D-9 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED.
   No statement in this chapter shall be construed as preventing a special
agreement, arrangement, or contract between the Council and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted subject to special conditions, rates, and costs as established by the
Council; provided further, that such rates and agreement shall not be in
violation of any law, or any outside contract between the City and other
corporate entity.
8-2D-10 ANNUAL REVISION OF RATES.
   The City will review the sewer service charges at least yearly and revise
the sewer user charges as necessary to ensure that such charges as herein
established and specified generate adequate revenues to pay the costs of
maintenance and operation (including replacement and debt service) of a sewage
treatment plant and system and that the sewer user charge system continues to
provide for the proportional distribution of maintenance and operation costs
(including replacement costs and debt service) for a sewage treatment plant and
system among the users and user classes. The liability of a sanitary sewer user
to pay for charges as provided in this chapter shall not be contingent,
however, upon any such review or revision.
8-2D-11 USER NOTIFICATION.
   The City will notify each sanitary sewer user at least annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill for charges for sanitary sewer service as
provided in this chapter, of the rate being charged for operation and
maintenance (including replacement and debt service) of the sewage treatment
plant and system. The liability of the sanitary sewer user to pay for such
charges as set forth in this chapter shall not be contingent, however, upon
such notification.
8-2D-12 INCONSISTENT AGREEMENTS OR CONTRACTS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall take precedence over the terms or
conditions of any agreements or contracts which are inconsistent with the
requirements of Section 204(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
and Section 35.2140 of 40 CFR part 35, dated May 12, 1982.
CHAPTER 3
INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE
8-3-1 Definitions                    8-3-24 Report on Compliance by
                                     Categorical Industries
8-3-2 Abbreviations                  8-3-25 Permit Conditions, Restrictions,
                                     Modifications
8-3-3 General Adoption               8-3-26 Periodic Compliance Reports
8-3-4 Intent and Construction        8-3-27 Certification and Signatory
                                     Requirements
8-3-5 Purpose and Policy             8-3-28 Monitoring Facilities
8-3-6 Jurisdiction                   8-3-29 Inspection, Sampling, and Record
                                     Keeping
8-3-7 Severability                   Authority
8-3-8 Interpretation                 8-3-30 Confidential Documents, Date, and
                                     Information
8-3-9 User Requirements              8-3-31 Appeal of Denial of Confidential
                                     Status
8-3-10 Discharge Prohibitions        8-3-32 Public Notification of
                                     Significant Noncompliance
8-3-11 Local Limits for Specific     8-3-33 Significant Noncompliance
Pollutants
8-3-12 National Categorical          8-3-34 Administrative Actions
Pretreatment Standards
8-3-13 State Requirements            8-3-35 Actions Authorized
8-3-14 City’s Right of Revision    8-3-36 Civil Penalties
8-3-15 Pretreatment                  8-3-37 Performance and Payment Bonds
8-3-16 Dilution Prohibited           8-3-38 Revocation of Discharge Permit;
                                     Termination of
8-3-17 Spill Containment             Sewer Service
8-3-18 Treatment Upsets              8-3-39 Reinstatement of Service
8-3-19 Treatment Bypass              8-3-40 Emergency Disconnection of
                                     Service
8-3-20 Fees                          8-3-41 Elimination of Discharge;
                                     Reinstatement of Permit
8-3-21 Classes of Permits            8-3-42 Additional Remedies
8-3-22 Permit Requirements Generally 8-3-43 Notices to WRA; WRA Board,
                                     Director, or Appeal
8-3-23 Permit Applications; Baseline Committee
Monitoring Reports;
Compliance Schedules                  
 
8-3-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   1.   “Act” or “Clean Water Act” means the 1972 Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, the 1977 Clean Water Act, and the 1987 Water Quality Act, as
amended.
   2.   “Approval authority” means the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
   3.   “Authorized representative”
      A.   An executive officer of a corporation.
      B.   A general partner of a partnership.
      C.   The proprietor of a proprietorship.
      D.   The conservator, trustee, attorney in fact, receiver, or other
person or agent authorized in law and in fact to act on behalf of users which
are not corporations, partnerships, or proprietorships or on behalf of other
entities which must legally act through an agent.
      E.   Any other authorized representative of a person or entity identified
in Subsection A, B, C, or D of this definition, if the authorization specifies
either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall
operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, such as the
position of plant manager or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the
written authorization is submitted to the Director.
      F.   Any other person authorized by law to act on behalf of any entity.
   4.   “Baseline monitoring report” means the report required by 40 CFR 403.12
(b)(1-7).
   5.   “Biochemical Oxygen Demand” (B.O.D.) means the analysis of B.O.D. as
described in Environmental Protection Agency methods.
   6.   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage
pipes inside the wall of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning three feet outside the building wall.
   7.   “Building sewer” or “lateral sewer” means the sewer extending from the
building drain to the connection with the POTW.
   8.   “Bypass” means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of an industrial user’s pretreatment facility.
   9.   “Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand” (C.B.O.D.) means the analysis
of B.O.D. as described in Environmental Protection Agency methods while
inhibiting the nitrogenous oxygen demand.
   10.   “Categorical user” means a user subject to National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards.
   11.   “Chemical Oxygen Demand” (C.O.D.) means the measurement of the
susceptibility of a sample to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant expressed
in mg/L and using Environmental Protection Agency methods.
   12.   “City” means the political subdivision known as the City of Clive,
Iowa, and also means the territory within the corporate boundaries of the City
of Clive.
   13.   “City sanitary sewer system” or “sanitary sewer system” means the
local outfall sewers, trunk sewers, pumping stations, force mains, and
wastewater equalization basins, and all other structures, devices, and
appliances appurtenant thereto, which are used for collecting, conveying, or
storing wastewater and which serve and are owned, operated, and maintained by
the City or by a sanitary district serving the City.
   14.   “Combined waste stream formula” means the formula as found in 40 CFR
403.6(e).
   15.   “Composite sample” means a representative sample using a minimum of
three (3) grab sample aliquots obtained over a period of time and mixed using
either a flow proportional or time proportional method.
   16.   “Conventional pollutant: B.O.D., C.O.D., O and G,” means suspended
solids, pH, ammonia nitrogen, total Kjeldahl nitrogen, and fecal coliform
bacteria.
   17.   “Discharge” or “indirect discharge” means the introduction of treated
or untreated wastewater into the POTW.
   18.   “Dissolved solids” means the concentration of residue left in an
evaporating dish after evaporation and drying at defined temperatures using
Environmental Protection Agency methods or standard methods.
   19.   “Domestic user” means a person discharging only domestic wastewater to
the POTW, which wastewater is discharged from any building or parts of a
building designed for or occupied by one or more persons as a single
housekeeping unit, including such units within multifamily dwellings and
apartment buildings, which building or premises is a source of wastewater
discharge into a POTW.
   20.   “Domestic wastewater” means all household-type waste discharged from
places of human habitation, including toilet, bath, kitchen, and laundry
wastewater. Domestic wastewater is further defined as waste which does not
exceed daily maximum limits of 300 milligrams per liter C.O.D., 200 milligrams
per liter B.O.D., 250 milligrams per liter suspended solids, 100 milligrams per
liter oil and grease, 30 milligrams per liter TKN., and 15 milligrams per liter
NH3-N at a discharge rate of 100 gallons per capita per day. This loading is
equal to 0.25 pound of C.O.D., 0.17 pound of B.O.D., 0.20 pound of suspended
solids, 0.083 pound of oil and grease, 0.025 pound of TKN and 0.013 pound of
NH3-N per capita per day.
   21.   “E. Coli or escherichia coli” means bacteria that are a member of the
fecal coliform group and whose presence indicates fecal contamination in water.
   22.   “Environmental protection agency methods” means standard procedures
for wastewater analysis approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
and prescribed in 40 CFR 136, and includes alternate methods approved by the
approval authority.
   23.   “Environmental protection agency” or “E.P.A.” means the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
   24.   “Fat, oil, and grease” or “F.O.G.” Those substances which are
detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40
CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to
herein as "grease" or "greases".
   25.   “Fecal coliform” means bacteria common to the intestinal tracts of
humans and animals whose presence in water is an indication of pollution.
   26.   “Garbage” means solid waste from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling,
storage, and sale of produce.
   27.   “Grab sample” means a single aliquot sample collected either directly
or by means of a mechanical device.
   28.   “Headworks” means the main wet well at the W.R.F. prior to any
treatment process.
   29.   “Industrial user” means a person whose property, building, or premises
is a source of wastewater discharge into the POTW, other than a domestic user.
   30.   “Industrial waste” means the liquid waste from industrial users as
distinct from domestic sewage.
   31.   “Interference” means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, which both:
      A.   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and
      B.   Causes a violation of any requirement of the WRA’s National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation) or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with any federal, State, or local regulations or permits.
   32.   “Limit” means the maximum allowable discharge of a given pollutant as
in the following definitions:
      A.   Daily Maximum Limit or Daily Instantaneous Maximum Limit. The
maximum allowable discharge of pollutant as measured at any time during a
calendar day, expressed as either a concentration limit or a daily mass limit.
It is a violation if the concentration limit on any single sample taken exceeds
the discharge limits in the discharge permit for the user, or the discharge
limits set forth in Section
8-3-11 of this chapter.
      B.   Monthly Average Limit. The maximum allowable value for the average
of all measurements of a pollutant obtained during one calendar month.
   33.   “NH3-N” means the ammonia nitrogen concentration in mg/L as determined
using Environmental Protection Agency methods.
   34.   “National Categorical Pretreatment Standards” (NCPS) means any
limitations on pollutant discharges to POTW promulgated by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency that apply to specified process wastewater of
particular industrial categories.
   35.   “Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User” (NSICU) means a
categorical user which never discharge more than 100 gallons per day of total
categorical wastewater, as defined in 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2).
   36.   “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit” (NPDES) means
a permit issued pursuant to the Act.
   37.   “New source” means as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(k).
   38.   “Nonconventional pollutants” means all pollutants which are not
included in the definition of conventional pollutants.
   39.   “O and M” means operation and maintenance.
   40.   “POTW treatment plant” means that portion of the publicly owned
treatment works which is designed to provide treatment, including recycling and
reclamation, of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
   41.   “Pass through” means a discharge which exits the POTW into water of
the State in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of
the WRA’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit, including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or other permit issued to
the WRA by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources or the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.
   42.   “PERSON” means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, association, joint stock company, society, corporation trust, estate,
municipality, governmental entity, group, or any other legal entity, or their
legal representatives, agents, or assigns.
   43.   “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
   44.   “Pollution” means the alteration of chemical, physical, biological, or
radiological integrity of water as a result of human activity or enterprise.
   45.   “Pretreatment” means the reduction, elimination, or alteration of the
nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging
or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
   46.   “Pretreatment facility” means the equipment used to accomplish
pretreatment.
   47.   “Pretreatment requirements” means any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment standards, imposed on an industrial user.
   48.   “Pretreatment standards” means for any specified pollutant, the
prohibitive discharge standards as set forth in Section
8-3-10 of this chapter, the specific limitations on discharge as set forth in
Section
8-3-11 of this chapter, the State pretreatment standards or the National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, whichever standard is most stringent.
   49.   “Properly shredded garbage” means the waste from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that
all particles are carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in the POTW, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   50.   “Publicly owned treatment works” or “POTW” means treatment works as
defined by Section 212 of the Clean Water Act, and which is owned by the Des
Moines metropolitan wastewater reclamation authority or any of participating
communities that make up the WRA.
   This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances if
they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant.
   51.   “Sampling chamber” or “sampling maintenance hole” means a device or
structure suitable and appropriate to permit sampling and flow measurement of a
wastewater stream to determine compliance with this chapter.
   52.   “Severe property damage” means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to a pretreatment facility causing it to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   53.   “Sewage” means wastewater as herein defined.
   54.   “Sewage system” means sewers, intercepting sewers, pipes or conduits,
pumping stations, force mains, and all other constructions, devices, and
appliances appurtenant thereto used for collecting or conducting sewage to a
point of treatment or ultimate disposal.
   55.   “Significant user”
      A.   All categorical users.
      B.   All industrial users that:
         (1)   Discharge 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater
(excludes sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater);
         (2)   Contribute a process waste stream which makes up five percent or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the W.R.F.; or
         (3)   Contribute a discharge that has a reasonable potential, in the
opinion of the Director, to adversely affect the POTW treatment plant by
causing interference or pass through.
   56.   “Sludge” means the solids separated from the liquids during the
wastewater treatment process.
   57.   “Slug” or “slug load” means any discharge of water or wastewater
which, in concentration of any pollutant, measured using a grab or composite
sample, is more than five times the allowable concentration as set forth in
Sections
8-3-10 and
8-3-11 of this chapter or in a user’s most recent wastewater discharge permit
or which exceeds a slug concentration level specified in a wastewater discharge
permit. A discharge with pH outside the allowable range by more than one
standard unit (SU) shall also be considered a slug.
   58.   “Standard Industrial Classification” (SIC) means a classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, most recent
edition.
   59.   “Standard method” means the laboratory procedures set forth in the
latest USEPA approved edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Wastewater prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment
Federation.
   60.   “Storm sewer” means a sewer which carries stormwater, surface water,
and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial waste other than unpolluted
cooling water.
   61.   “T” means when used as a portion of a chemical name, shall designate
“total” such as in “cyanide-T” where “T” means “total” cyanide.
   62.   “TKN” means the total Kjeldahl nitrogen concentration expressed in mg/
L as determined using Environmental Protection Agency methods or standard
methods.
   63.   “Total metal” means the sum total of the suspended and dissolved
concentrations of a metal specified in a wastewater discharge permit or as
specified in Section
8-3-11 of this chapter.
   64.   “Total Suspended Solids” (TSS) means the portion of total solids
retained by a filter using Environmental Protection Agency methods or standard
methods.
   65.   “Total Toxic Organics” (TTO) means the summation of all quantified
values greater than 0.01 milligram per liter for the toxic organics as
specified in the applicable regulation.
   66.   “Toxic pollutant” means any pollutant or combination of pollutants
listed in 40 CFR 403, Appendix B.
   67.   “Unpolluted water” means water containing none of the following: free
or emulsified oil and grease; substances that may impart taste, odor, or color
characteristics; volatile, explosive, toxic or poisonous substances in
suspension or solution; explosive, odorous, or otherwise obnoxious gases. Such
water shall not contain more than 25 milligrams per liter of suspended solids,
and not more than 25 milligrams per liter of B.O.D.
   68.   “Upset” means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional
and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards because of factors
beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
pretreatment facilities, inadequate pretreatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
   69.   “User” means a person discharging anything other than domestic
wastewater into the POTW, and includes categorical users as herein defined.
   70.   “Waste generator” means any person who hauls or has hauled on its
behalf wastewater it generates to the W.R.F.
   71.   “Waste hauler” means a private contractor licensed by the WRA to
deliver wastewater to the W.R.F. or other locations approved by the WRA
Director, and includes all persons required to have a license under Section 8-
3B-2 of this title.
   72.   “WRA agreement” means the amended and restated agreement for the Des
Moines metropolitan wastewater reclamation authority, approved, and executed by
the WRA and its participating communities and effective as of July 1, 2004.
   73.   “WRA Collection and Conveyance System” or “WCCS” means the WRA
sanitary sewer interceptors and extensions to same, detention basins,
equalization basins, storage facilities, pumping stations, force mains, and all
related property and improvements.
   74.   “WRA director” or “director” means the person appointed by the WRA
Board, or by the WRA operating contractor upon consultation with the Board, as
provided in Section 2.63 of the WRA operating contract, who is charged with the
administration and management of the WRA system and of the provision of all
services outlined in the operating contract. Unless otherwise indicated in the
text, the Director shall mean and include the person acting as the Director’s
authorized designee in the Director’s absence in carrying out the Director’s
duties under this chapter.
   75.   “WRA operating contractor” or “operating contractor” means the City of
Des Moines, pursuant to the initial operating contractor executed by the City
of Des Moines and the WRA Board on and as of July 1, 2004, or such successor
operating contractor as the WRA shall contract with to provide operation and
management services to the WRA
   76.   “WRA” or “wastewater reclamation authority” means the Des Moines
metropolitan wastewater reclamation authority, an entity organized and existing
under Chapters 28E and 28F of the Code of Iowa, and established pursuant to the
WRA Agreement. The term “WRA” means and includes the representatives of the
participating communities on the WRA Board, and the officers and employees of
the WRA
   77.   “WRA participating community” means individually or collectively,
depending on context, the Cities of Altoona, Ankeny, Bondurant, Clive, Cumming,
Des Moines, Grimes, Johnston, Norwalk, Pleasant Hill, Polk City, Waukee, West
Des Moines, Polk County, Warren County, the Urbandale Sanitary Sewer District,
the Urbandale-Windsor Heights Sanitary District and the Greenfield Plaza/Hills
of Conventry Sanitary District, together with any other cities, counties, or
sanitary districts that become participating communities under the provisions
of the WRA Agreement.
   78.   “WRA system” means the W.R.F., the W.C.C.S., satellite wastewater and
C.S.O. treatment facilities hereafter constructed, all real and personal
property of every nature hereinafter owned by the WRA and comprising part of or
used as a part of the WRA system, and all appurtenances, contracts, leases,
franchises, and other intangibles of the WRA.
   79.   “WRA wastewater reclamation facility” or “WRF” means the wastewater
treatment plant located generally at 3000 Vandalia Road, Des Moines, Iowa, as
the same may be expanded or improved in the future, and any other wastewater
treatment plants hereafter acquired or constructed and operated by the WRA.
   80.   “Wastewater” means and includes sewage as defined in federal law and
regulation, or a combination of the liquid and water-carried waste from
residences, commercial buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments,
together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted
to enter the POTW.
   81.   “Wastewater discharge permit” means the document issued to a user by
the WRA, in accordance with the terms of this chapter, which permits such user
to discharge wastewater to the POTW.
   82.   “Waste hauler” means a private contractor licensed by the WRA to
deliver wastewater to the WRF or other locations approved by the WRA Director,
and includes all persons required to have a license under Section
8-3-22 of this chapter.
   83.   “Water of the State” means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural, or artificial, public, or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the State or any portion
thereof.
8-3-2 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
BETX     Benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, and xylenes (total)
BMR      Baseline monitoring report
BOD      Biochemical oxygen demand
C        Celsius
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
COD      Chemical oxygen demand
EPA      Environmental Protection Agency
F        Fahrenheit
FOG      Fat, oil, and grease
gpd      Gallons per day
IDNR     Iowa Department of Natural Resources
lb/day   Pounds per day
mgd      Million gallons per day
mg/L     Milligrams per liter
NCPS     National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or categorical standards
NH3-N    Ammonia nitrogen
NPDES    National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
O and G  Oil and grease
POTW     Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA     Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SCP      Spill control plan
SIC      Standard industrial classification
SNC      Significant noncompliance
TCLP     Toxicity characteristic leaching procedure
TFE      Trichlorotrifluoroethane
TKN      Total Kjeldahl nitrogen
TOH      Total organic hydrocarbons
TRC      Technical review criteria
TSS      Total suspended solids
TTO      Total toxic organics
U.S. EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
USC      United States Code
VPH      Volatile petroleum hydrocarbons
 
8-3-3 GENERAL ADOPTION.
   The provisions of this chapter are enacted to aid in the enforcement of the
pretreatment regulations set forth in this chapter. The City, by enacting this
chapter designates the WRA and its operating contractor as the enforcement
agency under this chapter. Employees, agents, and officers of the WRA and of
its operating contractor, while acting to enforce this chapter for the WRA, are
empowered to make such inspections, issue such orders, or permits and take such
actions within the corporate boundaries of the City as are authorized by this
chapter. The WRA or its operating contractor is also authorized to impose and
collect all fees or penalties authorized by this chapter, and is authorized to
directly bill and collect from contributors penalties, fees, charges, and
surcharges from all users within the City. A user’s failure to pay any fee,
charge, penalty, or surcharge is a municipal infraction and shall also be
grounds to discontinue sewer service to the user, all as hereafter more
particularly provided. The enforcement of this chapter in the City is not
dependent upon passage of this chapter or a similar ordinance by other WRA
participating communities.
8-3-4 INTENT AND CONSTRUCTION.
   This chapter seeks to implement provisions of the Act, the general
pretreatment regulations found at 40 CFR, parts 403, and the Iowa
Administrative Code, Chapter 567, Sections 62.4 and 62.8. This chapter is to be
construed and applied in accordance with the Clean Water Act amendments, the
general pretreatment regulations, the Iowa Administrative Code and the purpose
and policy provision set forth in Section
8-3-3 of this chapter.
8-3-5 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   This chapter regulates the use of sanitary sewers; private wastewater
disposal; the installation and connection of building sewers; and the discharge
of wastewater or waste into the POTW, and the deposit of wastewater and waste
hauled to the WRF or to other locations approved by the WRA Director for
disposal and treatment. The objectives of this chapter are:
   1.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that may
interfere with the operation of the system or interfere with sludge management
and disposal.
   2.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that may pass
through the system inadequately treated and ultimately into receiving water,
the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the system.
   3.   To protect workers’ safety and health and protect against damage to the
POTW.
   4.   To provide for equitable distribution of treatment and industrial
pretreatment costs resulting from pollutants introduced into the POTW.
8-3-6 JURISDICTION.
   The sections of this chapter are applicable in their entirety to all users
who contribute wastewater, directly or indirectly, into the POTW without regard
to whether the physical facilities of such users are situated within or outside
the corporate limits of the City.
8-3-7 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any
particular person or particular circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or application of this chapter which can be
given effect without the invalid provision or application. To this end, the
provisions of this chapter are severable.
8-3-8 INTERPRETATION.
   This chapter shall be construed and interpreted to conform with 40 CFR I,
and it is the intent of this chapter that it comply with the federal
regulations.
8-3-9 USER REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   Specific Requirements. The following requirements shall apply to all
users of the POTW:
      A.   All users shall promptly notify the WRA Director in advance of any
substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge.
      B.   New or increased contributions of pollutants or changes in the
nature of pollutants discharged to the POTW shall require prior approval by the
WRA Director.
      C.   Industrial users shall notify the WRA Director, the Environmental
Protection Agency Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State
hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR 261. The notification shall comply with the requirements set forth in 40
CFR 403.12(p).
      D.   Discharge of any pollutants without the notice and approval required
by this section is prohibited. Upon the receipt of notice required by this
section, the WRA Director shall, within 180 days or less, approve the discharge
if they find the proposed discharge meets applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements and would not cause the WRA to violate its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit. The WRA Director shall deny permission for
the discharge if they find applicable pretreatment standards and requirements
are not met or the discharge would cause a violation of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit for the WRF.
   In lieu of denial of permission for discharge, the WRA Director may allow
such discharge or contribution upon conditions which would not violate
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements and would not cause a
violation of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit for the
WRF.
      E.   Food service establishments shall be regulated first under
Subsection 1(A) of this chapter, but may be required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit and be subject to the requirements of this chapter if the WRA
Director determines that additional pretreatment is required in order to comply
with fat, oil, and grease discharge limits.
   2.   Permit. Any part of this section notwithstanding, upon receipt of the
notice required by this section, the WRA Director may require, in addition to
the requirements of this section, that an industrial user obtain a permit under
this chapter. Users who are determined to be industrial users as herein defined
and who refuse to apply for or obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall be
subject to termination of sewer services as provided in Section
8-3-38 of this chapter.
8-3-10 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   The following general prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW
unless the user is subject to a more restrictive National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, or wastewater
discharge permit limit. The following substances are prohibited from discharge
to the POTW:
   1.   Pollutants creating a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including,
but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140
degrees Fahrenheit (60°C) using test methods referenced in 40 CFR 261.21. Waste
streams shall not be ignitable at ambient temperatures. At no time shall two
successive readings on a meter capable of reading LEL (lower explosive limit)
at the nearest accessible point to the POTW, at the point of discharge into the
POTW or at any point in the POTW, be more than five percent nor any single
reading greater than 10 percent.
   2.   Any substance which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW,
but in no case discharges with pH lower than 5.0 or greater than 12.0.
   3.   Solid or viscous pollutants which will cause obstruction to the flow in
the POTW resulting in interference. Such pollutants include, but are not
limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any
dimension, animal tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings,
entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or
marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, wipes, spent
grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues from
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or
polishing waste, or tumbling and de-burring stones, and wastewater containing
fat, wax, O and G, or other substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0°C and
65°C).
   4.   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (B.O.D., etc.)
released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which will
cause interference or pass-through at the WRF or which constitutes a slug load
as defined in this chapter.
   5.   Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater or vapor having a
temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65°C) at the point of
introduction into the POTW, and in no case wastewater or vapor which alone or
in concert with other discharges produces a temperature at the WRF greater than
104 degrees Fahrenheit (40°C).
   6.   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
   7.   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems or a public nuisance.
   8.   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the WRA.
   9.   Any radioactive material as defined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended, and as defined in I.C. § 136C.1, except materials which meet
conditions of disposal by release into sanitary sewerage pursuant to 10 CFR
20.2003.
   10.   Any wastewater containing concentrations of inert suspended solids
such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues,
or of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate, which exceed 3,000 mg/L nonvolatile or 3,000 mg/L total dissolved
solids unless approved by the WRA Director.
   11.   Pollutants causing excessive discoloration such as, but not limited
to, dye waste and vegetable tanning solutions.
   12.   Hazardous waste pharmaceuticals for human or animal use as defined in
40 CFR 266.500.
8-3-11 LOCAL LIMITS FOR SPECIFIC POLLUTANTS.
   1.   Generally. Local limits for specific pollutants discharged pursuant to
this chapter shall be as follows:
      A.   Dilution. Dilution of the discharge from a pretreatment facility or
from a regulated process is prohibited as a method for treatment of wastes in
order to meet the limits set forth in this chapter.
      B.   Sample Location. Measurement of pollutant concentrations to
determine compliance shall be made at the point immediately following the
pretreatment facility and before mixture with other waters, unless another
point is designated by the WRA Director. If necessary, the concentrations so
measured shall be recomputed to exclude the effect of any dilution that is
improper using the combined waste stream formula.
   2.   Headworks Limits; Average Mass. The average composite loading of all
industrial users contributing the following specific pollutants to the POTW
shall not exceed the allowable total pounds. The allocation of pollutants
between industrial and nonindustrial sources may be adjusted by the Director
provided that the allowable total loading for any pollutant at the headworks of
the WRF is not exceeded.
 
Pollutant 30 Day Average Allowable Pounds/Day
Total     Industrial
B.O.D.    195,600 135,153
TSS       300,400 208,463
NH3       13,000  6,959
TKN       27,760  16,950
 
Pollutant Maximum Allowable Headworks Loading Maximum Allowable Industrial
          Pounds/Day                          Loading Pounds/Day
Pollutant    Maximum Allowable Headworks Loading Maximum Allowable Industrial
             Pounds/Day                          Loading Pounds/Day
Arsenic - T  7.58                                3.81
Cadmium - T  3.65                                2.16
Chromium - T 136.35                              120.90
Copper - T   148.56                              125.51
Cyanide - T  17.08                               8.28
Lead - T     28.17                               20.94
Mercury - T  0.999                               0.747
Nickel - T   87.27                               75.75
Silver - T   23.30                               19.77
Zinc - T     360.59                              283.53
 
   3.   Discharge Concentration Limits and Review Criteria. Discharge
concentration limits and review criteria shall be as follows:
      A.   Review of Discharges. The discharge into the POTW of any materials,
water, or waste having a pollutant concentration greater than the limits in
Subsections 3(C), 3(D), and 3(E) of this section or containing pollutants not
listed herein shall be subject to the review and approval of the WRA Director.
After review of the proposed discharges, the WRA Director may:
         (1)   Reject the waste for reasons consistent with Section
8-3-5 of this chapter.
         (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable pollutant concentration
for discharge to the POTW.
         (3)   Require control of the quantities and rates of discharge of the
water or waste.
         (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treatment of water and waste or any combination thereof.
         (5)   Reduce the maximum or average mass loading of present and
prospective individual users on any reasonable prorated basis to meet headworks
loading limits at the WRF.
         (6)   Require the user to obtain a wastewater discharge permit and be
subject to any of the rules and regulations contained therein.
         (7)   Require the user to meet local limits when local limits are more
restrictive than National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, provided that
headworks loading limits are met.
         (8)   Initiate enforcement action in response to any noncompliance
with this chapter using the enforcement procedures outlined in this chapter.
         (9)   Take any combination of the steps in Subsections 3(A)(1) through
3(A)(7)of this section, as appropriate.
      B.   Industrial Users. Users discharging wastewater to the POTW whose
pollutant concentrations or flows are greater than the following shall be
considered industrial users for purposes of sewer charges and may be regulated
or permitted by the WRA Director as appropriate:
Pollutant Daily Maximum (mg/L)
Pollutant   Daily Maximum (mg/L)
B.O.D.      200
TSS         250
COD         300
O and G - T 100
TKN         30
NH3-N       15
An average daily flow greater than 5,000 gallons or having an unusual
concentration of flow
 
      C.   Pollutant Limits. Average and maximum concentration limits for users
without National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for these pollutants shall
be as follows:
Pollutant Daily Maximum (mg/L) Monthly Average (mg/L)
Pollutant         Daily Maximum (mg/L) Monthly Average (mg/L)
Arsenic - T       0.38                 0.25
Cadmium - T       0.08                 0.05
Chromium - T      6.43                 4.29
Copper - T        10.21                6.80
Cyanide - T       0.53                 0.36
Lead - T          1.43                 0.95
Mercury - T       0.042                0.028
Nickel - T        7.22                 4.81
O and G - T       400.0
O and G - Mineral 100.0
Silver - T        1.30                 0.87
VPH               10.0
Zinc - T          19.64                13.09
pH range - not lower than 5.0 or greater than 12.0
Temperature (liquids or vapors) - not greater than 150°F at point of entry
 
      D.   Daily Maximum Pollutant Limits for Hauled Waste. Wastes delivered to
the WRF by truck or rail shall not exceed the following concentrations in any
load or overall daily loading limits unless otherwise approved by the WRA
Director:
Pollutant Concentration (mg/L) Loading (pounds/day)
Pollutant    Concentration (mg/L) Loading (pounds/day)
COD          100,000
O and G - T  50,000
VPH          10.0
Arsenic - T                       0.014
Cadmium - T                       0.93
Chromium - T                      24.74
Copper - T                        23.71
Cyanide - T                       0.29
Lead - T                          6.70
Mercury - T                       0.12
Nickel - T                        3.71
Silver - T                        0.26
Zinc - T                          87.62
pH range shall not be lower than 5.0 or greater than 12.0
 
      E.   Daily Maximum Limit for Gasoline Cleanup Projects. Discharge of
wastewater from sites where gasoline is being removed from the soil or
groundwater shall meet the following limits prior to discharge to the POTW:
 
Pollutant (mg/L)
Benzene   0.050
BETX      0.750
 
   4.   Compliance with Designated Standards. No subsection of this section
shall be construed to provide lesser discharge standards than are or that may
be imposed and required by U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources, nor to allow the average allowable total
loading for any pollutant at the headworks of the WRF to be exceeded.
8-3-12 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   Users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards (NCPS) as
contained in 40 CFR I, Subchapter N, Part 405 - 471 shall comply with the
standards and applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. New
sources of categorical discharge shall meet National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards in the shortest feasible time, but in no case longer than 90 days
from the commencement of discharge. Failure to comply shall be a violation of
this chapter and subject the user to enforcement action. The WRA is required to
notify all known affected categorical users of the applicable reporting
requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. Failure of the WRA to notify a user shall not
relieve the user of the duty, if any, to comply with National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards.
8-3-13 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
   State requirements and limitations on discharges pursuant to this chapter
shall apply when they are more stringent than U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or WRA requirements and limitations unless allowed by the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources.
8-3-14 CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The City, acting at the direction of the WRA, reserves the right to
establish more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW
than those contained in this chapter if deemed necessary to comply with the
purpose and policy objectives presented in Section
8-3-5 of this chapter.
8-3-15 PRETREATMENT.
   1.   Facility’s Requirements. A user discharging or with potential to
discharge any waste into the POTW as set forth in Sections
8-3-10,
8-3-11, or
8-3-12 of this chapter shall be required by the WRA Director to construct,
install, and operate, at the user’s sole expense, such pretreatment facilities
as may be required in order to:
      A.   Reduce the objectionable characteristics or constituents of
wastewater to within the maximum limits provided for in Sections
8-3-10,
8-3-11, and
8-3-12 of this chapter.
      B.   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such wastewater.
      C.   Reduce the pollutants to such concentration and flows as may be
contained in the user's wastewater discharge permit.
      D.   Prevent the discharge of liquid waste containing FOG, sand in
excessive amounts, any flammable waste, or other harmful pollutants. All traps
or similar devices shall be of a type and capacity needed to perform
effectively and shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. All traps or devices shall be provided and maintained in efficient
operating condition at all times. Materials removed from traps shall be
considered unacceptable for disposal at the WRF unless specifically approved by
the WRA Director.
   2.   Review and Approval of Plans. All plans, specifications, technical
operating data, and other information pertinent to the proposed operation and
maintenance of pretreatment facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the
WRA Director prior to construction. Design and installation of such facilities
shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, chapters, and
laws, including local zoning regulations. The review and approval of such plans
and operating procedures shall, in no way, relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent
acceptable to the WRA Director under this chapter. Any subsequent changes in
the pretreatment facilities or method of operations shall be reported to and be
acceptable to the WRA Director prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.
   3.   Maintenance of Facilities. Users shall continuously maintain all
pretreatment facilities required by this chapter in satisfactory and effective
operating condition at the sole expense of such user.
   4.   Special Agreements. No section contained in this chapter shall be
construed to prevent or prohibit a separate or special agreement between the
WRA and any user whereby wastewater containing waste of unusual strength,
character, or composition may be accepted for treatment, subject to additional
payment by such user; provided, however, that such agreement shall have the
prior approval of the WRA Board, shall not conflict with the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency requirements, and
shall be consistent with Subsection
8-3-11(B) and Sections
8-3-12 and
8-3-13 of this chapter, and Subsection 6 of this section.
   5.   Rejection of Waste. The WRA Director may reject any waste which, in the
opinion of the Director, may cause interference or pass-through.
   6.   Waste Discharge Approval Required. Users shall obtain the specific
approval of the WRA Director prior to discharging any waste resulting from a
pretreatment facility to the POTW.
   The WRA Director may develop a documentation system to track the
transportation and final disposition of any pretreatment waste. Pretreatment
waste regulated by this subsection shall include waste generated as a result of
pretreatment processes used to comply with National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permits, air pollution permits, wastewater discharge
permits, soil/groundwater reclamation processes, and pollutants resulting from
a spill of any liquid or solid material or the cleanup of any such spill.
Pretreatment waste is prohibited from disposal to the waters of the State
except as specifically permitted by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
8-3-16 DILUTION PROHIBITED.
   Users shall not increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to
dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
pretreatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or with any other pollutant-
specific limitation developed by the WRA or its operating contractor.
8-3-17 SPILL CONTAINMENT.
   1.   Prevention of Accidental Discharge. Users having the ability to cause
interference or pass-through or to discharge a slug shall provide protection
from accidental discharge to the POTW of prohibited materials or other
substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental
discharge of prohibited materials shall be constructed, installed, operated,
and maintained at the user’s sole cost and expense.
   2.   Containment Plan. Users meeting the criteria in Subsection 1 of this
section shall develop a spill containment plan. The plan shall require the
approval of the WRA Director and shall contain the following:
      A.   A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges.
      B.   A description of stored chemicals.
      C.   Procedures for immediately notifying the WRA of slug discharges,
including any that would violate the discharge prohibitions in Section
8-3-10 of this chapter. Notification procedures shall comply with Subsections 3
and 4 of this section.
      D.   A description of procedures and structures necessary to prevent
adverse impacts upon the POTW from accidental spills including inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling, and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants including solvents, or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
      E.   A schedule for the completion or implementation of necessary
procedures and structures. Complete implementation and installation of any
procedures or structures shall be according to the shortest possible schedule,
but in no case longer than one year. Review and approval of such plans and
operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to
modify and operate its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this
chapter.
   3.   Notify WRA of Illegal Discharge. Users shall immediately telephone and
notify the WRA of any accidental or deliberate discharge of pollutants which
violatesSection
8-3-10 of this chapter or which is a slug load. Any discharge into the POTW of
a substance which is a listed or characteristic waste under Section 3001 of
RCRA must be immediately reported to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Regional Director, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, and the WRA.
   Notifications required in this subsection shall include the name of caller,
location, and time of discharge, pollutant concentration, volume, and the
corrective actions taken.
   4.   Report Required. Users shall submit a written report to the WRA
Director within five days following such an accidental or deliberate discharge
describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user
to prevent similar future occurrences. Users shall submit follow-up reports as
may be required by the WRA Director. Such report shall not relieve the user of
any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result
of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property,
nor shall such report relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed by this chapter or otherwise. Failure to report
accidental or deliberate discharges may, in addition to any other remedies
available to the City, result in the revocation of the discharger’s wastewater
discharge permit.
   5.   Users to Control Production. Users shall control production of all
discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable
regulations upon reduction, loss, or failure of its pretreatment facility until
the facility is restored or an alternative method of pretreatment is provided.
This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power to the user’s pretreatment facility is reduced, lost,
or fails.
   6.   Posting Emergency Notification Procedures. Users required to have a
spill containment plan must permanently post a notice in English and the
language of common use on the user’s bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees whom to call if a prohibited discharge occurs. Users shall
ensure that all employees who are in a position to cause, discover, or observe
such an accidental discharge are advised of the emergency notification
procedures.
8-3-18 TREATMENT UPSETS.
   Users shall inform the WRA Director within one hour of becoming aware of an
upset in operations that places it in a temporary state of noncompliance with
the pollutant limits in this chapter. Users shall provide a follow-up written
report to the WRA Director within five days. The report must demonstrate that
the pretreatment facility was being operated in a prudent and appropriate
manner and shall contain:
   1.   A description of the upset, its cause, and impact on the user’s
compliance status.
   2.   The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of
noncompliance, and, if the noncompliance is continuing, the time by which
compliance is reasonably expected to be restored.
   3.   All steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence
of such an upset.
8-3-19 TREATMENT BYPASS.
   1.   Bypass Prohibited; Exceptions. Under this chapter, bypass is prohibited
unless it is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe
property damage or no feasible alternatives exist such as the use of auxiliary
treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or maintenance during
normal periods of equipment downtime.
   2.   Maintenance. The user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause
a violation of pretreatment standards, but only if it is for essential
maintenance to ensure efficient operation.
   3.   Notification Procedure. Notification of bypass shall be submitted in
accordance with the following:
      A.   Anticipated Bypass. If the user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, it shall submit prior written notice, at least 10 days before the date
of the bypass, to the WRA Director.
      B.   Unanticipated Bypass. The user shall immediately notify the WRA
Director and submit a written report to the WRA within five days. This report
shall specify the following:
         (1)   A description of the bypass, its cause, and the duration.
         (2)   Whether the bypass has been corrected.
         (3)   The steps being taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent a reoccurrence of the bypass.
   4.   Liability of User. Proper notification shall not relieve the user of
liability for treatment costs and fees or other remedies as provided for in
Section
8-3-15 of this chapter.
8-3-20 FEES.
   To provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW and for the
implementation of the pretreatment program established by this chapter, the
following fees are hereby established and shall be applicable to discharges by
all users:
   1.   Fees and Changes Enumerated. All users shall be subject to the
following fees and charges:
      A.   The one-time wastewater discharge permit application fee shall be
$200.00 for a Class A permit and $100.00 for a Class B permit.
      B.   The annual fee for a Class A wastewater discharge permit, including
annual inspection of permitted users, shall be $1,500.00.
      C.   The annual fee for a Class B wastewater discharge permit, including
annual inspection of permitted users if completed or applicable, shall be
$750.00
      D.   The fee paid by each industrial user when an accidental discharge or
slug load occurs shall be the total of all costs incurred by the WRA as a
result of said discharge or load. Said fee may be charged by the WRA separately
from and in addition to a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00 charged to the user
under Section
8-3-36 of this chapter related to said discharge or load.
      E.   The trip charge for sampling or inspecting a user’s discharge shall
be $50.00 per event. An equipment fee of $50.00 per event shall also apply when
using a WRA-owned automatic sampler. When a sampling or inspection event must
be rescheduled due to failure of the user’s sampling equipment, a sampler seal
(used to detect sample tampering) being broken, monitoring facilities not being
readily accessible or operational, or any other reason beyond the control of
the WRA, a trip charge of $50.00 shall be assessed.
      F.   Laboratory analysis fees for those analyses performed by the WRA
shall be as follows:
Test Cost/Sample
Test                                   Cost/Sample
B.O.D.                                 $20.00
COD                                    $20.00
Total Organic Carbon (TOC)             $20.00
TSS                                    $10.00
pH                                     $5.00
Oil and grease - total                 $35.00
Mineral/nonmineral                     $35.00
Nitrogen, ammonia                      $15.00
Nitrogen, nitrate                      $15.00
TKN                                    $30.00
Phosphorous, total                     $25.00
Potassium                              $12.00
Calcium carbonate equivalent           $15.00
Soil analysis, each pollutant          $20.00
Phenols                                $28.00
Cyanide                                $30.00
Metals:                                 
Arsenic                                $20.00
Selenium                               $20.00
Mercury                                $25.00
Other metals (per parameter):          $15.00
BETX (OA-1)                            $40.00
VPH (OA-1)                             $40.00
BETX and VPH (OA-1)                    $45.00
USEPA Tests:                            
608 Organochlorine pesticides and PCBs $70.00
624 Volatile organic compounds         $140.00
625 Base/neutral organic compounds     $290.00
625 Acid/organic compounds             $290.00
 
      G.   Fees for analysis performed by laboratories other than the WRA
laboratory shall be the full cost of each analysis.
      H.   Fees for rescheduling a scheduled inspection with WRA personnel,
with less than 24 hours’ notice or if appropriate facility managers are
unavailable at the scheduled time of inspection, shall be $100.00 per
rescheduled inspection.
      I.   Fees for copying and mailing documents shall be $1.00 for the
initial page and $0.25 for each additional page plus postage. No charges shall
be assessed for requests for copies received from individuals or agencies
served by the WRA, provided the number of pages requested does not exceed 10.
      J.   Fees for past due reminders sent each 30 days that a balance remains
unpaid shall be $5.00.
      K.   Prohibitive waste charges for each pollutant discharged in excess of
permit or ordinance limits shall be $50.00 per violation for Class B permit
holders and $100.00 per violation for Class A permit holders. Charges shall
double if discharges exceed slug threshold values. Payment of fees does not
preclude other enforcement action and may not be paid in lieu of compliance
with discharge limitations.
      L.   At the WRA’s discretion, administrative cost recovery fees may be
assessed separately to a user or added to a user’s disposal fee for actions or
occurrences subject to Division 6 of this article which result in the need for
additional labor, equipment, or materials from the WRA or its contractor,
including, but not limited to, cleanup of spills, infrastructure maintenance,
improper scale transactions, improper disposal, and waste source verification.
Fees shall be assessed based on the actual costs incurred by the WRA, or on the
estimated costs incurred by the WRA rounded down to the nearest multiple of 20
based on actual rates for labor, materials, and equipment with a minimum fee of
not less than $20.00. Fees under this section will be charged in addition to
charges, fines, fees, or other costs associated with rejected, unapproved, or
atypical wastes under Sections 8-3B-8 and 8-3B-9 of this chapter.
   2.   Surcharges.
      A.   All users contributing wastewater in excess of the following
concentrations shall be assessed a surcharge, which shall be in addition to the
rates and charges ordinarily billed to such users for sewer use. Commencing
October 1, 2022 until June 30, 2025, surcharges shall be assessed in accordance
with the following rate schedule:
 
                    Surcharge per Pound of Pollutant for the Period
Pollutant           10/1/2022 – 6/30/ 7/1/2023 – 6/30/ 7/1/2024 – 6/30/2025
                    2023                2024
Total suspended
solids in excess of $0.18               $0.20              $0.22
250 mg/L
BOD or CBOD in      $0.14               $0.17              $0.21
excess of 200 mg/L
TKN in excess of 30 $0.55               $0.49              $0.42
mg/L
Oil and grease in   $0.08               $0.10              $0.11
excess of 100 mg/L
 
   Commencing on July 1, 2025, surcharge rates listed in the above table shall
be annually adjusted as of July 1 of each year to increase two percent per
annum rounded to the nearest whole cent.
      B.   Chemical oxygen demand (COD) in excess of 300 mg/L may be used at
the discretion of the WRA Director in lieu of CBOD.
   In such case, the excess COD concentration shall be multiplied by the known
CBOD/COD ratio or by a ratio of two-thirds to establish an equivalent CBOD
concentration. Ammonia nitrogen (NH3-N) in excess of 15 mg/L may be used at the
discretion of the WRA Director in lieu of TKN by multiplying the excess NH3-
N concentration times two to establish an equivalent TKN concentration.
   3.   Effective Date. The establishment and imposition of new or different
fees or charges, in addition to or in substitution for those provided above in
this section, shall be by ordinance amending this chapter. The amounts of the
fees and charges established in this section shall be and remain in effect
until such time as the WRA Board shall by resolution revise said fee amounts.
Said revised fees and charges shall take effect after the Board causes said
resolution to be sent to the Council and thereafter causes same to be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in each county in which participating
communities are located.
8-3-21 CLASSES OF PERMITS.
   Discharge permit classifications shall be as follows:
   1.   Class A permit issued to a user discharging 25,000 gallons per day or
more of process wastewater (excludes sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler
blowdown).
   2.   Class B permit issued to a user discharging less than 25,000 gallons
per day of process wastewater.
8-3-22 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.
   1.   All new industrial users shall notify the WRA Director of the nature
and characteristics of their proposed discharge 180 days prior to commencing
discharge. A notification form prescribed by the WRA shall be used for this
purpose.
   2.   Significant users shall discharge wastewater, either directly or
indirectly, into the POTW only after obtaining a wastewater discharge permit
from the WRA Director. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve
a user of the obligation to obtain other permits required by federal, State, or
local law.
   3.   Other users, including waste haulers, shall obtain permits as required
by the WRA Director.
8-3-23 PERMIT APPLICATIONS; BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS; COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES.
   Users applying for a wastewater discharge permit or categorical users
submitting a baseline monitoring report shall submit the following information
as required by 40 CFR 403.12 or by the WRA Director:
   1.   Users applying for a wastewater discharge permit must submit an
application form prescribed by the WRA and accompanied by the application fee.
All new significant users must submit such application 180 days prior to the
date of any wastewater discharge.
   2.   Existing users subject to new National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards must, within 180 days after the effective date of the standard,
submit a baseline monitoring report prescribed by the WRA.
   New users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards must submit
a baseline monitoring report prescribed by the WRA at least 90 days prior to
commencement of discharge to the POTW. A baseline monitoring report shall
include:
      A.   Name, address, and location of the facility, if different from the
mailing address.
      B.   Name of the operator and owners of the facility.
      C.   A list of all environmental control permits held by or for the
facility.
      D.   A description of the operations including the average rate of
production, applicable Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes,
schematic process diagrams, and points of discharge to the POTW from regulated
processes.
      E.   Daily average and daily maximum flow measurements for regulated
process waste streams and nonregulated waste streams where necessary.
      F.   The categorical user shall identify the pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process and shall submit the results of sampling
and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where required)
of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standards from each regulated process.
      G.   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample
immediately downstream of any pretreatment facility or immediately downstream
of each regulated process if no pretreatment exists and prior to mixing with
other waste to compile that data necessary to comply with this requirement. If
non-regulated wastewater is mixed with regulated wastewater prior to
pretreatment, the user must measure the flows and concentrations necessary to
allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to
evaluate compliance with pretreatment standards. Where an alternate
concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6
(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the
WRA Director. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with 40
CFR 136 or other verified method approved by the WRA Director.
      H.   The time, date, and place of sampling, methods of analysis, and
certification that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work
cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
      I.   Historical data may be allowed by the WRA Director so long as the
data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial
pretreatment measures.
      J.   Certification by an authorized representative of the user as
referenced in Section
8-3-27 and certified to by a qualified professional indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance or additional pretreatment is required for
the user to meet pretreatment standards and requirements.
      K.   If additional pretreatment or O and M will be required to meet
pretreatment standards, requirements, discharge limits as set forth in Sections
8-3-10,
8-3-11,
8-3-12 of this chapter, or any other limit set by the WRA Director, the user
shall supply a compliance schedule indicating the shortest time schedule
necessary to accomplish installation or adoption of such additional
pretreatment or O and M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. The following conditions apply to this schedule:
         (1)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards. Such schedule shall include, where
applicable, but shall not be limited to, dates for the hiring of an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing construction, beginning operation, and conducting routine
operations.
         (2)   No increment referred to in Subsection (K)(1) of this section
shall exceed nine months, nor shall the total compliance period exceed 18
months.
         (3)   No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
WRA Director, including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and the steps being taken by
the user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than
nine months elapse between such progress reports to the WRA Director.
      L.   A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds. For all other
pollutants required, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-
proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The WRA Director may
waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any user who demonstrates that
flow-proportional sampling is not feasible. In such cases, samples may be
obtained through time-proportional techniques or through a minimum of four grab
samples where the user demonstrates that such sampling will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
         (1)   New significant users not subject to categorical standards shall
submit analysis of wastewater representative of the effluent discharged to the
POTW as required in Subsections (2)(G-I) of this section for all parameters
deemed necessary by the WRA Director.
         (2)   New or existing industrial users not subject to categorical
pretreatment standards who fail to meet local, State, or federal pretreatment
standards or other permit requirements on a consistent basis shall be subject
to compliance schedules for additional pretreatment or O and M as outlined in
Subsection (2)(K) of this section.
   3.   Certification. All applications and reports must contain the
certification statement and be signed in accordance withSection
8-3-27 of this chapter.
8-3-24 REPORT ON COMPLIANCE BY CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIES.
   Users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall submit a
report to the WRA Director containing the information described in Sections
8-3-23 within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or, if a new source, following
commencement of discharge. Users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits shall provide a reasonable measure of the user’s long term production
rate. For all other users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production or other measure of operation, this report shall include the user’s
actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All reports must
contain the certification statement and be signed in accordance withSection
8-3-27 of this chapter.
8-3-25 PERMIT CONDITIONS, RESTRICTIONS, MODIFICATIONS.
   1.   Permit Contents. Wastewater discharge permits shall include such
conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the WRA Director to prevent
pass through or interference; protect the quality of the water body receiving
effluent from the POTW; protect worker health and safety; facilitate the WRA’s
sludge management and disposal program; and protect against damage to the POTW.
   The WRA Director may include the following items in the permit, and such
additional items as the Director determines necessary or prudent:
      A.   Limits on the average or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
      B.   Limits on the average or maximum concentration, mass, or other
measure of identified wastewater constituents or properties.
      C.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or
construction of appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to reduce,
eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW.
      D.   Development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions including additional management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or prohibited discharges.
      E.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
      F.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection,
sampling, and flow monitoring facilities and equipment for each separate
discharge into the POTW.
      G.   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and
reporting schedules.
      H.   Compliance schedules.
      I.   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports and which may include production data.
      J.   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the WRA Director and affording the
Director or the Director’s representatives access thereto.
      K.   Requirements for the notification of any substantial change in the
manufacturing processes, pretreatment processes, quantity or quality of waste
discharged to the POTW 90 days prior to such change. The WRA Director shall
approve, deny, or condition a changed discharge prior to a change occurring in
accordance with Subsection
8-3-9(1)(D) of this chapter.
      L.   Requirements for notification of excessive, accidental, or slug
discharges.
      M.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the WRA Director to ensure
compliance with this chapter, and State and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
      N.   A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal
pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term
of the permit.
   2.   Permit Duration and Renewal. Permits required under this chapter shall
be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. Permit fees
shall be due annually to the WRA regardless of the term of the permit.
Permitted users shall apply for a new permit by submitting a completed permit
application a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing
permit.
   3.   Continuation of Expired Permits. Expired permits issued pursuant to
this chapter shall remain effective and enforceable until the permit is
reissued unless the user is notified of permit termination by the WRA Director.
   4.   Permit Modifications.
      A.   The WRA Director may modify the permit issued pursuant to this
chapter for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:
         (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, State, or local
pretreatment standard or requirement. After becoming aware of more stringent
standards or requirements, the WRA will, as necessary, update permits within 90
days;
         (2)   To make material or substantial alterations or additions to the
discharger’s operation processes, or discharge volume or character which were
not considered in drafting the effective permit;
         (3)   To make a change in any condition in either the industrial user
or the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or
elimination of the authorized discharge;
         (4)   Upon receipt of information indicating that the permitted
discharge poses a threat to the POTW, to the City, the WRA or operating
contractor personnel, or to the receiving water;
         (5)   Upon occurrence of a violation of any terms or conditions of the
permit;
         (6)   Misrepresentation of, or grant of variance from, such
categorical standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
         (7)   To correct typographical or other errors in the permit;
         (8)   To reflect transfer of ownership or operation of the permitted
facility to a new owner or operator; or
         (9)   Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not
create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws, or rules
and regulations.
      B.   The filing of a request by the permittee for permit modification,
revocation, and reissuance, termination, or a notification of planned changes
or anticipated noncompliance shall not have the effect of staying or delaying
the implementation or effective date of any permit condition.
   5.   Permit Transfer. An industrial wastewater discharge permit is not
transferable to any other person or entity. A new owner or operator must apply
for a new wastewater discharge permit 60 days prior to taking ownership or
undertaking operation of a permitted facility.
   6.   Denial of Permit. The WRA Director may deny a wastewater discharge
permit to any user whose discharge of material to the POTW, whether shown upon
application, including test results submitted by the applicant, or determined
after inspection or testing conducted by the WRA or its operating contractor,
is not in conformity with this chapter or whose application is incomplete or
does not comply with the requirements ofSection
8-3-23 of this chapter.
   7.   Permit Violations. Any violation of the terms, conditions, or limits of
a user’s wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter and shall subject the user to all enforcement procedures outlined in
this chapter.
8-3-26 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   Under this chapter, periodic compliance reports are required as follows:
   1.   Significant users shall submit to the WRA Director, during the months
of January and July, a report indicating the nature, concentration, and flow of
pollutants in the effluent which are limited by permit or pretreatment
standards for the preceding six- month period. This report shall include a
record of the monthly average flows and the daily flow for each analysis date
during the reporting period. At the discretion of the WRA Director and in
consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget
cycles, etc., the WRA Director may agree to alter the months during which the
reports are to be submitted. More frequent reports may be required by the WRA
Director.
   2.   The WRA Director may impose mass limitations on users. In such cases,
the report required by Subsection 1 of this section shall indicate the mass of
pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. All
analyses shall be performed using Environmental Protection Agency approved
methods using sampling techniques approved by the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources.
   3.   Users shall meet the certification and signatory requirements in
Section
8-3-27 of this chapter for each report submitted under this section. Where the
WRA itself collects all the information required for the report, including flow
data, the industrial user will not be required to submit a periodic compliance
report.
   4.   A user must notify the WRA Director of all violations identified as a
result of self-monitoring to the POTW by telephone, during normal business
hours, within 24 hours of the time the user becomes aware of such violation.
The user must also submit the results of repeat analyses to the WRA within 30
days after becoming aware of the violation, together with a complete report on
all steps taken to resolve the violation. The user need not repeat the analyses
if:
      A.   The WRA performs sampling of the industrial user at a frequency of
at least once per month; or
      B.   The WRA performs sampling of the user between the time when the user
performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results
of this sampling.
   5.   A user who monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the
WRA or who self-monitors in addition to WRA monitoring, using Environmental
Protection Agency methods or standard methods, shall report the monitoring
results to the WRA Director in accordance with Subsections 1, 2, and 4 of this
section.
8-3-27 CERTIFICATION AND SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   All applications or reports submitted by a user pursuant to this
chapter shall contain the following certification statement:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
   2.   All applications and reports shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the “user” as defined herein. A user shall maintain a current
and accurate authorization on file with the WRA Director.
8-3-28 MONITORING FACILITIES.
   1.   Facilities Required. When required by the WRA Director pursuant to this
chapter, each permitted user shall, at its expense, provide and operate
monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of
the building sewer or internal drainage systems. The WRA Director may require
the placement of such monitoring facilities at the end of each process where
pollutants are used, produced, or treated. The monitoring facility should
normally be situated on the user’s premises and located so that it will not be
obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
   2.   Sampling Requirements. When required by the wastewater discharge permit
and within 90 days of written notification, a user shall install a sampling
chamber for each separate discharge of the building sewer in accordance with
plans and specification approved by the WRA Director. A user shall provide
ample room in or near such sampling chamber to allow accurate sampling and
preparation of samples for analysis. Each user shall, at its expense, maintain
all sampling and measuring equipment in a safe and proper operating condition
at all times, which equipment shall be safely, easily, and independently
accessible to authorized representatives of the WRA.
   Users shall certify all flow measuring devices to be in proper working
condition at a frequency specified in the permit or in writing by the WRA
Director, using a qualified technician acceptable to the WRA Director. Sampling
shall be in accordance with the following:
      A.   Each sampling chamber shall contain a flume unless another device is
approved by the WRA Director, with a recording and totalizing device for
measurement of the liquid quantity.
      B.   At the discretion of the WRA Director, metered water supply to a
user may be used as the volume quantity where it is substantiated that the
metered water supply and waste quantities are approximately the same, or where
a measurable adjustment agreed to by the Director is made in the metered water
supply to determine the liquid waste quantity. Separate meters may be used to
subtract water which is not discharged to the POTW or is discharged to a sewer
other than the sampled location.
      C.   Samples shall be taken at a frequency and volume determined by the
WRA Director and shall be properly refrigerated and preserved in accordance
with Environmental Protection Agency approved methods. The sample shall be
composited in proportion to the flow for a representative 24-hour sample. A
time proportioned 24-hour sample may be used if flow proportioned sampling is
determined by the WRA Director to be impractical. Grab samples shall be used
where appropriate.
   3.   Breaking Sampler Seal; Notify Director. A user must inform the WRA
Director prior to breaking a sampler seal, used by the WRA to detect sample
tampering, unless necessary to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe
property damage. A user shall not place additional seals or locks upon a
sampler which may be used by the WRA without first obtaining approval from the
WRA Director.
8-3-29 INSPECTION, SAMPLING, AND RECORD KEEPING AUTHORITY.
   Under this chapter, users shall give the following authorities to the WRA
and its operating contractor:
   1.   Right of Entry. Users shall permit authorized representatives or agents
of the WRA to enter upon all properties and all parts of the premises, or upon
properties of users with wastewater discharge permits for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination, records copying, or the performance
of any of their duties. This shall include the right to set up, on the user’s
property, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection,
compliance monitoring, or metering operations as may be required in pursuance
of the implementation and enforcement of this chapter.
   2.   Security Measures. Where a user has security measures in force which
would require proper identification and clearance before entry into the
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements in the security measures
so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, WRA or operating
contractor personnel will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the
purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
   3.   Records Retention. All users subject to any of the reporting
requirements of this chapter shall maintain copies of reports and records of
all information as required in 40 CFR 403.12(o) resulting from any monitoring
activities required by this chapter for a minimum of three years and shall make
such records available for inspection and copying by the WRA and its operating
contractor. This period of retention shall be extended until the completion of
any unresolved negotiation, hearing, or litigation involving a purported
violation.
8-3-30 CONFIDENTIAL DOCUMENTS, DATA, AND INFORMATION.
   1.   Except as provided in this section, documents, data, and information
obtained from user reports, questionnaires, permit applications, and
inspections pursuant to this chapter shall be made available to the public or
other government agencies without restriction. If the user specifically
requests and is able to demonstrate that the release of such information would
divulge information concerning processes or methods of production entitled to
protection under law as trade secrets of the user or would give the advantage
to competitors and serve no public purpose, the WRA Director may determine that
such information should be kept confidential and not made available for public
examination, but such information shall be available to the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
   2.   Decisions by the WRA Director to deny confidential status for
information may be appealed using the procedures in Section
8-3-31 of this chapter. In determining whether information is confidential, the
provisions of Chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa shall prevail.
   3.   Effluent data and enforcement actions by the WRA or its operating
contractor will not be considered confidential records or information.
8-3-31 APPEAL OF DENIAL OF CONFIDENTIAL STATUS.
   1.   Any person aggrieved by the WRA Director’s decision to release
information or data obtained as provided in Subsection
8-3-30(1) of this chapter and who can demonstrate a direct and substantial
interest in the information or data sought to be kept confidential may appeal
the WRA Director’s decision. A request for appeal shall be filed in writing
with the WRA Director not less than five days after the WRA Director’s decision
to deny confidential status to such information or data. The appeal request
shall include a statement of the basis upon which the request for confidential
status is made, as well as the appealing party’s interest in the information or
data sought to be kept confidential. The WRA Director may request additional
information from the appealing party.
   2.   Based upon the information provided by the appealing party, the WRA
Director shall make a determination with respect to the confidentiality of the
information or data at issue. The WRA Director shall notify the parties, in
writing, of the WRA Director’s decision within seven days after receipt of the
appeal.
   3.   If still aggrieved by the WRA Director’s determination on appeal, a
party may file an action in County District Court, seeking a declaratory ruling
with respect to the confidentiality of such documents, data, and information,
or seeking an injunction to prevent the disclosure of same.
   4.   During the pendency of an appeal to the WRA Director, the documents,
data, or information at issue shall be kept confidential. However, if during
the pendency of such appeal, a request for examination or copying of such
documents, data, or information is made of the WRA or its operating contractor
pursuant to Chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa, the WRA or its operating contractor
will notify the appealing party of such request for disclosure and will keep
confidential the requested documents, data, or information, pending action by
the appealing party to defend its confidentiality request. In that
notification, the appealing party requesting confidentiality will be given not
more than five calendar days within which to file suit in County District Court
seeking the entry of a declaratory order or injunction to protect and keep
confidential such documents, data, or information. If the appealing party fails
to initiate suit within the time requested, the WRA Director shall release the
documents, data, or informational issue for public examination.
   5.   If during the pendency of such appeal, a lawsuit is initiated, pursuant
to Chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa, seeking the release of such documents, data,
or information, the appealing party shall take action to defend its
confidentiality request in said lawsuit. If the appealing party fails to defend
its confidentiality request in said suit, the WRA Director shall release the
documents, data, or information at issue for public examination.
8-3-32 PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The WRA will annually publish, in the largest daily newspaper published in
the WRA community, a list of users who at any time during the previous 12
months were in significant noncompliance as defined in Section
8-3-33 of this chapter.
8-3-33 SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   1.   Instances of Noncompliance. Any violation of pretreatment requirements
under this chapter (i.e., including, but not limited to, those relating to
limits, sampling, analyses, reporting, meeting compliance schedules, and
regulatory deadlines) is an instance of noncompliance for which the user is
liable for enforcement, including penalties and injunctive relief. Instances of
significant noncompliance are user violations which meet one or more of the
following criteria:
      A.   Violations of wastewater discharge limits as follows:
         (1)   Chronic Violations. Sixty-six percent or more of the
measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit in a
six-month period (any magnitude of exceedance).
         (2)   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) Violations. Thirty-three percent
or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same
average limit by more than the TRC in a six-month period (e.g., limit x TRC =
the point at which a violation becomes a TRC violation). There are two groups
of TRCs as follow:
            Group I for conventional pollutants (BOD, TSS, FOG) TRC = 1.4
            Group II for all other pollutants TRC = 1.2
         (3)   Other Violations. Any other violation of a wastewater discharge
permit limit (average or daily maximum) that the WRA Director believes has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference, including
slug loads, or pass-through or which endangers the health of City, WRA, or
operating contractor personnel or the public.
         (4)   Pollutant Causing Danger to Humans or Environment. Any discharge
of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health/welfare or
to the environment and has resulted in the WRA’s exercise of its emergency
authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
      B.   Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a
wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order, for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after
the schedule date.
      C.   Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-
monitoring data, or any other report required by the WRA within 45 days from
the due date.
      D.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
      E.   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of Best Management Practices that the WRA Director considers to be
significant.
   2.   Duties of the Director. When a user is in significant noncompliance,
the WRA Director is directed to:
      A.   Report the information to the Iowa Department of Natural Resources
as part of the annual pretreatment performance summary of permitted user
noncompliance.
      B.   Include the user in the annual public notification according
toSection
8-3-32 of this chapter.
      C.   Address significant noncompliance through appropriate enforcement
actions or document in a timely manner the reasons for withholding enforcement.
8-3-34 ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS.
   1.   Notice of Violation. The WRA Director may issue a written notice to the
user giving the specific nature of violations which shall include the
frequency, magnitude, and impact of the violation upon the POTW.
   The notice may also include the following:
      A.   An order requiring a plan of action for preventing reoccurrence of
the violation.
      B.   An order requiring specific action for accomplishing remediation.
      C.   An order requiring the user to respond in writing within 30 days.
   2.   Corrective Action. The WRA Director is empowered to enter into consent
orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the user responsible for any noncompliance. Such
orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct
noncompliance within a time period specified by the order.
   3.   Compliance Schedule. The WRA Director may issue enforceable orders or
schedules to require compliance with pretreatment standards including
appropriate interim limits. Such orders and schedules may be incorporated as a
revision to an existing wastewater discharge permit and shall not require the
consent of the user.
8-3-35 ACTIONS AUTHORIZED.
   1.   Where there has been noncompliance with any section of this chapter,
the WRA Director may request the WRA operating contractor’s attorney, or the
attorney retained by the WRA for that purpose, to bring an action in equity or
at law to seek the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, or both,
or such other relief as may be appropriate, to compel the user’s compliance
with this chapter.
   2.   In addition to other remedies provided under this section or other
sections of this chapter, in any action brought at the request of the WRA
Director to enforce this chapter, the WRA operating contractor’s attorney or
the attorney retained by the WRA is authorized to seek to recover all actual
damages suffered by the City or the WRA, including all actual damages and
losses related to costs of repair and remediation of the POTW, costs of
investigation, and administration reasonably related to any particular
violation and attorneys’ fees.
8-3-36 CIVIL PENALTIES.
   1.   Each violation of any section of this chapter or of a permit issued
under this chapter is declared to be a municipal infraction. Each day that a
violation of a section of this chapter continues, and each day that a violation
of a permit issued under this chapter continues, shall be considered a separate
municipal infraction.
   2.   Any person who knowingly makes a false statement, representation, or
certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or a wastewater discharge
permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this chapter, commits a municipal
infraction punishable by a civil penalty as hereafter provided by Subsection 4
of this section.
   3.   Any person who fails to perform an act required by the provisions of
this chapter, or who commits an act prohibited by the provisions of this
chapter, commits an environmental violation and shall be guilty of a municipal
infraction, punishable by a civil penalty as provided by Subsection 4 of this
section. Violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement referred to in 40
CFR 403.8 is an environmental violation punishable by a civil penalty as
hereafter provided in Subsection 4 of this section.
   4.   Whenever in this chapter, any act is prohibited and is declared to be a
municipal infraction, or, whenever in this chapter, the doing of any act is
required and the failure to do that act is declared to be a municipal
infraction, the violation of any such provision shall be punishable by a civil
penalty of not more than $500.00 for each violation or, if the infraction is a
repeat offense, by a civil penalty of not more than $750.00 for each repeat
offense. However, a municipal infraction which is classified as an
environmental violation or which arises from noncompliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement, referred to in 40 CFR 403.8, by an industrial user may
be punishable by a civil penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each day a
violation exists or continues. Each day a violation of a provision of this
chapter continues shall be considered a separate municipal infraction.
(State law reference(s) - Authority for enhanced penalties in pretreatment
violations, Sec. 364.22[1] of the Code of Iowa).
8-3-37 PERFORMANCE AND PAYMENT BONDS.
   1.   The WRA Director may decline to reissue a permit to any user who has
failed to comply with this chapter or any order or previous permit issued under
this chapter unless such user first files a satisfactory bond payable to the
WRA in a sum not to exceed the value determined by the WRA Director to be
necessary to achieve compliance giving due consideration to the number and
magnitude of previous violations, potential need for remediation, and stating
the reasons which support the amount of bond in a written order directed to the
user, but in no case shall the bond be required to be greater than $100,000.00.
The user shall use a bond form prescribed by the WRA.
   2.   The WRA Director may require any user, including any permitted or non-
permitted waste generator which sends its wastewater by truck to the WRF, to
obtain a bond payable to the WRA with reasonable surety in a penal sum which
will adequately cover treatment costs, surcharges, fees, or any other charges
associated with discharge of wastewater to the POTW in the amount as listed in
Section 8-3B-2. The user shall use a bond form prescribed by the WRA.
8-3-38 REVOCATION OF DISCHARGE PERMIT; TERMINATION OF SEWER SERVICE.
   1.   Grounds for Revocation of Discharge Permit or for Termination of Sewer
Service. Any user who violates this chapter, any condition of its wastewater
discharge permit, or any of the following is subject to having its discharge
permit revoked or its sewer service terminated in accordance with the
procedures of this section:
      A.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge.
      B.   Failure of the user to report substantial changes in process
activity or in volume or character of pollutants being discharged into the POTW
at least 90 days prior to such change.
      C.   Tampering with monitoring equipment.
      D.   Refusal to allow reasonable access by WRA or operating contractor
personnel to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or
sampling.
      E.   Violation of permit conditions.
      F.   Failure to report an upset, failure, or bypass of the user's
pretreatment facilities.
      G.   Failure to pay fines, fees, or sewer user charges.
      H.   Failure to follow enforcement orders or compliance schedules.
      I.   Failure to correct a condition that impedes or alters the WRA’s
ability to monitor the user’s discharge or has the potential to cause
interference or pass-through.
      J.   Failure to obtain a wastewater discharge permit as required by this
chapter after notification by the WRA Director that such permit is required.
      K.   Failure to pay actual costs for negligent damage, or actual costs
and penalties charged for grossly negligent or intentional damage, to the POTW
not addressed elsewhere in this chapter.
   2.   Procedure for Revocation of Discharge Permit and for Termination of
Sewer Service. The procedure for revocation of a discharge permit and
termination of sewer service shall be as follows:
      A.   Any permit issued to a user pursuant to this chapter may be revoked,
and sewer service terminated, by written order of the WRA Director, specifying
the grounds for such revocation and termination as outlined in Subsection 1 of
this section, which order shall not take effect until hearing thereon as
hereafter provided. Upon determining that grounds exist for an order to revoke
a user’s discharge permit and terminate sewer service, the WRA Director shall
cause a notice of hearing to be prepared, specifying the violations of
Subsection 1 of this section which are deemed to have occurred, and the time,
date, and place that such hearing will be held. The notice shall be sent to the
user by regular mail addressed to the user’s address listed on the wastewater
discharge permit a minimum of 10 days prior to the date set for hearing, and
shall be deemed delivered when placed in the mail.
      B.   Sewer service may be terminated by written order of the WRA
Director, specifying the grounds for such revocation and termination as
outlined in Subsection 1 of this section, which order shall not take effect
until hearing thereon as hereafter provided. Upon determining that grounds
exist for an order to terminate sewer service, the WRA Director shall cause a
notice of hearing to be prepared, specifying the violation of Subsection 1 of
this section which is deemed to have occurred, and the time, date, and place
that such hearing will be held. The notice shall be sent to the user by regular
mail addressed to the user’s address a minimum of 10 days prior to the date set
for hearing, and shall be deemed delivered when placed in the mail.
      C.   If, after such a hearing, the WRA Director makes a finding based on
substantial evidence that violations under Subsection 1 of this section have
occurred as alleged, the Director may issue an order immediately revoking the
permit, if a permit had previously been issued, and terminating sewer service
to the user’s premises. The determination to revoke such permit and terminate
service, shall be in the discretion of WRA Director and shall be dependent upon
the circumstances surrounding the user’s violations of Subsection 1 of this
section and the severity of those violations. If the user does not appear for
the hearing, the WRA Director shall issue the order revoking the discharge
permit or terminating sewer service, which shall take effect immediately.
      D.   The decision and order of the WRA Director to revoke the permit of a
user may be appealed to the WRA Appeal Committee. Such appeal request shall be
in writing, shall include the grounds for appeal including any factual findings
which are disputed, and shall be delivered to WRA not less than 10 days after
the Director’s entry of the order of revocation of permit or termination of
sewer service. Such appeal request shall be considered delivered when placed in
the mail, return receipt requested, addressed to:
         WRA Appeal Committee
         c/o Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority
         3000 Vandalia Road
         Des Moines, Iowa 50317
      E.   The Chair of the Appeal Committee shall schedule the appeal and
shall cause notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing to be mailed to
the appealing user. Such appeal shall be decided by majority vote of the Appeal
Committee. If the Appeal Committee affirms the order of the WRA Director
revoking the permit or terminating sewer service, the Appeal Committee shall so
state and order in its written decision.
      F.   A user whose permit has been revoked shall not be eligible for
another permit until 30 days after the violating conditions have been corrected
to the satisfaction of the WRA Director.
      G.   Upon determination by the WRA director that the user’s sewer service
connection to the POTW be terminated, the Director’s written order shall be
sent to the Public Works Department who shall cause the user’s connection to
the sewer to be severed or plugged. The manner of severance and procedure for
disconnection shall be determined by the Public Works Department. Upon
completion of the disconnection, the Public Works Department shall certify to
the WRA Director the City’s cost to disconnect the user’s sewer service. Upon
receipt of such certification of costs, the WRA Director shall forward to the
user whose service was disconnected by registered mail return receipt
requested, certified mail, or personal service, a bill for the cost of making
the disconnection, including all costs for labor and materials, and a service
charge of $500.00 for WRA supervision.
      H.   Any building at which sewer service is disconnected as herein
provided shall be inspected by the City Building Official and, if appropriate,
shall be red-tagged as unfit for human occupancy.
8-3-39 REINSTATEMENT OF SERVICE.
   If service is severed pursuant to this chapter, the service may be
reinstated in the following manner:
   1.   Upon payment to the WRA of any delinquency in full, supervision fee of
$500.00, and an inspection by the WRA Director to determine whether the
original cause for termination has been corrected, the WRA will issue a permit
for reconnection of the building service line to the POTW.
   Such reconnection costs, plus inspection fees for the City in accordance
with this Code, shall be at the sole expense of the user.
   2.   Upon reconnection and payment of all costs described in Subsection 1 of
this section, the City, through its agents, shall remove the red tag from the
building, and the building shall, so far as the City is concerned, be fit for
human occupancy.
8-3-40 EMERGENCY DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE.
   1.   Conditions for Immediate Disconnection of Service. The WRA Director
may, after informal notice, suspend the wastewater discharge permit of, and
sewer service to, a user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop
an actual or threatened discharge presenting or causing an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the POTW, or the
environment.
   2.   Procedures for Immediate Disconnection. The procedure for immediate
disconnection shall be as follows:
      A.   When the WRA Director determines that a discharge as described in
Subsection 1 of this section exists, an oral order shall be issued, followed
immediately by a written order, to the user stating the problem and requiring
immediate cessation of the discharge. A user orally notified of a suspension of
its wastewater permit or sewer service shall immediately stop or eliminate all
discharges. If a user fails to immediately and voluntarily comply with the
suspension order, the WRA Director shall take immediate action to eliminate the
discharge, including disconnection from the POTW.
      Methods of informal notice to a user shall include, but not be limited
to, any of the following: personal conversations between user and personnel or
the WRA or its operating contractor, telephone calls, letters, hand-delivered
messages, or notices posted at the user’s premises or point of discharge.
      B.   A user responsible, in whole or in part, for imminent endangerment
shall submit to the WRA Director, prior to the hearing described in Subsection
8-3-38(2) of this chapter, a detailed written report describing the causes of
the endangerment and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence.
8-3-41 ELIMINATION OF DISCHARGE; REINSTATEMENT OF PERMIT.
   A user notified by the WRA Director of revocation of its discharge permit or
disconnection of its sewer service underSection
8-3-38 or
8-3-40 of this chapter shall immediately cease discharging wastewater to the
POTW.
   If the user fails to comply voluntarily with the revocation or disconnection
order, the City shall take such steps as are deemed necessary by the WRA,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection. The WRA Director shall
reinstate the wastewater discharge permit or the sewer service upon proof of
the elimination of the non-complying discharge.
8-3-42 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   1.   In addition to remedies available to the WRA set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, if the WRA is fined by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources
or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for violations of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit for the WRF, or for violations of
water quality standards as the result of a discharge of pollutants by an
identifiable user, the fine, and all legal, sampling, analytical testing costs
and any other related costs, shall be charged to the responsible user. Such
charge shall be in addition to any other remedies the WRA may have under this
chapter at law or in equity.
   2.   If the discharge from any user results in a deposit, obstruction,
damage, or other impairment to the POTW, the user shall become liable to the
City or the WRA for any expense, loss, or damage caused by the violations or
discharge. The WRA may add to the user’s charges and fees the costs incurred by
the WRA and by the City for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by
the violations or discharge.
   3.   The remedies provided in this chapter shall not be exclusive, and the
WRA may seek whatever other remedies are authorized by statute, at law or in
equity against any persons violating this chapter.
   4.   In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, the City or
the WRA may initiate an action, either in law or in equity, to obtain an
injunction against further violations of this chapter and for judgment for all
costs incurred by the City or the WRA occasioned by the user’s violation of any
requirements of this chapter.
8-3-43 NOTICES TO WRA; WRA BOARD, DIRECTOR, OR APPEAL COMMITTEE.
   Notices which are required to be given or which may be given to the WRA, the
WRA Board, the WRA Director, or the WRA Appeal Committee, as provided in
Sections
8-3-9 through
8-3-43 of this chapter, shall be mailed to such entity, body, or person at the
following address:
   Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority
   Des Moines Wastewater Reclamation Facility
   3000 Vandalia Road
   Des Moines, Iowa 50317
CHAPTER 3A
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS, GREASE INTERCEPTORS
8-3A-1 Purpose                         8-3A-8 Records and Record Keeping
8-3A-2 Definitions                     8-3A-9 Inspection of Grease Interceptors
                                       and Related Sewers and Equipment; Fees
8-3A-3 Effective Date of FOG           8-3A-10 Enforcement
Regulations
8-3A-4 Grease Interceptor Installation 8-3A-11 Notice of Violation;
Required; Exemption                    Administrative Penalties; Corrective
                                       Action Ordered
8-3A-5 Compliance Procedures           8-3A-12 Penalties
8-3A-6 Installation of Grease          8-3A-13 Order to Cease Operation of FSE
Interceptors and Grease Traps
8-3A-7 Operation, Maintenance, and
Cleaning of Grease Interceptors and    8-3A-14 Appeal of Corrective Action
Grease Traps, and Grease Hauler        Order or Cease and Desist Order
Certification
                                      8-3A-15 Additional Remedies
 
8-3A-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter shall be to aid in the prevention of sanitary
sewer blockages and obstructions from contribution and accumulation of fat,
oil, and grease into the POTW.
   Such discharges from commercial kitchens, restaurants, food processing
facilities, and all other establishments, where fat, oil, and grease of
vegetable or animal origin are discharged directly or indirectly into the POTW,
can contribute to line blockages or spills in violation of Title 40, Code of
Federal Regulations (40 CFR), part 403.
8-3A-2 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions found in Section
8-3-1 of this chapter shall apply to the provisions of this chapter; provided,
however, that the following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   1.   “Best Management Practices” or “BMPs” means and includes schedules of
activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the State.
For purposes of this chapter, Best Management Practices include procedures and
practices that reduce the discharge of FOG to the building sewer, to the City
sanitary sewer system, and to the POTW.
   2.   “Design liquid depth” means the maximum depth of liquid when the tank
is filled with water.
   3.   “Effective date” means the date set forth in Section 8-3A-3 of this
chapter upon which the regulatory provisions of this chapter take effect.
   4.   “Food Service Establishment” or “FSE” means an operation or enterprise
that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for
human consumption. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, those
that process meat or other food ingredients as an intermediate step or for
final human consumption, food service operations in a summer camp, residential
substance abuse treatment facility, halfway house, correctional facility,
school, restaurant, commercial kitchen, caterer, church, hotel, bars, hospital,
prison, care institution, or similar facility.
   5.   “Grease interceptor” means a tank that serves one or more fixtures and
is remotely located. Grease interceptors include, but are not limited to, tanks
that capture wastewater from dishwashers, garbage disposals, floor drains, pot
and pan sinks, and trenches as allowed by local Plumbing Codes. For purposes of
this chapter, a grease interceptor is a multi-compartment tank located
underground outside of a building that reduces the amount of FOG in wastewater
prior to its discharge into the POTW.
   6.   “Grease traps” means a device designed to retain grease from one to a
maximum of four fixtures. Not all grease traps are approved by the manufacturer
for use on heated water (e.g., dishwasher) or in-line to a waste disposal unit
(e.g., garbage disposal and grinders). For purposes of this chapter, a grease
trap is a small device located within a building.
   7.   “Minimum design capability” means the design features of a grease
interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and
retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the POTW.
   8.   “Nonroutine inspection” means an impromptu, unscheduled inspection of
an FSE made without prior notification or arrangement.
   9.   “Routine inspection” means an inspection of an FSE which is scheduled
in advance or according to a pre-arranged schedule.
   10.   “User” means the same as the definition in Section
8-3-1 of this chapter, but also includes persons who discharge wastewater to
the POTW from mobile sources, such as mobile food vendors.
8-3A-3 EFFECTIVE DATE OF FOG REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be effective on and after April 1,
2019.
8-3A-4 GREASE INTERCEPTOR INSTALLATION REQUIRED; EXEMPTION.
   1.   Required. The owner of a building or facility in which as FSE is
located, and the owner or operator of an FSE shall be required to install an
approved grease interceptor, and to thereafter operate and maintain same as
provided in this chapter.
   2.   Exemption. The requirements of Subsection 1 shall not apply to that
portion of a building or facility within which an FSE is in existence on the
effective date if:
      A.   The FSE has an existing grease interceptor or grease trap in place
as of the effective date and provided that:
         (1)   The owner or occupant of the FSE continues to use the
interceptor or trap;
         (2)   The interceptor or trap is of sufficient capacity and design;
and
         (3)   The interceptor or trap is operated and maintained so as to
comply with FOG discharge limits; and
      B.   Any repair, remodeling or renovation of the wastewater plumbing
system in the existing FSE involves only:
         (1)   The repair of leaks or the clearing of stoppages in drains,
soil, waste, or vent piping; or
         (2)   The removal and reinstallation of a sink, toilet, or hot water
heater; provided that such work does not involve replacement, rearrangement, or
moving of wastewater pipes, floor sinks, drainage fixtures, or grease traps;
and
      C.   None of the following conditions are present:
         (1)   A building or facility exists on the effective date and is
thereafter expanded or renovated, or a portion thereof, to include an FSE where
such FSE did not previously exist; or
         (2)   An FSE exists on the effective date within a building or
facility, or portion of a building or facility, and application is thereafter
made for a building permit(s) for such building or facility with valuation of
$50,000.00 or more within a 12 month period; or
         (3)   A building or facility, or portion thereof, that contained an
FSE on the effective date but in which an FSE ceases to operate for one year or
more, as determined by Iowa Department of Inspections and Appeals, Food and
Consumer Safety Bureau records.
8-3A-5 COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES.
   1.   Certificate of Compliance or Occupancy. After the effective date, any
permitted construction under Subsection 8-3A-4(1) of this chapter shall be
deemed compliant upon issuance of a Certificate of Compliance or Certificate of
Occupancy for such construction by the City Building Official or designee.
   2.   Inadequate Grease Interceptor. An FSE shall be deemed compliant, unless
the WRA Director or local Building Official or designee determines that an
existing grease trap or grease interceptor is incapable of adequately retaining
FOG.
   In such cases, the Director may order the FSE to install an adequate grease
interceptor within a specified time period if:
      A.   The FSE is found to contribute FOG in quantities above FOG discharge
limits; or
      B.   The FSE discharges necessitate increased maintenance on the publicly
owned treatment works (POTW) in order to keep stoppages from occurring therein;
or
      C.   The FSE’s discharge to the POTW is at any time determined to exceed
400 mg/L total FOG.
   3.   Order to Install. An order directing an existing FSE or the owner or
operator of the FSE or the owner of the building or facility in which the FSE
is located to install a grease interceptor shall be in writing from the WRA
Director in the form of a notice of violation including a corrective action
order, as provided in Section 8-3A-11 of this chapter.
   4.   Exceptional Physical Constraints or Economic Hardship. FSEs or owners
of buildings or facilities within which an FSE is located which are unable to
install or replace a grease interceptor due to exceptional physical constraints
or economic hardship may appeal to the WRA Director for approval of an
alternative grease control technology by requesting a hearing in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. Such requests shall be submitted in
writing and shall include detailed descriptions of the FSE’s physical or
financial constraints and the alternative grease control technology which it
proposes to install and utilize.
      A.   In order to demonstrate exceptional economic hardship, the owner or
operator of the FSE shall submit to the WRA Director balance sheets and profit
and loss statements for FSE for the preceding three years. A new FSE shall
submit profit/loss projections or a detailed business plan with projections for
24 months. Each request shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
      B.   Notwithstanding approval of alternative grease control technology,
when the WRA Director determines that such alternative is not performing
adequately, the FSE or owner of the building or facility in which the FSE is
located shall be required to take additional grease control measures, which may
include the installation of a grease interceptor.
      C.   In order to demonstrate exceptional physical site constraints
preventing the installation of a grease interceptor, the owner or operator of
the FSE or owner of the building or facility in which the FSE is located shall
submit to the WRA Director documentation and plats showing the location of City
sanitary sewer and any private easements in relation to the building sewer for
the building housing the FSE, and showing available space inside or outside the
building and drawings of existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common
plumbing for all services at that site.
      D.   An FSE that is given an exemption from installing a properly sized
grease interceptor is prohibited from installing or using a dishwasher or
garbage disposal without approval of the Director and must comply with the
conditions of such approval, if any.
8-3A-6 INSTALLATION OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND GREASE TRAPS.
   Grease interceptors and grease traps, when required, shall be installed as
follows:
   1.   Grease interceptors and grease traps shall be installed at the expense
of the owner or operator of the FSE or owner of the building or facility in
which the FSE is located which is contributing wastewater to the POTW.
   2.   All wastewater streams containing FOG or reasonably likely to contain
FOG within FSEs or other FOG generating operations shall be directed into one
or more appropriately sized grease interceptor before discharge to the POTW.
   Grease interceptors shall be either sized by adding the peak design flow
rates for all fixtures leading to the grease interceptor and allowing a minimum
retention time of 30 minutes or as follows:
Grease Interceptor Sizing
Grease Interceptor Sizing
1. Peak Meals per hour:
   a. Seating capacity of FSE
   b. Occupancy of FSE *
   c. Seating or occupancy x meal factor of 1.3 (45 minute meal) or 1.0
      (intermittent-use FSEs) = Peak meals per hour
   * Church: Include all area(s) used for meal service
   * Assisted living/nursing facility: Equal to maximum number of
   residents (per State license)
2. Waste flow rate, gallons of flow:
   a. Commercial, equipped kitchen with dishwasher and 1 garbage disposal   7
      *
   b. Commercial, equipped kitchen with dishwasher, no garbage disposal     6
   c. Commercial, equipped kitchen with no dishwasher, 1 garbage disposal   6
      *
   d. Commercial, equipped kitchen with no dishwasher, no garbage disposal  5
   e. Single service kitchen **                                             2
   * Each additional garbage disposal, add 1 gallon
   ** Single service kitchen - no garbage disposal, no dishwasher and all
   service is single use
3. Retention time, hours:
   a. Commercial kitchen                                                    2.5
   b. Single service kitchen                                                1.5
4. Storage factor:
   a. Commercial kitchen up to 8 hours of operation                         1
   b. Commercial kitchen up to 12 hours of operation                        1.5
   c. Commercial kitchen up to 16 hours of operation                        2
   d. Commercial kitchen up to 20 hours of operation                        2.5
   e. Commercial kitchen up to 24 hours of operation                        3
   f. Single service kitchen                                                1.5
 
Peak Meals per Hour x Waste Flow Rate x Retention Time x Storage Factor =
Calculated Interceptor Size
   3.   Concrete grease interceptors, whether precast or poured in place, shall
be designed and manufactured in accordance with ASTM C 1613-08 standard
specification for precast concrete grease interceptor tanks or IAPMO/ANSI Z1001
grease interceptors and shall be installed in accordance with the codes adopted
by the jurisdiction in which the FSE is located. Grease interceptors using
materials other than concrete require approval by the Director, and shall
comply with the conditions of such approval, if any.
   4.   The Building Official or other designated official of the governmental
subdivision within which the FSE is located shall inspect each grease
interceptor installation made pursuant to this chapter, shall review all
relevant information regarding the rated performance of the grease interceptor,
and the building plan and facility site plan for the building and site where
the grease interceptor has been installed, and shall approve such grease
interceptor installation upon determination that the grease interceptor meets
all applicable standards and requirements.
   5.   Grease interceptors shall have a minimum capacity of 1,000 gallons and
shall not exceed 5,000 gallons for a single unit. Where a capacity greater than
5,000 gallons is required, several smaller units shall be installed in series,
however the capacity shall not exceed 10,000 gallons for any single series of
interceptors without approval of the Director.
   6.   Grease interceptors shall be installed outside the building housing the
FSE and below surface grade, and shall have access manholes, with a minimum
diameter of 24 inches, over each chamber and sanitary tee. Access manholes
shall extend from the grease interceptor to at least the finished surface grade
and be designed and maintained to prevent storm or surface water inflow and
groundwater infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers
to facilitate inspection and grease removal.
   7.   Sewer lines which are not grease laden, which are not likely to contain
FOG, or which contain sanitary wastes shall not be connected to a grease
interceptor.
   8.   Grease interceptors shall be equipped with an accessible discharge
sampling port with a minimum six-inch diameter, which shall extend from the
grease interceptor to at least the finished surface grade.
   9.   Where grease interceptors are shared by more than one FSE, the building
owner shall be the responsible party for record keeping and cleaning of the
interceptor.
8-3A-7 OPERATION, MAINTENANCE, AND CLEANING OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND GREASE
TRAPS, AND GREASE HAULER CERTIFICATION.
   1.   Wastewater Limitation. The owner or operator of an FSE which is
required to pass wastewater through a grease interceptor or trap shall operate
and maintain the grease interceptor or trap so that wastewater exiting the
grease interceptor or trap shall not exceed 400 mg/L of FOG.
   2.   Cleaning Schedule. The owner or operator of the FSE shall cause the
grease interceptor or trap to be cleaned as hereinafter required when FOG and
solids reach 25 percent of the design liquid level of the grease interceptor or
trap, or sooner if necessary to prevent carry-over of FOG from the grease
interceptor or trap into the City sanitary sewer system. Interceptors and traps
shall be cleaned at three-month intervals or less. A longer cleaning interval
must be approved by the WRA Director. The owner or operator of an FSE shall
employ a waste hauler licensed by the WRA pursuant to Chapter 3B of this title
to clean the grease interceptor or trap, provided that the waste hauler
personnel performing the cleaning has a current grease hauler certification
from the WRA indicating satisfactory completion of the course of training
offered by the WRA on the cleaning of grease interceptors and traps.
   3.   Cleaning Requirements. Any person who cleans a grease interceptor or
trap shall do so in accordance with the following procedures and requirements.
The person cleaning the grease interceptor or trap shall:
      A.   Completely empty and remove the contents (liquids and sludge) of all
vaults of the grease interceptor or trap, and remove the grease mat and
scrapings from the interior walls. As part of each cleaning of a grease
interceptor or trap, the licensed waste hauler employed by the FSE owner or
operator, shall perform the following maintenance activities:
         (1)   Check that the sanitary “tees” on the inlet and outlet sides of
the grease interceptor are not obstructed, loose, or missing.
         (2)   Verify that the baffle is secure and in place.
         (3)   Inspect the grease interceptor or trap for any cracks or other
defects.
         (4)   Check that lids are securely and properly seated after
completion of cleaning.
      B.   Not deposit waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor/
trap back into the grease interceptor/trap from which the waste or wastewater
was removed or into any other grease interceptor/trap or drainage fixture
connected to the sanitary sewer, for the purpose of reducing the volume of
waste and wastewater to be disposed of.
      C.   Not introduce enzymes, emulsifying chemicals, hot water, or other
agents into a grease interceptor or trap to dissolve or emulsify grease or as a
grease abatement method. Introduction of bacteria as a grease degradation agent
is permitted with prior written approval by the WRA Director.
      D.   Dispose of waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor or
trap at the WRF or at a facility approved for disposal of such waste by the WRA
Director. Waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor or trap shall
not be discharged to any private sanitary or storm sewer or to the City
sanitary or storm sewer system. The waste hauler shall provide a copy of the
disposal receipt for all waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor
or trap to the owner or operator of the FSE.
      E.   Not use an automatic grease removal system to clean a grease
interceptor or trap without prior written approval of the WRA Director and, if
the use of an automatic grease removal system is approved, shall operate same
in a manner that the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the
system’s outlet, is consistently achieved.
   4.   Allow Exceptions or Alternatives. The WRA Director may make exceptions
to the above requirements, or may approve alternative operational requirements
or cleaning and maintenance methods, provided that such exceptions or approvals
shall be made in writing by the WRA Director.
   5.   The WRA Director may issue a grease hauler certification upon
satisfactory completion of the course of training offered by the WRA on the
proper maintenance and cleaning of grease interceptors and traps, disposal
procedures, and record keeping. Such certification shall be for a period of
five years and shall be in effect for the person receiving such training.
Grease haulers certified by the WRA shall be subject to a grease interceptor
cleanout inspection by WRA personnel, not less than once every two years, for
purposes of the hauler demonstrating its compliance with requirements in this
section. Such inspections shall be scheduled at a time which coincides with
normal working hours for WRA personnel, shall involve all individuals employed
by the same company who have been issued a grease hauler certification by the
WRA, and shall be conducted at an FSE within the WRA service area. Failure to
follow WRA’s cleanout procedures or other requirements of this section may
result in fines, additional scheduled cleanout inspections, and loss of grease
hauler certification status, individually or company-wide, with the WRA.
8-3A-8 RECORDS AND RECORD KEEPING.
   1.   Required Records. The owner or operator of an FSE which is required to
pass wastewater through a grease interceptor or trap shall maintain a written
record of grease interceptor or trap maintenance, including a log showing the
dates upon which the grease interceptor or trap was inspected and the estimated
amount of FOG present in the grease interceptor or trap at each inspection, the
date upon which waste and wastewater was removed from the grease interceptor or
trap and disposed of, the location and means of such disposal of waste and
wastewater, and the name and employer or the person or persons performing each
of said tasks. The log shall further include a record of the placement of any
approved or unapproved additive into the grease interceptor, grease trap or
building sewer on a constant, regular, or scheduled basis, including the type
and amount of additive placed on each such occasion. Only additives approved by
the WRA Director pursuant to Subsection 8-3A-7(3) of this chapter may be used
in a grease interceptor
   2.   Record Keeping. The log shall at all times be kept and maintained on a
day-to-day basis, so as to show a record of waste and wastewater removal, waste
and wastewater disposal, and approved additive placement for a continuous
period of three years. All such records shall be kept secure at the premises of
the FSE for a continuous period of three years and shall be made available for
non-routine inspection by the City, the WRA and its operating contractor, or
the employees and agents of any of them at any time during normal business
hours.
8-3A-9 INSPECTION OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND RELATED SEWERS AND EQUIPMENT;
FEES.
   1.   The owner or operator of an FSE shall:
      A.   Provide, operate, and maintain, at its expense, safe and accessible
monitoring facilities (such as a suitable manhole), and shall make such
monitoring facilities available for inspection, for routine cleanouts by the
owner or operator’s licensed grease hauler, and for sampling and flow
measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems. There shall be
ample room in or near such monitoring facilities to allow for proper
inspection, accurate sampling, and preparation of samples for analysis. The
monitoring facilities shall be maintained such that the device(s) is readily
and immediately accessible for inspections and cleanouts being free of
coverings, building materials, pavements, or any other obstructions.
      B.   Allow personnel authorized by the WRA Director or by the City/County
Building Official or designee, bearing proper credentials and identification,
to enter upon or into any building, facility, or property housing an FSE at any
reasonable time and without prior notification, for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, testing, or record review, in accordance
with this chapter.
      C.   Upon request by the WRA Director’s authorized representative, open
any grease interceptor or grease trap for the purpose of confirming that
maintenance frequency is appropriate, that all necessary parts of the
installation are in place including, but not limited to, baffles, and effluent
tees, and that all grease interceptors, traps, and related equipment and piping
is maintained in efficient operating condition.
      D.   Accommodate compliance inspections and sampling events by the
authorized representatives of the WRA Director or of the City/County Building
Official. Staff may conduct routine inspections and sampling events of any food
service establishment. Non-routine inspection and sampling events shall occur
more frequently when there is a history of non-compliance with this chapter and
when blockages occur in the City’s sanitary sewer system downstream of the FSE.
   2.   Trip Charges. The fees for inspection of an FSE shall be as provided in
Section
8-3-20 of this chapter, and shall be paid within 30 days of the date of the
invoice for such fees. A trip charge of $50.00, as referenced in Section
8-3-20(1)(E), shall be assessed in conjunction with the violation of any
requirement of Section
8-3-9 which results in the need for WRA personnel to reschedule such inspection
of grease interceptor/trap or food service establishment, and shall be paid
within 30 days of the date of the invoice for such charge.
8-3A-10 ENFORCEMENT.
   The WRA Director is authorized to enforce this chapter as hereinafter
provided. The City Building Official or designee, or such other governmental
official hereafter designated by the WRA, is also authorized to enforce this
chapter.
8-3A-11 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES; CORRECTIVE ACTION
ORDERED.
   1.   Notice; Corrective Actions. The Director, or such other designated
officers or officials with enforcement authority as provided in Section
8-3A-10 of this chapter, are authorized to issue a notice of violation imposing
an administrative penalty upon any person who fails to perform an act required
by this chapter or who commits an act prohibited by this chapter. Such notice
may include a corrective action order requiring the user to take one or more of
the following corrective actions within 30 days:
      A.   Conform to Best Management Practices;
      B.   Submit copies of the grease interceptor or trap maintenance log;
      C.   Develop, submit, and implement a FOG compliance plan to be approved
by the Director or designated enforcement official; or
      D.   Install a compliant grease interceptor or trap.
   2.   Administrative Penalty. The administrative penalty for such violations
shall be as provided in the schedule of administrative penalties adopted by the
Council by resolution.
   3.   Service of Violation Notice. Notice of violation, with the applicable
penalty for such violation noted thereon, shall be issued to, and served upon
the violator. Service of the notice may be by regular mail or by delivery in
person.
   4.   Time Limit for Payment of Penalty. Penalties assessed pursuant to
notice of violation shall be paid by the violator in full as directed in the
notice within 30 days of its issuance.
   5.   Penalty Imposed; Records Kept. The administrative penalties set out in
the schedule of administrative penalties shall be charged in lieu of the fines
and penalties provided for in Section
8-3A-12 of this chapter, unless the violator refuses to correct the violation
and pay the scheduled administrative penalty, or the WRA Director determines
that immediate enforcement action by misdemeanor or municipal infraction
prosecution is, in view of the particular circumstances of the case, necessary
to achieve compliance with the requirements of this chapter. A record of all
violations, administrative penalties charged, or other enforcement actions
taken shall be maintained by the WRA for a period of three years.
8-3A-12 PENALTIES.
   1.   Violations. Any person who fails to perform an act required by this
chapter or who commits an act prohibited by this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by fine or imprisonment or shall be guilty of a
municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty.
   2.   Noncompliance with Pretreatment Standards. Any person who fails to
comply with a pretreatment standard applicable to an FSE shall be guilty of a
municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty of not more than $1,000.00
for each day the violation exists or continues, as provided by Section 364.22
or 331.307 of the Code of Iowa.
   3.   Remedial Actions. When enforcement is sought through a municipal
infraction proceeding, the Director, or such other designated officers or
officials with enforcement authority as provided in Section
8-3A-10 of this chapter, may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the user
responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be
taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified
by the order.
8-3A-13 ORDER TO CEASE OPERATION OF FSE.
   1.   Authority to Issue Cease and Desist Order. Where a violation of this
chapter has not been timely corrected, and results in or threatens interference
or pass-through as herein defined, the WRA Director, or such other designated
officers or officials with enforcement authority as provided in Section
8-3A-10 of this chapter, shall have the authority to issue an order in writing
to the owner or operator of the FSE, ordering such person or persons to cease
and desist from further operation of the FSE and from further discharge of
wastewater to the sanitary sewer system. The order shall be delivered by
personal service unless the owner or operator cannot be found within the City,
in which event notice shall be by ordinary mail addressed to the owner’s or
operator’s last known address and by posting a copy of the notice in a
conspicuous place upon the premises of the FSE.
   2.   Discontinuance of Operation. Operation of the FSE shall cease on the
date stated in the order and shall not recommence without the prior written
approval of the WRA Director.
   3.   Request for Reconsideration and Hearing. The applicant may make a
written request to the Director for a reconsideration and hearing on the cease-
and-desist order within 10 days from the issuance of the order, provided,
however, that operation of the FSE shall cease pending the outcome of the
hearing.
   4.   Contents of Request for Hearing. The owner’s or operator’s request for
hearing shall identify the appealing party, include the address of the person
requesting the hearing and to which all further notices shall be mailed or
served, and shall state the basis for the appeal.
   5.   Schedule of Hearing. The hearing shall be scheduled to be held as soon
as practicable and no later than 14 days after the request for hearing was
filed with the WRA Director. The person requesting the hearing shall be
notified in writing or by telephone of the date and place of such hearing at
least three days in advance thereof. At such hearing the Director and the
person requesting the hearing may be represented by counsel, examine witnesses,
and present evidence as necessary.
   6.   Final Determination; Appeal. The determination by the Director that the
violation occurred shall be considered a final administrative decision, unless
appealed to the WRA.
8-3A-14 APPEAL OF CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER OR CEASE AND DESIST ORDER.
   1.   Filing of Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a corrective action order or
a cease-and-desist order issued by the WRA Director, or by such other
designated officers or officials with enforcement authority as provided in
Section
8-3A-10 of this chapter, may file an appeal and request a ruling that such
order be modified or rescinded.
   2.   Contents of Request. Such appeal request shall be in writing, shall
include the grounds for appeal including any factual findings which are
disputed, and shall be delivered to the WRA within 10 days after the WRA
Director’s issuance of the order. Such appeal request shall be considered
delivered when placed in the mail, return receipt requested, addressed to:
WRA Appeal Committee
Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority
3000 Vandalia Road
Des Moines, Iowa 50317
   3.   Scheduling of Appeal; Committee Decision. The Chair of the Appeal
Committee shall schedule the appeal and shall cause notice of the time, date,
and place of the hearing to be mailed to the appealing party. Such appeal shall
be decided by majority vote of the Appeal Committee. The Appeal Committee may
affirm, modify, or rescind the order of the Director and shall so state and
order in its written decision.
8-3A-15 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   The WRA or the City is not precluded from seeking alternative relief from
the court, including an order for abatement or injunctive relief or for
recovery of investigational or remedial costs resulting from a non-complying
discharge, in the event that the WRA or the City files a misdemeanor citation,
notice of administrative penalty, or files a municipal infraction for the same
violation of this chapter.
CHAPTER 3B
HAULED WASTE
8-3B-1 Definitions 8-3B-9 Treatment Fees for Hauled Waste
8-3B-1 Definitions                  8-3B-9 Treatment Fees for Hauled Waste
8-3B-2 Licensing Requirements       8-3B-10 Enforcement
8-3B-3 Standards for Vehicles and   8-3B-11 Notice of Violation; Administrative
Equipment                           Penalties; Corrective Action Order
8-3B-4 Disposal                     8-3B-12 Penalties
8-3B-5 Identification Of Source and 8-3B-13 Denial, Suspension, or Revocation
Wasteload Approval                  of License
8-3B-6 Mixing Wastes                8-3B-14 Alternative Relief
8-3B-7 Standards of Disposal at WRF  
8-3B-8 Rejection of Waste Loads      
 
8-3B-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions found in Sections
8-3-1 and
8-3A-2 of this title shall apply to the provisions of this chapter, provided
however that the following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   1.   “Vehicle” means a commercial device equipped with a tank and used to
remove or transport waste.
   2.   “Waste” means human excreta, water, scum, sludge, septage, FOG, food
waste or grease solids, and non-hazardous industrial wastewaters and solids
removed from public and private wastewater disposal systems, holding tanks,
impervious vaults, portable or chemical toilets, or from devices used to trap.
8-3B-2 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   Required; Exceptions. No waste hauler shall remove waste from within
the City or shall dispose of waste, whether from a source inside or outside the
City, into the POTW without first obtaining a waste hauler license from the
WRA, with the following exceptions:
      A.   WRA participating communities that operate vehicles to remove waste
from their sewer systems.
      B.   Waste haulers hired by WRA participating communities to remove waste
from their sewer systems and which bring no other wastes to the WRF.
      C.   Waste haulers utilized by industrial users issued a wastewater
discharge permit by the WRA.
      D.   Waste haulers granted temporary authorization by the WRA Director in
order to deal with an emergency.
   2.   Issuance of License; Payment Bond Requirements. The waste hauler’s
license shall be issued by the WRA Director, upon written application, that
shall consist of the following minimum requirements:
      A.   Inspection. The WRA Director, upon application, shall inspect the
trucks, hoses, valves, and associated equipment of the applicant for a waste
hauler’s license and determine if they meet the minimum qualifications for
complying with the conditions of this chapter.
      B.   License Fee and Bond. An application shall require the payment of a
fee of $60.00 for each vehicle used by the applicant and the posting of a bond
with reasonable surety in a penal sum which shall cover no less than two months
of average or estimated treatment fees at the WRF for the faithful compliance
with this chapter, including prompt payment of treatment costs, surcharges,
fees, and fines. Bond amounts shall be up to $100,000.00 but not less than
$20,000.00 and structured as follows or as required by the WRA Director:
 
Total Monthly Treatment Fees Surety Bond Amount
< $10,000                    $20,000.00
$10,001 - $20,000            $40,000.00
$20,001 - $40,000            $60,000.00
> $40,001                    $100,000.00
 
WRA participating communities that contract with waste haulers in order to
clean and rehabilitate storm and sanitary sewers owned by the community or that
own and operate waste hauling vehicles may provide proof of self-insurance or
provide a letter guaranteeing payment of up to $20,000.00 in lieu of providing
a surety bond.
      C.   Renewal. A waste hauler license shall expire on June 30 next after
its issuance. The renewal application must be made in the same manner as the
initial application and must be received by the Director 30 days prior to
expiration. Failure to apply 30 days prior to expiration may result in an
interruption in the license and the privileges of such license.
      D.   Transferability. Waste hauler licenses are not transferable.
8-3B-3 STANDARDS FOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
   As to all vehicles and equipment used by a waste hauler, the licensee shall:
   1.   Prevent waste and wastewater from leaking, spilling, or discharging
onto roads or rights-of-way.
   2.   Ensure proper construction and repair of the equipment to allow
cleaning.
   3.   Maintain vehicles and equipment in an essentially rust-free and
sanitary condition and appearance.
   4.   Display the business name as it appears on the waste hauler license in
three-inch or larger letters on the left and right sides of the vehicle.
8-3B-4 DISPOSAL.
   Hauled waste shall only be disposed at the WRF at the designated disposal
station or as authorized by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources for land
application. Waste haulers shall maintain the WRF designated disposal location
in a clean and orderly condition to avoid noxious odors and unsanitary
conditions. Hours of operation at the WRF disposal station shall be set by the
WRA Director. In the event of emergency situations, special arrangements
between the waste hauler and the WRA Director regarding disposal at an
alternative disposal site shall be allowed to permit response to such
emergency. Any violation of an Iowa Department of Natural Resources rule or
regulation for land disposal of hauled wastes by a waste hauler shall be
grounds for rejection of a hauled waste load in Section
8-3B-8 of this chapter by such waste hauler or shall be grounds for denial,
suspension, and revocation of such waste hauler’s license in Section
8-3B-13 of this chapter.
8-3B-5 IDENTIFICATION OF SOURCE AND WASTELOAD APPROVAL.
   1.   Waste haulers must document the nature and origin of wastes collected
and the site and method of disposal for wastes that are removed from any
locations or are delivered to the WRF.
   Such information shall be provided on a manifest form provided by the WRA
and shall also include: a) the name and address of the waste generator(s), b)
the type of waste collected, c) any other information consistent with
identification and tracking of wastes. The WRA Director or their designee shall
have the right to verify all information required by this section, including
the right to measure, sample, and analyze any waste regulated by this chapter.
   2.   The waste hauler or waste generator shall obtain approval from the WRA
Director or their designee prior to loading wastes originating from an
industrial/commercial source unless prior approval is on record with the WRA. A
hauled waste profile form prescribed by the WRA must be completed by the waste
generator and submitted to the WRA Director or their designee for consideration
for waste load disposal at the WRF.
   Such profile form shall include information regarding the waste generator’s
name, address, phone number, authorized representative, waste description, and
product information, anticipated volume and frequency of disposals, waste
transporter information, process waste characteristics including pollutant
concentrations, declarations, certifications, and signature of authorized
official.
8-3B-6 MIXING WASTES.
   1.   For the purposes of this chapter, wastes from residential and
nonresidential sources shall not be mixed. Wastes from an industrial/commercial
source shall not be mixed with wastes of any type from another location.
Portable toilet and FSE grease trap wastes may be mixed with similar wastes
from different locations. Residential wastes from several sources may be mixed
as long as each source is identified.
   2.   Any tanks used for hauling waste to the WRF or equipment that comes in
contact with waste shall not be used for hauling hazardous wastes or hazardous
substances, as defined in I.C. § 567.1 et seq., Chapter 131 of the Iowa
Administrative Code and in 40 CFR 261, or other wastes which may be detrimental
to the POTW, the receiving waters, or the health of WRF employees, private
contractors, or the public.
8-3B-7 STANDARDS OF DISPOSAL AT WRF.
   Under this chapter, disposal of wastes at the WRF shall be carried out in
accordance with pretreatment standards and requirements established by federal,
State, County, and City governments including categorical standards developed
for the waste generator’s industrial category. The WRA Director may reject
wastes from waste haulers who do not comply with this section or with any other
section of this chapter. Waste haulers shall not deliver wastes to the WRF, or
to any other disposal location approved by the WRA Director, which are:
   1.   Prohibited by Section
8-3-10 of this chapter or exceed the limits found in Subsection
8-3-11(3)(D), Sections
8-3-12 and
8-3-13 of this chapter.
   2.   Hazardous wastes or hazardous substances as defined in 40 CFR Part 261
or 567 IAC., Chapter 131.
   3.   Originate from mineral oil unless first treated to remove the oil and
grease.
   4.   Not completely identified or are from industrial/commercial sources
that are not approved by the WRA Director as required in Section
8-3B-5 of this chapter.
   5.   Mixed in a manner prohibited in Section
8-3B-5 of this chapter.
   6.   Wastes other than residential from outside the WRA, except through
requests to the WRA Director.
   7.   All disposal transactions at the WRF shall consist of waste haulers
scaling in and scaling out on the WRF scales system. Prior to discharging any
contents from their vehicle, a waste hauler shall:
      A.   Collect on-site at the WRF a sufficient sample of the waste material
onboard.
      B.   Test and record the pH and immediately report any results that do
not meet disposal limits as listed in Section
8-3-10(2).
      C.   Document on the WRF manifest all contents of the waste load
including waste type, source information, and any other information consistent
with identification and tracking of wastes as required in Section
8-3B-5.
      D.   Request and obtain approval from WRF Operations to begin unloading
at the WRF digesters.
8-3B-8 REJECTION OF WASTE LOADS.
   1.   The WRA Director may reject any hauled waste load that violates, or is
suspected of violating the requirements of this chapter, or that fails to meet
any other guidelines established by the WRA Director to protect personnel,
equipment, and the WRF.
   Waste haulers must:
      A.   Remove rejected waste from the WRF.
      B.   Immediately remove any additional wastes contaminated by the
rejected waste while contained at the WRF prior to introduction into the sewer.
      C.   Properly dispose of all rejected wastes in accordance with State and
federal law.
      D.   Provide the WRA Director with a written statement, signed by the
waste hauler license holder, stating the location, date, and time the rejected
load was disposed of. The statement is due within five calendar days after the
waste is rejected.
   2.   A vehicle used to haul rejected wastes shall not thereafter be allowed
to dispose of additional wastes at the WRF until the statement required by this
section is delivered to the WRA Director.
8-3B-9 TREATMENT FEES FOR HAULED WASTE.
   1.   Treatment Through Headworks:
      A.   A treatment fee shall be charged per pound of hauled waste disposed
of at the WRF and assessed based on the waste type, pollutant loading, approved
disposal location, and location of the source material. The fee for treatment
shall include electrical, chemical, labor, equipment, fuel, maintenance, and
any capital costs associated with the treatment processes utilized. The
treatment fee shall reflect a total cost per gallon or per pound of hauled
waste equaling the sum of the total cost of pollutants per gallon or per pound
plus, if applicable, total cost of flow per gallon, based on: (1) the
parameters of chemical oxygen demand (COD), estimated biochemical oxygen demand
(B.O.D.), total suspended solids (TSS) or total solids (TS), volatile solids
(VS), total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN), oil and grease (O and G), and, if
applicable, total phosphorus (TP) contained in trucked waste to the WRF; (2)
net weight of the wasteload in pounds; and (3) the treatment surcharge
component rate per pound of pollutant as found in Section
8-3-20 of this chapter. Wasteloads disposed of at an unapproved location at the
WRF, or containing pollutant concentrations different from typical pollutant
concentrations or from original disclosures made during the wasteload approval
process, may be subject to the following additional costs: treatment fees,
charges, or fines may also be applied pursuant toSection
8-3-20(1).
      B.   The treatment fee for loads originating outside the corporate limits
of the WRA participating communities shall be one and one- half times the fee
for loads originating within the WRA participating communities.
   2.   Using Portion of Treatment Processes:
      A.   Treatment costs shall be reviewed and updated annually per the U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index. The WRA shall provide 30 days’
notice prior to assessing updated disposal rates with such notices posted, at a
minimum, on the WRA website.
      B.   The treatment fee for loads originating outside of the WRA
participating communities shall be one and one-half times the fee for loads
originating within the WRA participating communities unless otherwise approved
by the WRA Director.
   3.   Computation, Recording, and Payment of Fees. Wasteload disposal weights
shall be computed and recorded at the WRF truck scales and the resulting
treatment fees shall be paid by the waste hauler or the waste generator, at the
WRA’s discretion, on the basis of monthly billings by the operating contractor.
Limits of credit shall not exceed 60 days. Abuse of such credit shall be
grounds for liability on the waste hauler’s or waste generator’s bond and for
refusal of disposal services to any waste hauler or waste generator under this
division.
   4.   Testing of Loads. Waste haulers and waste generators may elect to have
their routine waste streams tested for actual concentration at their expense as
set forth in Section
8-3-20 of this chapter and as approved by the WRA Director. When a waste hauler
or waste generator has elected to test for actual concentration, the treatment
fee will be based on the actual concentration whether it be higher or lower
than the average concentration treatment fee. Said testing will be done at
least semi-annually or as required by the WRA Director.
8-3B-10 ENFORCEMENT.
   The WRA Director, the City Building Official, or such other governmental
official hereafter designated by the WRA, shall be authorized to enforce this
chapter as hereinafter provided.
8-3B-11 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES; CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER.
   1.   The Director, or such other designated officers or officials with
enforcement authority as provided in Section
8-3B-10 of this chapter, are authorized to issue a notice of violation imposing
an administrative penalty upon any person who fails to perform an act required
by this chapter or who commits an act prohibited by this chapter.
   2.   The administrative penalty for such violations shall be as provided in
the schedule of administrative penalties adopted by the Council by resolution.
   3.   Notice of violation, with the applicable penalty for such violation
noted thereon, shall be issued to and served upon the violator. Service of the
notice may be by regular mail or by delivery in person.
   4.   Penalties assessed pursuant to notice of violation shall be paid by the
violator in full as directed in the notice within 30 days of its issuance.
   5.   The administrative penalties set out in the schedule of administrative
penalties shall be charged in lieu of the fines and penalties provided for in
Section
8-3B-12 of this chapter, unless the violator refuses to correct the violation
and pay the scheduled administrative penalty, or the WRA Director determines
that immediate enforcement action by municipal infraction prosecution is, in
view of the particular circumstances of the case, necessary to achieve
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The WRA shall maintain a
record of all violations, administrative penalties charged, or other
enforcement actions taken.
8-3B-12 PENALTIES.
   1.   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.
   2.   Any person who violates a discharge prohibition set forth in Section
8-3-10 of this chapter, or discharges in excess of local limits as set forth in
Section
8-3-11 of this chapter, shall be guilty of an environmental violation
punishable as provided by Section 364.22 of the Code of Iowa.
8-3B-13 DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   1.   Grounds for Denial, Suspension, or Revocation of Waste Haulers License.
The WRA Director may deny, suspend, or revoke the waste hauler license or
grease hauler certification of any waste hauler who violates any provision of
this chapter or any condition of its license, or who commits any of the
following violations, or who does not meet the following requirements:
      A.   Violation of any term, condition, or requirement of this chapter,
the license, or applicable State or federal laws or regulations.
      B.   Obtaining a license by misrepresentation.
      C.   Falsification of, failure to complete or failure to fully disclose
all relevant facts in a license application.
      D.   Failure to pay fees, administrative penalties, or fines.
      E.   Failure to report a spill to the WRA.
      F.   Using wash down water or otherwise diluting the permitted waste for
the purpose of meeting discharge limitations or requirements.
      G.   Falsification of, failure to complete, or failure to fully disclose
all relevant facts in any report, manifest information, or record required by
the license or this chapter.
      H.   Tampering with samples or sampling equipment intended to accurately
reflect the contents of each hauled waste load.
      I.   Refusing to allow WRA personnel timely access to the waste hauler’s
facility premises, vehicles, or records.
      J.   Failure to perform as required under a corrective action order or
compliance schedule issued by the WRA Director.
      K.   Failure to correct any violation of this chapter within 30 days
after notice by the WRA Director.
      L.   Failure to immediately correct any violation of this chapter if the
condition constituting the violation is declared a threat to public health,
safety, or welfare by the WRA Director and the Director orders immediate
correction.
   2.   Procedure For Denial, Suspension, or Revocation Of Waste Hauler's
License. The procedure for denial, suspension, or revocation of a waste
hauler's license shall be as follows:
      A.   Any license issued to a waste hauler pursuant to this chapter may be
denied, suspended, or revoked by written order of the WRA Director specifying
the grounds for such action as outlined in Subsection 1 of this section, which
order shall not take effect until hearing thereon as hereafter provided. Upon
determining that grounds exist for an order to deny, suspend, or revoke a waste
hauler’s license, the WRA Director shall cause a notice of hearing to be
prepared, specifying the violations of Subsection 1 of this section which are
deemed to have occurred, and the time, date, and place that such hearing will
be held. The notice shall be sent to the waste hauler by regular mail addressed
to the waste hauler’s address listed on the waste hauler’s license a minimum of
10 days prior to the date set for hearing, and shall be deemed delivered when
placed in the mail.
      B.   If, after such a hearing, the WRA Director makes a finding based on
substantial evidence that one or more violations under Subsection 1 of this
section have occurred as alleged, the Director may deny issuance of the
license, suspend the license for a fixed period, or may issue an order
immediately revoking the license and ordering the waste hauler to discontinue
hauling waste to the WRF or any other disposal locations approved by the
Director. The determination whether to deny issuance of a license, to suspend a
license, or to revoke a license, shall be in the discretion of the Director and
shall be dependent upon the circumstances surrounding the violations of
Subsection 1 of this section and the severity of those violations. If the waste
hauler does not appear for the hearing, the Director shall issue the order
revoking the waste hauler’s license and ordering the cessation of delivery of
hauled waste at the WRF or any other disposal locations approved by the
Director, which order shall take effect immediately.
      C.   The decision and order of the WRA Director to deny issuance, to
suspend or to revoke the license of a waste hauler may be appealed to the WRA
Appeal Committee. Such appeal request shall be in writing, shall include the
grounds for appeal including any factual findings which are disputed, and shall
be delivered to WRA not less than 10 days after the Director’s entry of the
order of denial, suspension, or revocation. Such appeal request shall be
considered delivered when placed in the mail, return receipt requested,
addressed to:
WRA Appeal Committee
Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority
3000 Vandalia Road
Des Moines, Iowa 50317
The Chair of the Appeal Committee shall schedule the appeal and shall cause
notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing to be mailed to the
appealing waste hauler. Such appeal shall be decided by majority vote of the
Appeal Committee. If the Appeal Committee affirms the order of the WRA Director
denying issuance, suspending, or revoking the license and ordering the
cessation of waste deliveries at the WRF or other approved locations, the
Appeal Committee shall so state and order in its written decision.
      D.   A waste hauler whose license has been denied or revoked shall not be
eligible for issuance or reinstatement of its license until 30 days after the
violating conditions have been corrected to the satisfaction of the Director.
8-3B-14 ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.
   Neither the WRA nor the City is precluded from seeking alternative relief
from the court, including an order for abatement or injunctive relief, in the
event that the WRA or the City files a misdemeanor citation, notice of
administrative penalty, or files a municipal infraction for the same violation
of this chapter, or in the event the WRA seeks to deny, suspend, or revoke the
waste hauler’s license.
CHAPTER 4
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM AND FACILITIES
 
8-4-1 Purpose                                         8-4-5 Prohibited Acts
8-4-2 Definitions                                     8-4-6 Right of Entry
8-4-3 Scope and Responsibility for Stormwater Utility 8-4-7 Penalties
8-4-4 Director of Public Works                         
 
8-4-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a stormwater utility which shall
be responsible for stormwater management within the corporate boundaries of the
City and shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation,
use, and enhancement of stormwater management systems and facilities.
8-4-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Commercial/industrial” means any developed land whereon multiple-
family dwellings, commercial retail and office, industrial, and manufacturing
buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious
surfaces, parking lots, public and private school buildings, churches,
hospitals, and convalescent centers have been constructed.
   2.   “Customers of the stormwater utility” means all persons, properties,
and entities served by or benefiting from the utility’s acquisition,
management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater
management system and facilities.
   3.   “Developed land” means land that has been altered from its natural
state by construction or installation of more than 500 square feet of
“impervious surface area” as defined in this section.
   4.   “Duplex dwelling” means a building containing only two dwelling units
and designed for and occupied exclusively by not more than two families with
separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. In the application of
stormwater service charge rates, duplex dwelling properties shall be treated as
two single-family dwellings.
   5.   “Equivalent Residential Unit” (ERU) means the median average impervious
coverage of a detached dwelling unit property in the City as determined by the
City and shall be used as the basis for determining stormwater service charges.
Forty-one hundred square feet of impervious surface area shall be one
equivalent unit.
(Subsection 5 – Ord. 1144 – May 24 Supp.)
   6.   “Impervious surface area” means those areas which prevent or impede the
infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it enters in natural conditions
prior to development. Common impervious surface areas include, but are not
limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, patios, parking lots, storage
areas, compacted gravel surfaces, and other surfaces which prevent or impede
the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to
development.
   7.   “Multiple-family dwelling” means a building or portion thereof
containing more than three dwelling units designed for or occupied by more than
three families with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. In
the application of stormwater service charge rates, multiple-family dwelling
properties shall be treated as commercial/industrial.
   8.   “Pollutant” means anything that causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents;
oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard
wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution; pesticides,
herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal
coliform bacteria and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal
wastes; waste and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
   9.   “Service charge” means the periodic rate, fee, or charge applicable to
a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the service
provided by the City stormwater utility. Service charges are based on
measurable parameters which influence the stormwater utility’s cost of
providing services and facilities, with the most important factor being the
amount of impervious surface area on each parcel of developed property. The
service charge shall be determined, from time to time, by resolution of the
Council.
   10.   “Single-family dwelling” means a building containing only one dwelling
unit and designed for and occupied exclusively for residence purposes by only
one family.
   11.   “Stormwater management systems and facilities” means the issue of
drainage management (flooding) and environmental quality (pollution, erosion,
and sedimentation) of receiving rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, and ponds
through improvements, maintenance, regulation, and funding of plants,
structures, and property used in the collection, retention, detention, and
treatment of stormwater or surface water drainage.
   12.   “Substantial completion” means the date when the construction has been
completed and the City has acknowledged that the construction has been
completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications through the
issuance of a temporary Certificate of Occupancy or permanent Certificate of
Occupancy.
   13.   “Townhome dwelling” means a dwelling unit which is detached or
attached horizontally, and not vertically to one or more other dwelling units,
wherein the land or lot beneath each dwelling may be individually owned in
common by a townhome association. In the application of stormwater service
charge rates, each townhome dwelling shall be treated as one single-family
dwelling.
   14.   “Undeveloped land” means land in its unaltered natural state or which
has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response
comparable to land in an unaltered state shall be deemed undeveloped.
“Undeveloped land” shall have less than 500 square feet of pavement, asphalt,
or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface
area that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to
collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which
would occur when the land was in an unaltered natural state.
8-4-3 SCOPE AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR STORMWATER UTILITY.
   The City stormwater utility consists of all rivers, streams, creeks,
branches, lakes, ponds, drainageways, channels, ditches, swales, storm sewer,
culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, dams, head walls and other structures,
natural or manmade, within the corporate boundaries of the City which control
or convey stormwater through which the City intentionally diverts surface
waters from its public streets and properties. The City owns or has legal
access for purposes of operation, maintenance, and improvement to those
segments of this system which: a) are located within public streets, rights-of-
ways, and easements; b) are subject to easement or other permanent provisions
for adequate access for operation, maintenance, and improvement of systems or
facilities; or c) are located on public lands to which the City has adequate
access for operation, maintenance, and improvement of systems or facilities.
Operation, maintenance, and improvement of stormwater systems and facilities
which are located on private property, or public property not owned by the City
and for which there has been no public dedication of such systems and
facilities, shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner,
or its occupant.
8-4-4 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The Director of Public Works has the following powers and duties related to
the City stormwater utility:
   1.   Operations and Maintenance. Operation and maintenance of the stormwater
management systems and facilities.
   2.   Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   3.   Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all stormwater
management systems and facilities.
   4.   Policies. Recommend to the Council policies to be adopted and enforced
to implement the provisions of this chapter.
8-4-5 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
   1.   Damage Stormwater Management Systems and Facilitates. Maliciously,
willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper
with any structure, pipe, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the
stormwater management systems or facilities.
   2.   Illicit Discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise
discharge or cause to throw, drain, run, or allow to seep or otherwise be
discharged into the City stormwater management system and facilities,
including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants,
other than stormwater.
   3.   Manholes. Open or enter any manhole, structure, or intake of the
stormwater system, except by authority of the Director of Public Works.
   4.   Connection. Connection of any private stormwater system to the City’s
stormwater management system and facilities, except by authority of the
Director of Public Works.
8-4-6 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Director of Public Works and other authorized employees of the City,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
private properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing all private stormwater discharges directly or indirectly
entering into any public stormwater management system or facility in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
8-4-7 PENALTIES.
   The following penalty provisions shall apply to violations this chapter:
   1.   Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provisions of
this chapter shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently remedy all violations.
   2.   Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the time limit provided for in Subsection 1 of this section, shall be
subject to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in
Title 1 Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day which said violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   3.   Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the City by reason of such violation.
CHAPTER 4A
STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGES
 
8-4A-1 Stormwater Service Charges Required 8-4A-6 Billing for Service
8-4A-2 Effective Date of Service Charges   8-4A-7 Lien for Nonpayment
8-4A-3 Basic Rate                          8-4A-8 Discontinuance of Service
8-4A-4 Rate Appeals                        8-4A-9 Annual Revision of Rates
8-4A-5 Exemptions from Charges              
 
8-4A-1 STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED.
   Every customer whose premises is served by a connection with the stormwater
management system and facilities of the City, either directly or indirectly,
shall pay to the City stormwater service charges hereinafter established and
specified for the purpose of contributing toward the costs of construction,
maintenance, and operation of the stormwater management system and facilities.
8-4A-2 EFFECTIVE DATE OF SERVICE CHARGES.  
   Stormwater service charges shall accrue beginning August 1, 2005, and shall
be billed monthly thereafter to all customers.
8-4A-3 BASIC RATE.
   1.   Except as hereinafter noted, each customer whose property lies within
the corporate limits of the City shall pay to the City, through its collection
agent, the Clive Water Department, at the same time payment for City water
service is made, the following charges per equivalent residential unit
associated with the customer’s property (an “ERU” means the median average
impervious coverage of a detached dwelling unit property in the City of Clive,
which has been determined by the City to be 4,100 square feet of impervious
surface area):
      A.   Undeveloped. A flat storm sewer availability charge at the rate of
zero dollars ($0.00) per month, regardless of the amount of consumption by the
customer; and
      B.   Residential. A storm sewer availability charge, regardless of the
amount of consumption by such customer, will be based on the following
schedule:
         (1)   Fiscal year 2025/2026: $12.40 per ERU per month
         (2)   Residential Tier 1 (.5 ERU): 0-3100 square feet of impervious
area – $6.21 per month
         (3)   Residential Tier 2 (1 ERU): > 3100-5100 square feet of
impervious area – $12.40 per month
         (4)   Residential Tier 3 (1.5 ERU): > 5101 or more square feet of
impervious area – $18.61 per month
      The monthly rate for each fiscal year beyond 2025-26 will be determined
by the ordinance of the City Council before July 1 of each year.
      C.   Commercial/Industrial. A storm sewer availability charge will be
based on the following schedule:
      The fiscal year 2025-26: $12.40 per ERU per month
      The monthly rate for each fiscal year beyond 2025/2026 will be determined
by the ordinance of the City Council before July 1 of each year.
   2.   The number of equivalent residential units (ERUs) on each property
shall be calculated by the Community Development Department based on the most
recent aerial photography available to the City of Clive and/or impervious
surface data from an approved site plan for the property.
(Section 8-4A-3 – Ord. 1161 – May 25 Supp.)
8-4A-4 RATE APPEALS.
   Any customer who believes the provisions of this chapter have been applied
in error may appeal in the following manner:
   1.   Filing of Appeal. An appeal must be filed in writing with the City
Manager. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal may include a survey
prepared by a registered State land surveyor or professional engineer
containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area,
and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of
the property to rainfall events.
   2.   Technical Review. Using the information provided by the appellant, the
City Manager shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property
and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days.
   3.   Adjustment of Charge. In response to an appeal, the City Manager may
adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in conformance
with the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
   4.   Appeal of Adverse Decision. A decision of the City Manager which is
adverse to an appellant may be further appealed to the Council within 30 days
of receipt of notice of the decision. Notice of the appeal shall be served on
the Council by the appellant, stating the grounds for the appeal. The Council
shall schedule a public hearing within 30 days. All decisions of the Council
shall be served on the appellant by registered mail, sent to the billing
address of the appellant.
   5.   Council Decisions Final. All decisions of the Council shall be final.
8-4A-5 EXEMPTIONS FROM CHARGES.
   Exemptions from charges are those permitted as follows:
   1.   Rights-of-way owned by a public governmental entity, such as:
      A.   The State;
      B.   The Counties of Polk and Dallas; and
      C.   The City;
   2.   Railroad right-of-way (track).
   3.   A subdivided lot until a substantially completed improvement has been
constructed on the lot.
   4.   Des Moines Waterworks.
   5.   Des Moines Wastewater Reclamation Authority.
(Section 8-4A-5 – Ord. 1161 – May 25 Supp.)
8-4A-6 BILLING FOR SERVICE.
   Billing and payment for stormwater services shall be in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Bills Issued. The Director of Administrative Services shall prepare and
issue bills for stormwater service on or before the first day of the month
following each monthly billing period.
   2.   Bills Payable. Bills for stormwater service shall be due and payable at
the Utility Billing office by the 15th of the month following the end of each
monthly billing period.
   3.   Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be considered
delinquent. A one-time late payment penalty of 10 percent of the amount due
shall be added to each delinquent bill.
   4.   Returned Checks. A fee, as set forth in the fee schedule established by
the Council, shall be charged for all checks not honored by the bank.
(Section 8-4A-6 – Ord. 1161 – May 25 Supp.)
8-4A-7 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   1.   Responsibility for Payment. The owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for stormwater
service charges to the premises. Stormwater service charges remaining unpaid
and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and may be
certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same
manner as property taxes.
   2.   Lien Notice. A lien for delinquent stormwater service charges shall not
be certified to the County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to
certify a lien is given to the customer. If the customer is a tenant and if the
owner or landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the
notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent
to the appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to
certification of the lien to the County Treasurer.
8-4A-8 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   After giving reasonable notice, the Director of Public Works may discontinue
water service to any customer who has failed to pay the amounts due and owing
under this chapter and who has not contested the payment therefore in good
faith.
8-4A-9 ANNUAL REVISION OF RATES.
   The City will review the stormwater service charges at least yearly and
revise the stormwater service charges as necessary to ensure that such charges
as herein established and specified generate adequate revenues to pay the costs
of maintenance and operation (including replacement and debt service) of a
stormwater management system and facilities and that the stormwater service
charges continue to provide for the proportional distribution of maintenance
and operation costs (including replacement costs and debt service) for a
stormwater management system and facilities among the users and user classes.
The liability of a stormwater service user to pay for charges as provided in
this chapter shall not be contingent, however, upon any such review or
revision.
CHAPTER 4B
ILLICIT DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM
 
8-4B-1 Purpose                        8-4B-5 Industrial Discharges
8-4B-2 Definitions                    8-4B-6 Watercourse Protection
8-4B-3 Allowable Non-Stormwater       8-4B-7 Detection, Reporting, and
                                      Inspection
8-4B-4 Illicit Discharges and Illegal 8-4B-8 Abatement Notice; Procedure
Connections Prohibited
                                     8-4B-9 Penalty
 
8-4B-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the City through the regulation of non-
stormwater discharges to the City separate storm sewer system to the maximum
extent practicable, as required by federal law. This chapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the City separate
storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.
8-4B-2 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms are defined for use in this chapter, unless the context
specifically indicates otherwise:
   1.   “Hazardous materials” means any material, including any substance,
waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   2.   “Illegal connection” means either of the following: a) any pipe, open
channel, drain, or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not
limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and
any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or b) any drain or
conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm
drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent
records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   3.   “Illicit discharge” means any direct or indirect non-stormwater
discharge to the City separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in
Section
8-4B-3 of this chapter.
   4.   “Industrial discharge” means discharges subject to NPDES industrial
permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14).
   5.   “Municipal separate storm sewer system, (MS4)” means any facility
designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including inlets,
catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater
controls, or other drainage structures which are owned or maintained by the
City.
   6.   “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) permit” means a permit issued by Iowa
Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
   7.   “Non-stormwater discharge” means any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
   8.   “Pollutant” means anything that causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes
and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects or accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or
offensive matter of any kind.
   9.   “Pollution” means the contamination or other alteration of any water’s
physical, chemical, or biological properties, including change in color,
turbidity, or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous,
solid, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a
nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental, or injurious to the public
health, safety, or welfare.
   10.   “Premises” means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   11.   “Responsible party” means, for purposes of this chapter, one or more
persons that control or are in possession of or own property. Responsible
parties shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with this
chapter and jointly and severally liable for any illicit discharge from the
property controlled, possessed, or owned. For purposes of this chapter,
“property” includes, but is not limited to, real estate, fixtures, facilities,
and premises of any kind located upon, under, or above the real estate. The
definition of “responsible party” does not include the City when an illicit
discharge is caused by a person on a public street or on public property.
   12.   “Stormwater runoff” or “stormwater” means any surface flow, runoff,
and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
   13.   “Structural stormwater control” means a structural stormwater
management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the
characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and
quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow.
8-4B-3 ALLOWABLE NON-STORMWATER.
   Discharges from firefighting activities, fire hydrant flushing, potable
water sources, water line flushing, uncontaminated ground water, foundation or
footing drains, springs, riparian habitats, wetlands, irrigation water, air
conditioning condensate, exterior building wash water when no detergents or
other surfactants are used, and pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of
toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred and when no detergents or other
surfactants are used.
8-4B-4 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   1.   Any discharge into the City’s storm sewer system prohibited by the
City’s NPDES permit, the terms of which are hereby incorporated by reference,
shall be deemed an illicit discharge in violation of this chapter.
   2.   The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of any
illegal connection shall constitute a violation of this chapter. This
prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in
the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or
practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
8-4B-5 INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES.
   Any responsible party subject to an industrial NPDES discharge permit issued
by the IDNR shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
8-4B-6 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every responsible party owning property through which a watercourse passes,
or such responsible party’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the
watercourse within the property below the elevation of the 100-year flood free
of trash, debris, grass clippings, or other organic wastes and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly alter the quality of water
flowing through the watercourse.
8-4B-7 DETECTION, REPORTING, AND INSPECTION.
   1.   Authority. All detection activities permitted under this chapter shall
be conducted by the Public Works Director, or their designee, hereinafter
referred to as the “Inspector.”
   2.   Nonliability of City. The City shall not be responsible for any direct
or indirect consequences affecting responsible party or property as a result of
an illicit discharge, or circumstances which may cause an illicit discharge,
whether detected or undetected by the City.
   3.   Duty of Responsible Party. Every responsible party has an absolute duty
to monitor conditions on property owned or controlled by them, to prevent all
illicit discharges, and to report to the City any illicit discharges, which the
responsible party knows or should have known to occur. Failure to comply with
any provision of this chapter is a violation of this chapter.
   4.   Immediate Response to Illicit Discharge. Notwithstanding other
requirements of law, as soon as any responsible party has information of any
known or suspected illicit discharge, the responsible party shall immediately
take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of
such discharge at the responsible party’s sole cost.
   5.   Notify Emergency Response Agencies. If the illicit discharge consists
of hazardous materials, the responsible party shall also immediately notify
emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
   6.   Record of Discharge and Actions Taken. If the illicit discharge
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator
of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall
be retained for at least three years.
   7.   Time Limit for Reporting. A report of an illicit discharge shall be
made in person or by phone or facsimile or e-mail to the Inspector immediately,
but in any event within 24 hours of the illicit discharge; notifications in
person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed or
e-mailed to the Inspector within 24 hours of the personal or phone notice.
   8.   Report Risk of Possible Discharge. Any responsible party shall also
report to the City any circumstances which such person or entity reasonably
believes pose a risk of an illicit discharge.
   9.   Inspection of Site. Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous
subsections of this section or otherwise coming into possession of information
indicating an actual or imminent illicit discharge or an illegal connection,
the Inspector shall conduct an inspection of the site as soon as reasonably
possible and, if an illicit discharge or illegal connection is found, the
Inspector thereafter shall provide to the responsible party(s) for such
premises a written notice to abate conditions which have already caused or may
cause an illicit discharge or the presence of an illegal connection. The
responsible parties shall immediately commence corrective action or remediation
and shall complete such corrective action or remediation within the time frame
specified within the abatement notice.
   10.   Cooperation with Inspector. The Inspector shall be permitted to enter
and inspect any property subject to regulation under this section as often as
is necessary to determine compliance with this section. If a responsible party
owning, controlling, or possessing a property has security measures that
require identification and clearance before entry to its property, such
responsible party shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access by the
Inspector. By way of specification, but not limitation:
      A.   A responsible party shall allow the Inspector ready access to all
parts of the property for purposes of inspection, sampling, examination, and
copying of records related to a suspected, actual, or imminent illicit
discharge, and for the performance of any additional duties as defined by State
and federal law.
      B.   The Inspector shall have the right to set up on any property such
devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Inspector to conduct monitoring
or sampling related to a suspected, actual, or imminent illicit discharge.
      C.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction that obstructs the safe and
easy access to property to be inspected or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the responsible party at the written or oral order of the Inspector and shall
not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
responsible party.
      D.   An unreasonable delay in allowing the Inspector access to a property
is a violation of this chapter.
      E.   If the Inspector has been refused access to any part of the property
from which an illegal connection or illicit discharge is occurring, suspected,
or imminent, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there
may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify
compliance with this chapter, or to protect the overall public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, then the Inspector may seek issuance of a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
8-4B-8 ABATEMENT NOTICE; PROCEDURE.
   1.   Contents. The notice to abate shall contain:
      A.   Description. A description of what constitutes the illicit discharge
or illegal connection.
      B.   Location. The location of the illicit discharge or illicit
connection.
      C.   Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to
abate the illicit discharge or illegal connection.
      D.   Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.
      E.   Payment of Costs. A statement that if the illicit discharge or
illegal connection is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made
within the time prescribed, the City will abate it and invoice the costs to
such responsible party.
   2.   Method of Service of Notice. The notice shall be sent by certified mail
to the property owner.
   3.   Request for Hearing. Any responsible party ordered to abate an illicit
discharge or illegal connection may have a hearing with the Council as to
whether an illicit discharge or illegal connection exists. A request for a
hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time
stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that an illicit
discharge or illegal connection exists and it must be abated as ordered. The
hearing will be before the Council at a time and place fixed by the Council.
The findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if an illicit discharge or
illegal connection is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a
reasonable time under the circumstances.
   4.   Failure to Abate. Any responsible party, causing or maintaining an
illicit discharge or illegal connection, who shall fail or refuse to abate or
remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified in the notice
to abate is in violation of this Code.
   5.   Abatement by City. If the responsible party notified to abate an
illicit discharge or illegal connection neglects or fails to abate as directed,
the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping an accurate account
of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall be filed with the
Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the City.
   6.   Collection of Costs. If it is determined that an illicit discharge is
imminent or has occurred, the actual administrative costs incurred by the City
in the enforcement of this chapter shall be recovered from the responsible
party. The Inspector shall submit an invoice to the responsible party
reflecting the actual costs and wages and all other expenses incurred by the
City for the enforcement activities undertaken. Failure to pay charges invoiced
under this chapter within 30 days of billing shall constitute a violation of
this chapter.
   7.   Abatement in Emergency. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the illicit discharge or illegal
connection, the City may perform any action which may be required under this
chapter without prior notice. The City shall bill the costs as provided in
Subsection 6 of this section.
   8.   Abatement on Public Street or Public Property. The person causing an
illicit discharge on a public street or on public property shall be responsible
for abatement, as directed by the City, or shall pay all costs of abatement
performed by the City. The City shall bill any costs incurred as provided in
Subsection 6 of this section. In addition to paying the costs of abatement, any
person causing an illicit discharge on a public street or on public property
shall be subject to a civil penalty in accordance with this chapter.
8-4B-9 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the standard penalty as stated in Section
1-4-1.† 10
 
Notes
10 † EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Section
   8-4-7 of this title.
CHAPTER 4C
POSTCONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
 
8-4C-1 Title                                  8-4C-7 Maintenance
8-4C-2 Purpose                                8-4C-8 Inspections
8-4C-3 Warning                                8-4C-9 Corrective Action by City
8-4C-4 Interpretation                         8-4C-10 Responsibility
8-4C-5 Definitions                            8-4C-11 Violations
8-4C-6 Postconstruction Stormwater Management  
Plan (PCSWMP)
 
8-4C-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Clive Postconstruction Stormwater
Management Ordinance, may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as
“this chapter.”
8-4C-2 PURPOSE.
   1.   The U.S. EPA’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(“NPDES”) permit program (“program”) administered by the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources (“IDNR”) requires that cities meeting certain demographic and
environmental impact criteria obtain from the IDNR an NPDES permit for the
discharge of stormwater from a municipal separate storm sewer system (“MS4”)
(“MS4 permit”). The City of Clive (“City”) is subject to the program and is
required to obtain, and has obtained, an MS4 permit. The City’s MS4 permit is
on file at the office of the Clerk and is available for public inspection
during regular office hours.
   2.   The purpose of this chapter is to comply with the MS4 permit
requirements and establish a set of water quality and quantity policies
applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable guidance for the
regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water
resources from degradation. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from
land development and other construction activities in order to control and
minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream
channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater
runoff, is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and
safety.
8-4C-3 WARNING.
   No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed
or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter, as indicating the safety of or
quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor
inspections made pursuant thereto, nor certificates issued, are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises
or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in the risk
associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a
premises has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not, in any way,
constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises.
8-4C-4 INTERPRETATION.
   The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take
precedence over any other language contained in this chapter.
8-4C-5 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Applicant” means person, firm, or entity applying for a permit or
development approval to develop, grade, or construct any improvement within the
corporate limits of the City.
   2.   “Approval” means formal, written consent by the Council, or authorized
representative of the City.
   3.   “Best Management Practices” (BMPs) means schedules of activities
prohibitions of practice, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States.
Common BMPs are described in the State stormwater management manual and SUDAS.
   The BMPs covered are not meant to be a comprehensive list of acceptable
BMPs.
   4.   “Drainage, detention, or overland flowage easement” means a legal right
granted by a property owner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for
stormwater management.
   5.   “National pollutant discharge elimination system” means the program for
issuing, modifying, revoking, terminating, monitoring, and enforcing permits
under the Clean Water Act (Sections 301, 318, 402, and 405) and United States
Code of Federal Regulations Title 33, Sections 1317, 1328, 1342, and 1345.
   6.   “Postconstruction stormwater management plan” means a set of plans and
specifications approved by the Council during the approval of the site plan,
construction drawing, or plat that defines the system of BMPs that are to be
constructed and maintained on the site.
   7.   “Property” means land located in the City, whether or not improved with
buildings or other structures.
   8.   “Property owner” means a person who, alone or with another person or
other persons, holds the legal title to property; except, however, where
property has been sold on contract to a person who has the present right to
possess the property and the contract has been filed for record in the office
of the County Recorder, the person so purchasing the property, whether alone or
with another person or other persons, is the “property owner” and the person
retaining bare legal title to the property as security for the balance of the
purchase price.
   9.   “Regional detention facility” means a wet or dry detention basin(s)
which is designed to accept stormwater runoff from two or more sites that is
required to obtain an NPDES General Permit No. 2 and that otherwise complies
with all City, State, or federal permit requirements as they apply to
stormwater management requirements for those sites.
   10.   “SUDAS” means the current Standard Urban Design and Specifications
Manual, as locally amended, that specifies the stormwater guidelines and
stormwater controls deemed by SUDAS to meet the goals of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency NPDES permit program administered by the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources.
   11.   “Stormwater” means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface
runoff and drainage.
   12.   “Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan” (SWPPP) means a plan as defined
in the State NPDES stormwater general permit.
8-4C-6 POSTCONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (PCSWMP).
   1.   Every property owner or applicant of a project creating 5,000 square
feet or more of impervious surface area, shall design, install, and maintain
Postconstruction Stormwater Management Plan (PCSWMP) facilities as approved by
the Council during the site plan, construction drawing, or platting process.
PCSWMP facilities may be required for projects that create less than 5,000
square feet of impervious surface area, if the project is part of a larger plan
of development that meets the applicability threshold, even though multiple
separate and distinct projects may take place at different times on different
schedules.
   2.   A State licensed professional engineer or landscape architect shall
design PCSWMP facilities in conformance with the guidelines established in the
City “Stormwater Management Manual,” the State “Stormwater Management Manual”
and SUDAS. PCSWMP facilities shall be designed with appropriate BMPs, such as
detention and retention basins, wetlands, soil quality restoration, grass
swales, buffer strips, bioretention basins, and other similar types of
infiltration based practices, so that the drainage through the property shall
not cause adverse water quality or quantity impacts to a downstream property
owner, watercourse, channel, or conduit receiving stormwater runoff from the
proposed development site.
   3.   In order to ensure that the PCSWMP facilities are constructed in
accordance with the approved design, the property owner or applicant shall
provide to the City an as built plan detailing dimensions and elevations as
well as certification that the approved facilities were installed and working
properly. The as-built plan shall be completed by a State licensed professional
engineer or landscape architect and submitted to the City prior to the
acceptance of any public improvements or issuance of any Certificate of
Occupancy.
   4.   At the discretion of the City, the property owner or applicant may
satisfy the PCSWMP requirements by ensuring the conveyance of stormwater
discharge from the property to a regional detention facility.
8-4C-7 MAINTENANCE.
   It shall be the property owner’s duty to ensure that the site is
periodically inspected and maintained in accordance with the approved PCSWMP.
   Periodic inspections shall be completed as needed and in no case less than
one time per year. Inspections shall be documented and shall be retained by the
property owner for at least three years. Copies of the inspection documentation
shall be made available to the City upon request.
8-4C-8 INSPECTIONS.  
   1.   The City shall be permitted to enter and inspect any property with
PCSWMP facilities subject to this regulation as often and as necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter.
   2.   The City may conduct site visits at any time to determine compliance
with the approved PCSWMP.
   Additionally, the City may request that a property owner verify, through the
preparation of an as-built plan completed by a State licensed professional
engineer or landscape architect, that the PCSWMP facilities contain appropriate
capacities and operational characteristics as originally designed and approved.
   3.   In the event that a site is found not to be in compliance with the
PCSWMP, the City will communicate, in writing, with the property owner a list
of deficiencies that identifies the area or incident of noncompliance. The
property owner shall have 14 days from the date of notice to provide a written
response outlining the steps and implementation time lines for corrective
action. The property owner shall have 30 days from the date of notice to
complete the corrective action necessary to bring the site back into compliance
with the approved PCSWMP.
   4.   Following the review of the property owner’s written response, if
extenuating circumstances exist which makes implementation of the necessary
corrective action difficult to complete within the specified time period, the
City may grant, at its sole discretion, a reasonable extension of time to
complete the corrective action.
   5.   Failure of the property owner to allow access to the property, provide
a written response, or undertake corrective action shall constitute a violation
of this chapter.
8-4C-9 CORRECTIVE ACTION BY CITY.
   If the property owner fails to take corrective action, following notice
prescribed for the service of civil process by the State rules of civil
procedure, the City may do so, by its own crews or by persons under its hire,
and assess against the property owner the City’s cost therefor. Said costs
shall include the salaries and benefits earned by City employees during such
corrective action, a charge for City machinery used, and such other costs and
expenses as the City actually incurred. To the extent allowed by State law,
such costs and expenses may be assessed against the property owner and
collected in the same manner as a property tax.
8-4C-10 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The failure of City officials to observe or foresee hazardous or unsightly
conditions, or to impose other or additional conditions or requirements, or to
deny or revoke permits or approvals, or to stop work in violation of this
chapter shall not relieve the property owners of the consequences of their
actions or inactions or result in the City, its officers or agents, being
liable therefor or on account thereof. Notwithstanding any provision of this
chapter, every applicant bears final and complete responsibility for compliance
with the NPDES General Permit No. 2 and any other requirements of State or
federal law or administrative rule.
8-4C-11 VIOLATIONS.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject
to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in Title 1
Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs or is
permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
CHAPTER 5
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
 
8-5-1 Purpose.                   8-5-7 Littering Prohibited
8-5-2 Definitions                8-5-8 Open Dumping Prohibited
8-5-3 Sanitary Disposal Required 8-5-9 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
8-5-4 Health and Fire Hazard     8-5-10 Solid Waste Storage Containers
8-5-5 Open Burning Restricted    8-5-11 Prohibited Practices
8-5-6 Yard Waste                 8-5-12 Penalty
 
8-5-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter pertaining to solid waste control is to provide
for the sanitary storage, collection, and disposal of solid waste, yard waste,
and recyclable material, and, thereby, to protect the citizens of the City from
such hazards to their health, safety, and welfare as may result from the
uncontrolled disposal of solid waste, yard waste, or recyclable material.
8-5-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Bags” means any untreated paper bags acceptable under the Compost It!
program administered by the Metro waste authority.
   2.   “Brush bundle” means a stack of brush or tree branches bound together
with biodegradable twine, which must be no more than 18 inches in diameter, no
more than four feet long, and may weigh no more than 40 pounds.
   3.   “Collection” means the transportation of solid waste or recyclable
material from the place it is generated and includes all activities up to the
time the waste is delivered to a sanitary disposal project for the disposal of
solid waste or a recycling facility.
   4.   “Collector” means any person authorized by the City to collect,
transport, and dispose of solid waste, yard waste, or recyclable material.
   5.   “Composting” means a controlled microbial degradation of organic waste
to produce a relatively nuisance free product of potential value as a soil
conditioner.
   6.   “Container” means a reusable receptacle constructed of plastic or metal
materials used for the collection and storage of solid waste, yard waste, or
recyclable material.
   7.   “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit, or drop.
   8.   “Duplex” means a structure containing two dwelling units.
   9.   “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a
structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used,
or are intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
   10.   “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and
vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing,
serving, and consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all
offal, excluding useful industrial byproducts, and includes all such substances
from all public and private establishments and from all residences.
   11.   “IDNR director” means the director of the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources or any designee.
   12.   “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials,
or debris not exceeding 10 pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume. Litter
includes, but is not limited to, empty beverage containers, cigarette butts,
food waste packaging, other food or candy wrappers, handbills, empty cartons,
or boxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
   13.   “Multi-family premises” means real property on which any multi-family
dwelling or combination of more than two dwelling units sharing common
driveways is located.
   14.   “Multiple-family dwelling” means a structure containing more than two
dwelling units.
   15.   “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person
residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating, or transacting business in
any premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities,
liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
   16.   “Property served” means any property which is being used or occupied
and is eligible to receive solid waste collection and disposal service as
provided herein.
   17.   “Recyclable material” means plastic necked bottles, plastic margarine
and yogurt tubs, newspapers, magazines, mixed paper (junk mail, envelopes,
sticky notes, coloring books), phone books, cereal boxes, tissue boxes,
cardboard (broken down to fit in collection container), tin and aluminum cans,
shredded paper placed in a paper bag, and glass jars and bottles or as may be
redefined by the Metro waste authority in the administration of the Curb It!
program.
   18.   “Recycling” means the separation, collection, processing, recovering,
and sale or reuse of materials which would otherwise be disposed of as solid
waste.
   19.   “Refuse” means putrescible and nonputrescible waste, including, but
not limited to, garbage, yard waste, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues,
street cleanings, market and industrial solid waste, and sewage treatment waste
in dry or semisolid form.
   20.   “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling, duplex,
townhouse, and townhouse style condominium used for residential purposes.
Garden type apartments and row type housing units are considered residential
premises regardless of the total number of such apartments or units which may
be included in a given housing development.
   21.   “Residential waste” means any garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other
similar discarded solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material
resulting from domestic activities of single-family dwelling units or duplexes.
   22.   “Rubbish” means nonputrescible solid waste consisting of combustible
and noncombustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.
   23.   “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it
does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
   24.   “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances
(including all real and personal property connected with such facilities) that
are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved,
extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid
waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and
which are approved by the Director of the State Department of Natural
Resources. “Sanitary disposal project” does not include a pyrolysis or
gasification facility as defined in Section 455B.301 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
   25.   “Single-family dwelling” means a structure containing one dwelling
unit only.
   26.   “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar
discarded solid or semisolid materials, including, but not limited to, such
materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic
activities. Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of
the Code of Iowa. Solid waste does not include any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
      A.   Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
      B.   Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa,
except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes
have been adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
      C.   Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
      D.   Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable
State or federal standards.
      E.   Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing
process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as a
discarded material.
      F.   Material that is legitimately recycled pursuant to Section 455D.4A
of the Code of Iowa.
      G.   Post-use polymers or recoverable feedstocks that are any of the
following:
         (1)   Processed at a pyrolysis or gasification facility.
         (2)   Held at a pyrolysis or gasification facility prior to processing
to ensure production is not interrupted.
   27.   “Source separation” means the separation of recyclable materials from
the residential waste stream at the point of waste generation.
   28.   “Toxic and hazardous waste” means waste materials, including (but not
limited to) poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological
waste, flammable or explosive materials, and similar harmful waste that
requires special handling and that must be disposed of in such a manner as to
conserve the environment and protect the public health and safety.
(567 IAC 100.2)
   29.   “Yard waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage. The
term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves,
grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings.
8-5-3 SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED.  
   It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all
refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a nuisance. Any
such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than 30 days
shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such nuisances in
accordance with the provisions of Title 5 Chapter 6 of this Code or by
initiating proper action in district court. A single collector shall be
authorized by the City to collect solid waste from residential premises, a
single collector shall be authorized by the City to collect yard waste from
residential premises, and a single collector shall be authorized by the City to
collect recyclable material from residential premises as set forth in this
Code.
8-5-4 HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.
   It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises,
improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste,
yard waste, or recyclable material that constitute a health, sanitation, or
fire hazard.
8-5-5 OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED.  
   No person shall allow, cause, or permit open burning of combustible
materials where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air
without passing through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is
permitted in the following circumstances:
   1.   Disaster Rubbish. The open burning of rubbish, including yard waste,
for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an officially
declared emergency condition exists.
   2.   Flare Stacks. The open burning or flaring of waste gases, provided such
open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with applicable rules of the
Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
   3.   Recreational Fires. Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation, and
ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission of visible air
contaminants established by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources. Rubber
tires shall not be burned in a recreational fire.
   4.   Training Fires. Fires set for the purpose of bona fide training of
public or industrial employees in firefighting methods, provided that the
training fires are conducted in compliance with rules established by the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources.
   5.   Variance. Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials not
permitted herein may make application for a variance to the IDNR Director.
8-5-6 YARD WASTE.
   All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other
solid waste accumulated on the premises. For residential premises, the owner or
occupant may either compost such yard waste on the premises or place it in
paper bags, bundles, or containers in accordance with the requirements of the
Metro waste authority Compost It! program or the City/Metro waste authority
premium yard waste program.
   1.   Collection. For residential premises, persons choosing not to manage
yard waste on their own property may place yard waste in brown paper bags which
are imprinted with the Compost It! logo (as a part of the Compost It! program)
or affix a Compost It! sticker to a brown paper bag. Brush bundles may also be
placed for yard waste pick up provided that a Compost It! sticker is attached
to the brush bundle and the brush bundle complies with the length, diameter,
and weight restriction contained in the definition of brush bundle. Compost It!
bags and stickers may be purchased at participating grocery, hardware, and
convenience stores. The number of bags and brush bundles which residents may
place out for collection is unlimited, provided that a Compost It! sticker is
attached to each bag or bundle. In the alternative, the owner of a residential
premises may choose to participate in the premium yard waste collection program
in which a resident purchases a sticker for the season from the City in order
to be permitted to use a plastic wheeled container to collect yard waste for
pick up by the authorized collector of yard waste.
   2.   Composting. Back yard composting of yard waste is encouraged. Owners
and occupants are encouraged to accumulate, upon property under their
respective control, such quantities of leaves or yard debris as can be properly
composted in a composting area (having at least three sides) or composting bin
without creating offensive odors, litter, fire, or vector problems. Composting
areas or bins must be located in a back yard, outside the boundaries of any
easement areas, and no closer than five feet to the rear property line and no
closer than two feet to any side property lines. Such composting so carried out
shall be deemed to be an alternative disposition of the disposal of yard waste
in satisfaction of any requirement in this section.
   3.   Violations. It is prohibited and will be deemed a violation hereof for
any owner, lessee, or occupant of any residential, commercial, or institutional
property in the City to put into or cause to be put into the solid waste
collection system of the City any yard waste.
8-5-7 LITTERING PROHIBITED.  
   No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that
nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection
and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such
purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor
vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to
which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter.
8-5-8 OPEN DUMPING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall dump or deposit or permit the dumping or depositing of any
solid waste or yard waste on the surface of the ground or into a body or stream
of water at any place other than a sanitary disposal project, unless a special
permit to dump or deposit solid waste or yard waste on land owned or leased by
such person has been obtained from the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
However, this section does not prohibit composting yard waste in accordance
with this chapter or prohibit the use of dirt, stone, brick, or similar
inorganic material for fill, landscaping, excavation, or grading at places
other than a sanitary disposal project.
8-5-9 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.  
   No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for
collection of any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall be transported
and disposed of as prescribed by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources. As
used in this section, “toxic and hazardous waste” means waste materials,
including, but not limited to, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids,
caustics, pathological waste, flammable, or explosive materials and similar
harmful waste which requires special handling and which must be disposed of in
such a manner as to conserve the environment and protect the public health and
safety.
8-5-10 SOLID WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS.
   1.   Container Specifications. Solid waste storage containers shall comply
with the following specifications:
      A.   Residential. The single collector contracted by the City to collect
solid waste from residential premises (“solid waste collector”) shall provide
and deliver to the resident, at no cost to the resident, one plastic solid
waste collection container. If a resident requests a second waste container, a
second monthly fee will be charged to the resident. All residents must use the
plastic solid waste collection container provided by the solid waste collector
for storage and collection of solid waste. Extra trash bags not placed in the
waste collection container provided by the solid waste collector will be picked
up by the solid waste collector if the trash bags have a trash bag tag sticker
(“TBT sticker”) attached. A TBT sticker authorizes the pick-up of a 33-gallon
trash bag or box, which shall not weigh more than 35 pounds. A large item that
does not fit in a 33-gallon trash bag or box must have a large item sticker
(“LI sticker”) attached. The solid waste collector shall be responsible for the
sale of TBT stickers and LI stickers to residents.
      B.   Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or
renting any commercial premises shall maintain metal bulk solid waste storage
containers in good working order.
   2.   Storage of Containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be
stored upon the residential premises. Residential solid waste containers may
not be stored in the front yard or secondary front yard, as such terms are
defined in Title 11, Chapter 2 of this Code, of residential premises, except in
cases of hardship and when the owner has been granted written permission from
the City Manager or their designee to store waste containers in an alternate
location. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon private
property, unless the owner has been granted written permission from the City
Manager or their designee to use public property for such purposes. The storage
site shall be well drained; fully accessible to collection equipment, public
health personnel, and fire inspection personnel. All owners of residential and
commercial premises shall be responsible for proper storage of all garbage and
yard waste to prevent materials from being blown or scattered around
neighboring yards and streets. Trash shall be bagged before it is placed in the
residential solid waste containers in order to minimize blowing or loss of
material when the containers are emptied.
   3.   Location of Containers For Collection. The owner or occupant of each
single- or two-family dwelling using solid waste collection service at the curb
shall place the containers storing solid waste and bags and bundles of “yard
waste” at the curb, as defined herein, not earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the day
preceding the regularly scheduled collection day. For purposes of this section,
placing a container “at the curb” means placing the solid waste container such
that the side of the container with the metal bar is at least 18 inches from
the curb or from the edge of the road, if there is no curb. Yard waste bags and
bundles and Curb It! recycling containers shall all be located at least three
feet away from the solid waste container.
   4.   Removal of Containers from Curb or Edge of Roadway. After collection,
the owner or occupant of each single- or two-family dwelling shall remove all
empty solid waste containers from the curb or from the edge of the road, as
applicable, on the same day as the scheduled collection day.
   5.   Assistance for the Physically Impaired. In the event all occupants of a
single- or two-family dwelling are physically impaired to the extent that no
occupant can place the containers storing solid waste at the curb, the City
may, upon application by the occupant, authorize house side collection service.
For residents electing house side collection service, containers for solid
waste and recyclable materials shall be placed outdoors for collection at some
easily accessible place not more than 10 feet from the front of a single- or
two-family dwelling, or a garage serving such building, on the regularly
scheduled collection day. The collector shall return all containers at the curb
of the single- or two-family dwelling, whether the resident elects collection
at the curb or house side. The collector shall place all empty containers at
the curb in a location that does not block ingress or egress to any driveways.
8-5-11 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.  
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   1.   Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste
containers not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of
such containers.
   2.   Interference with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste
collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance
of their duties.
   3.   Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed
for high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid, or gaseous
combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid
residues contain little or no combustible material, as acceptable to the
environmental protection agency.
   4.   Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste which has been placed out
for collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste
collector.
   5.   Unlawful Disposal. Dispose of refuse at any facility or location which
is not a sanitary disposal project.
8-5-12 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in Title 1
Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs or is
permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
CHAPTER 5A
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION; FEES AND CHARGES
 
8-5A-1 Collection Service      8-5A-8 Uniform Collection from Residential
                               Premises
8-5A-2 Collection Vehicles     8-5A-9 Container Size and Charges for
                               Residential Premises
8-5A-3 Loading                 8-5A-10 Billing for Service to Residential
                               Premises
8-5A-4 Frequency of Collection 8-5A-11 Service Discontinued
8-5A-5 Bulky Rubbish           8-5A-12 Lien for Nonpayment
8-5A-6 Yard Waste Collection   8-5A-13 Penalty
8-5A-7 Right of Entry           
 
8-5A-1 COLLECTION SERVICE.
   The collection and transportation of solid waste within the City shall be
performed in accordance to the provisions of this Code or the regulations of
the Polk County or Dallas County Board of Health or of any other appropriate
government agency. A single collector shall be authorized by the City to
collect solid waste from residential premises, a single collector shall be
authorized by the City to collect yard waste from residential premises, and a
single collector shall be authorized by the City to collect recyclable material
from residential premises as set forth in this Code.
8-5A-2 COLLECTION VEHICLES.
   Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage
and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall be
leakproof, durable, and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned
to prevent nuisances, pollution, or insect breeding and shall be maintained in
good repair so as to prevent leaking of oil or hydraulic fluid onto the City
streets.
8-5A-3 LOADING.
   Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any
solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will
not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or
loss of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up
immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or
container and the area properly cleaned.
8-5A-4 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
   All solid waste, yard waste, and recyclable materials shall be collected, on
the same day, by the respective authorized collectors, from residential
premises at least once each week on a schedule approved by the Council, and
from commercial, industrial, and institutional premises as frequently as may be
necessary, but not less than once each week. Collection shall not begin before
7:00 a.m. or continue after 7:00 p.m. on the same day. Yard waste shall be
collected between March 15 and November 30.
8-5A-5 BULKY RUBBISH.
   Bulky rubbish which is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal
manner of other solid waste may be collected by the authorized single
residential collector.
8-5A-6 YARD WASTE COLLECTION.
   The single collector authorized by the City to collect yard waste from
residential premises shall haul the yard waste to a compost site approved by
the City and shall keep an accurate accounting of the amount of such yard
waste. The collector shall submit a monthly written report to the City
detailing the amount of such yard waste that has been collected and delivered
for composting during the reporting year. No collector shall mix yard waste and
solid waste together. Any hauler who delivers for disposal yard waste and solid
waste mixed together shall be subject to penalty(s) as provided in Section
8-5A-13 of this chapter.
8-5A-7 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for the
purpose of collecting solid waste, yard waste, or recyclable material therefrom
as required by this chapter; however, the authorized single collector shall not
enter dwelling units or other residential buildings.
8-5A-8 UNIFORM COLLECTION FROM RESIDENTIAL PREMISES.
   The collection of solid waste and recyclable material from residential
premises and the maintenance of the availability of such service, whether or
not the service is used regularly or at all by the occupant of the residential
premises, are hereby declared a benefit to such premises at least equal to the
monthly charge specified for the service. Such charge shall be paid whether the
occupant uses the residential premises solid waste and recyclable material
collection service or not. Nothing herein is to be construed so as to prevent
the owner from transporting solid waste or yard waste accumulating upon
premises owned, occupied, or used by such owner, provided such refuse is
disposed of at City approved composting stations or neighborhood collection
sites in accordance with policies established by the composting station.
8-5A-9 CONTAINER SIZE AND CHARGES FOR RESIDENTIAL PREMISES.
   Container size and charges for solid waste collection and disposal from
residential premises shall be fixed and determined by the Council. Such
container size and charges may, from time to time, be amended by the Council by
resolution. A copy of the resolution setting forth the currently effective size
and charges shall be kept on file in the office of the Clerk and be open to
inspection during regular business hours.
8-5A-10 BILLING FOR SERVICE TO RESIDENTIAL PREMISES.
   Billing and payment for the collection of residential solid waste and
recyclable material shall be in accordance with the following:
   1.   Fee Charged. A fee shall be charged to each dwelling unit each month
for the collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material, which
fee shall include the fee paid to the collector authorized to collect solid
waste from residential premises, the fee paid to the collector authorized to
collect recyclable material from residential premises, and the costs of the
City for performing the billing service. The fee to be charged to each dwelling
unit shall be established from time to time. Each dwelling unit shall receive
one waste container for solid waste. If a resident requests a second waste
container, a second monthly fee will be charged to the resident. For yard
waste, a resident must purchase Compost It! stickers to be attached to each bag
of yard waste or each bundle of brush set out for collection. A sticker shall
also be purchased each season by each resident participating in the premium
yard waste collection program.
   2.   Bills Issued. The Clerk shall prepare and issue bills for the
collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material each month. The
fee for the collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material shall
be included on the bill sent by the Clerk to each dwelling unit for water
service, sewer service, and stormwater service charges, as a combined service
account.
   3.   Bills Payable. Bills for the collection of solid waste and recyclable
material shall be due and payable at the office of the Clerk by the 15th of the
month following the end of the month in which service was provided. If a bill
for the combined service account is not paid in full, the amount paid shall be
applied pro rata to the amount billed for water service, for sewer service, for
stormwater service charges, and for the collection of residential solid waste
and recyclable material.
   4.   Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be considered
delinquent. A late payment penalty of 10 percent of the amount due shall be
added to each delinquent bill.
   5.   Returned Checks. A fee, as set forth in the fee schedule established by
the Council, shall be charged for all checks not honored by the bank on which
the checks are written.
8-5A-11 SERVICE DISCONTINUED.
   Collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material shall be
discontinued in accordance with the following:
   1.   Notice. Within five days following the date that bills for water
service and the collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material
are due and payable (i.e., the 15th day of the month), the Clerk shall send a
written notice to each delinquent customer that water service, sewer service,
and the collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material may be
discontinued if payment, including late payment charges, is not received within
10 days from the date the notice is mailed. The notice shall afford the
customer the opportunity to request a hearing before the Clerk prior to the
discontinuance of service. Such written notice shall be sent by first class
mail. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or landlord of the property
has made written request for notice, the written notice sent to the customer
shall also be given to the owner or landlord.
   2.   Service Discontinued. If payment for all of the services billed by the
City on the combined service account is not received within 10 days following
the date the written notice is sent to the customer, and payment arrangements
have not been made pursuant to a hearing before the Clerk, the supply of water
to the customer may be shut off and collection of solid waste and recyclable
material may be discontinued for nonpayment.
8-5A-12 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   1.   Responsibility for Payment. The owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for fees for the
collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material for the premises.
Fees for the collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material, if
not paid as provided by this chapter, shall constitute a lien upon the premises
served and may be certified in the same manner as property taxes.
   2.   Lien Notice. A lien for delinquent fees for the collection of
residential solid waste and recyclable material shall not be certified to the
County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is
given to the customer. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or
landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the notice
shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the
appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to
certification of the lien to the County Treasurer.
8-5A-13 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in Title 1
Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs or is
permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
CHAPTER 5B
RECYCLING
 
8-5B-1 Purpose                          8-5B-3 Recycling Program for Multi-
                                        Family Dwellings
8-5B-2 Establishment of Recycling
Program for Single-Family Dwellings and 8-5B-4 Collection and Transportation
Duplexes
                                       8-5B-5 Enforcement
 
8-5B-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter pertaining to recycling is to promote recycling
by maintaining residential recycling programs for single-family dwellings and
duplexes and by permitting property owners of multi-family dwellings, not
otherwise served by residential recycling programs, to provide facilities for
the source separation of recyclable materials. Any person engaged in the
collection, processing, and marketing of recyclable materials within the City
or who collects solid waste within the City shall be subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
8-5B-2 ESTABLISHMENT OF RECYCLING PROGRAM FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS AND
DUPLEXES.
   1.   Adoption of Curb It! Program. The City has determined that all single-
family dwellings and duplexes in the City shall be served by the Curb It!
recycling program administered by Metro waste authority.
   2.   Preparation and Placement for Collection. Recyclable materials for
single-family dwellings and duplexes shall be placed in containers provided by
the Curb It! program and placed at the curb for collection every other week on
the same collection day as the regularly scheduled collection day for solid
waste. Only recyclable material shall be placed in the Curb It! program
containers for collection. Placing residential waste or yard waste in the Curb
It! program collection containers will result in such containers not being
emptied and other penalties applied in accordance with the Curb It!
contamination policy.
   3.   Residential Recycling Program Billing Procedure. The fees for the
collection of the recyclable materials from single-family dwellings and
duplexes shall be billed to residents together with the solid waste collection
fee in accordance with Sections
8-5A-9 through
8-5A-11 of this chapter. The monthly charges for collection of recyclable
materials shall be paid whether the occupant of the residential premises
utilized the recycling collection program or not.
8-5B-3 RECYCLING PROGRAM FOR MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
   Owners of multi-family dwellings may arrange for the collection of
recyclable materials separate from the collection of solid waste.
   1.   Storage Of Recyclable Materials: An owner of multi-family dwelling
premises that adopts a recycling program shall provide and keep, at all times,
a sufficient number of containers to hold all recyclable materials which may
accumulate during the intervals between collection of such recyclable materials
by an authorized collector.
   2.   Storage Container Requirements. For multi-family dwelling premises that
have adopted a recycling program, all recyclable materials accumulated by
owners and occupants of multi-family dwellings shall be placed in containers
which are durable, watertight, and made of metal or plastic. Each container
shall be clearly marked with both the recycling symbol and the type of material
(s) to be deposited in the container. The containers shall remain on the multi-
family premises at all times and shall be kept in a clean condition and in good
repair. The storage of recyclable materials shall not result in the creation of
a public nuisance. Containers shall have lids, if necessary, to avert a public
nuisance or protect the marketing quality of recyclable materials. Such lids
must remain closed except when recyclable materials are being placed in or
removed from the containers.
   3.   Storage Container Location. Containers for collection of recyclable
materials at multi-family dwellings adopting a recycling program shall be
located on the multi-family premises at places agreed upon by the owner of the
multi-family premises and the authorized collector. Such location shall not
interfere with private or public sidewalks, walkways, driveways, roads,
streets, highways, or entrances and exits of private or public buildings and
shall be in compliance with all applicable laws. Containers which are on wheels
to facilitate their movement shall remain blocked at all times while unattended
to prevent unintentional movement.
   4.   Collection. Collectors shall collect and remove all recyclable
materials from containers on multi-family premises and shall return the
containers to the multi-family premises in a manner so as not to create a
public nuisance.
8-5B-4 COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION.
   Any collector transporting recyclable materials within the City shall
prevent any spillage from containers or vehicles used in the transport of such
recyclable materials. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked
up immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or
container and the area properly cleaned. Such vehicles or containers shall not
be overfilled and shall be cleansed at sufficiently frequent intervals to
prevent obnoxious odors or unhealthful conditions. Such vehicles shall also be
so constructed, loaded, and driven as to prevent any portion of the load from
falling out upon the streets or highways.
8-5B-5 ENFORCEMENT.
   Failure to comply with the terms or provisions of this chapter constitutes a
municipal infraction, subject to a civil penalty as provided in Title 1 Chapter
4A of this Code.
TITLE 9 - FRANCHISES AND OTHER SERVICES
CHAPTER 1
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
 
9-1-1 Franchise Granted                              9-1-5 Indemnification
9-1-2 Location of Company Facilities                 9-1-6 Standards for
                                                     Operation and Maintenance
                                                     9-1-7 Standards for
9-1-3 Relocation of Company Facilities               Quality and Quantity of
                                                     Service
9-1-4 Street Obstruction; Company’s Duty to Repair 9-1-8 Protection of
Surface                                              Facilities
                                                    9-1-9 Franchise Fee
 
9-1-1 FRANCHISE GRANTED.
   There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, a State corporation,
hereinafter called “Company,” and to its successors and assigns, the right and
franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain, and operate in the City of
Clive, Iowa, hereinafter called the “City,” a gas distribution system, to
furnish natural gas along, under, and upon the streets, avenues, alleys, and
public places to serve customers within and without the City and to furnish and
sell natural gas to the City and its inhabitants. This franchise shall be
effective for a 25-year period from and after the effective date hereof;
provided, however, that there may be a reevaluation prior to the end of the
15th year of this franchise, with the opportunity for both parties to request
amendments to this franchise. If neither party requests such reevaluation by
means of a written notice to the other party at least 90 days prior to the
expiration of the 15th year of this franchise, this franchise will continue
without change for the remaining 10 years. If such a request to reevaluate or
amend the terms of the franchise is made and the parties are unable to agree to
amend the terms of this franchise within 90 days or by a mutually agreed upon
date, then either party may terminate this franchise at the end of the 15th
year. For the term of this franchise, the Company agrees not to exercise its
right of eminent domain without the prior approval of the Council, which
approval shall be evidenced by a resolution of the Council. The Company shall
not, without consent of the City, sell, assign, or convey its franchise rights
granted pursuant to the franchise except that the Company may, without the
City’s consent, sell, assign, or convey such franchise rights to its affiliated
companies or subsidiaries. † 11   
 
Notes
   † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 294 adopting a natural gas franchise for the
11 City, was passed and adopted on October 7, 1982. Voters approved the franchise
   at an election held on November 23, 1982. On December 6, 2007, Ordinance No. 874
   was approved by the Council, and they voted to waive the election provision.
9-1-2 LOCATION OF COMPANY FACILITIES.
   Company shall have the right to excavate in any public street for the
purpose of laying, relaying, repairing, or extending gas pipes, mains,
conduits, and other facilities, provided that the same shall be so placed as
not to interfere with any of the City’s utilities lines, including, but not
limited to, water mains, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and City owned
fiber optic cable lines, which have been or may hereafter be located by
authority of the City, and to cause minimal interference with the rights or
reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets or
other public ways and places.
9-1-3 RELOCATION OF COMPANY FACILITIES.
   The Company shall, at its cost and expense, relocate its installations in,
on, over, or under any public street or alley in the City in such manner as the
City may, at any time, reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the
construction, reconstruction, maintenance, modification, or repair of the
street or alley or any public utility or improvement of, in or about any such
street or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such
improvement. The Company will notify the City if project funds from a source
other than the City are available to pay for the relocation of utility
facilities, the City shall make a good faith effort to attempt to secure said
funds and provide them to the Company to compensate the Company for the costs
of relocation.
9-1-4 STREET OBSTRUCTION; COMPANY’S DUTY TO REPAIR SURFACE.
   In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, and public
places for the installation or repair of gas pipes, conduits, or apparatus,
Company shall not unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets. Prior to
Company making any excavations or causing any street obstructions, Company
shall obtain the approval of the City’s Public Works Department, which shall
not unreasonably deny approval and whose decision may be appealed to the
Council. Any excavation or obstruction in the streets or other public ways made
by Company shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of
adequate barriers, fences, or boarding, the boundaries of which shall be
clearly designated by warning lights during periods of dusk and darkness. In
the case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other
surfacing, Company shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved
by the City Engineer, replace the surface disturbed, restoring the original
pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing as nearly as practicable to
the condition existing before said work was commenced. All trenches and filled
excavations must be tamped and compacted to a 95 percent standard proctor
density.
9-1-5 INDEMNIFICATION.
   Company shall indemnify and save harmless the City from any and all claims,
suits, losses, damages, costs, or expenses on account of injury or damage to
any person or property, caused or occasioned, or allegedly caused or
occasioned, in whole or in part, by Company’s construction, reconstruction,
excavation, operation, or maintenance of the gas utilities authorized by this
franchise; provided, however, that the Company shall not be obligated to
defend, indemnify and save harmless the City for any costs or damages arising
from the negligence of the City, its officers, employees, or agents.
9-1-6 STANDARDS FOR OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The Company shall extend its mains and pipes and operate and maintain the
system in accordance with the applicable laws of the State, regulations of the
Iowa Utilities Board or its successors, and applicable ordinances, regulations,
and codes of the City.
9-1-7 STANDARDS FOR QUALITY AND QUANTITY OF SERVICE.
   During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish natural gas in
the quantity and quality consistent with applicable State laws and regulations.
9-1-8 PROTECTION OF FACILITIES.
   All reasonable and proper police regulations shall be adopted and enforced
by the City for the protection of the facilities of the Company.
9-1-9 FRANCHISE FEE.
   In consideration of the right and franchise granted to MidAmerican Energy
Company (the “Company”) in Section
9-1-1 of this chapter, a franchise fee equal to five percent of the gross
receipts minus uncollectable amounts derived by the Company in the City for
delivery and sale of natural gas, shall be imposed from and after January 1,
2011 until December 1, 2032.
   1.   The amount of franchise fee shall be shown separately on the utility
bill to each customer. The Company shall remit collected franchise fees to the
City on a quarterly basis, within 30 days after the last day of the last
revenue month of each quarter of the calendar year (i.e., remitted by April 30,
July 31, October 31, and January 31). The City shall not modify the level of
the franchise fee more frequently than once in any 12-month period.
   2.   The City shall be solely responsible for the proper use of any amounts
collected as franchise fees, and shall only use such franchise fees for
purposes as allowed by State law and as set forth in the Revenue Purpose
Statement adopted by the City.
   3.   The franchise fee shall be applied to all customers’ bills in
accordance with Chapters 364.2(f) and 423B.5 of the Code of Iowa, except for
the City’s bills which shall be exempt from the franchise fee.
   4.   Upon receipt of a final and unappealable order or approval authorizing
annexation or changes in the corporate boundaries of the City, the Clerk shall
provide written notification to the Company of such annexation or change in the
corporate boundaries of the City, and the Company shall apply the franchise fee
to its customers who are affected by the annexation or change in the corporate
boundaries of the City, commencing no more than 90 days after receipt of the
written notice and City’s verification of the area added to the City.
   5.   To fulfill the purpose and intent of this section, the City and the
Company may enter into an agreement addressing the implementation of the
collection of the franchise fee, which agreement shall be approved by
resolution by the City.
CHAPTER 2
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
 
9-2-1 Franchise Granted                              9-2-6 City Signage on
                                                     Company Poles
9-2-2 Location of Company Facilities                 9-2-7 Indemnification
9-2-3 Tree Trimming                                  9-2-8 Standards for
                                                     Operation and Maintenance
                                                     9-2-9 Standards for
9-2-4 Relocation of Company Facilities               Quality and Quantity of
                                                     Service
9-2-5 Street Obstruction; Company’s Duty to Repair 9-2-10 Protection of
Surface                                              Facilities
                                                    9-2-11 Franchise Fee
 
9-2-1 FRANCHISE GRANTED.  
   There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, a State corporation,
hereinafter called the “Company,” and its successors and assigns, the right and
franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain, and operate in the City of
Clive, Iowa, hereinafter called the “City,” a system for the transmission and
distribution of electric energy and communications signals along, under, over,
and upon the streets, avenues, alleys, and public places to serve customers
within and without the City, and to furnish and sell electric energy to the
City and its inhabitants. This franchise shall be effective for a 25-year
period from and after the effective date hereof; provided, however, that there
may be a reevaluation prior to the end of the 15th year of this franchise, with
the opportunity for both parties to request amendments to this franchise. If
neither party requests such reevaluation by means of a written notice to the
other party at least 90 days prior to the expiration of the 15th year of this
franchise, this franchise will continue without change for the remaining 10
years. If such a request to reevaluate or amend the terms of the franchise is
made and the parties are unable to agree to amend the terms of this franchise
within 90 days or by a mutually agreed upon date, then either party may
terminate this franchise at the end of the 15th year. For the term of this
franchise, the Company agrees not to exercise its right of eminent domain
without the prior approval of the Council, which approval shall be evidenced by
a resolution of the Council. The Company shall not, without consent of the
City, sell, assign, or convey its franchise rights granted pursuant to the
franchise except that the Company may, without the City’s consent, sell,
assign, or convey such franchise rights to its affiliated companies or
subsidiaries.† 12
 
Notes
   † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 293 adopting an electric franchise for the
12 City, was passed and adopted on October 7, 1982. Voters approved the franchise
   at an election held on November 23, 1982. On December 6, 2007, Ordinance No.
   875 was approved by Council, and they voted to waive the election provision.
9-2-2 LOCATION OF COMPANY FACILITIES.
   The Company shall have the right to erect all necessary poles and to place
thereon the necessary wires, fixtures, and accessories as well as excavate and
bury conductors for the distribution of electric energy and communications
signals in and through the City and shall be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained, and operated so as not
to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or to unnecessarily hinder
or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic to public ways, places, and
structures. If new or replacement wires are to be installed under a street or
roadway, a conduit shall be installed by the Company, at the Company’s expense,
in which the wires shall be located. The Company agrees that all said conduits
and poles shall be placed in locations so as not to interfere with any of the
City’s utilities lines, including, but not limited to, water mains, sanitary
sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and City owned fiber optic cable which have
been, or may hereafter be, located by authority of the City, and to cause
minimal interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property
owners who adjoin any of the said streets or other public ways and places. In
order to further public safety, the Company shall repair any streetlight which
is not functioning within 30 days of the City’s report that the streetlight is
not operating.
9-2-3 TREE TRIMMING.
   The Company is authorized and empowered to prune or remove, at Company’s
expense, any tree extending into any street, alley, or public grounds to
maintain electric reliability, safety, to restore utility service and to
prevent limbs, branches, or trunks from interfering with the wires and
facilities of the Company. The pruning of trees shall be completed in
accordance with nationally accepted safety and utility industry standards, ANSI
A300-2001, “American National Standard For Tree Care Operations,” and ANSI
Z133-2006 pruning, repairing, maintaining, and removing trees, and cutting
brush safety requirements, or subsequent revisions to these standards, and City
ordinances regarding the trimming of trees and the protection of its facilities
upon public grounds. The removal of trees or pruning in public grounds shall
require prior approval from the City’s Public Works Department, except in
emergency and outage situations. Whether trimming trees for maintenance
purposes or in response to emergency and outage situations, the Company shall
promptly remove the wood trimmed from the trees from the public right-of-way.
9-2-4 RELOCATION OF COMPANY FACILITIES.
   The Company shall, at its cost and expense, relocate its installations in,
on, over, or under any public street or alley in the City in such manner as the
City may, at any time, reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the
construction, reconstruction, maintenance, modification, or repair of the
street or alley or any public utility or improvement of, in or about any such
street or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such
improvement. The Company will notify the City if project funds from a source
other than the City are available to pay for the relocation of utility
facilities, and the City shall make a good faith effort to attempt to secure
said funds and provide them to the Company to compensate the Company for the
costs of relocation.
9-2-5 STREET OBSTRUCTION; COMPANY’S DUTY TO REPAIR SURFACE.
   In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, and public
places for the excavation of conduits or the erection of poles and wires or
other appliances, the Company shall not unreasonably obstruct the use of the
streets. Prior to Company making any excavations or causing any street
obstructions, Company shall obtain the approval of the City’s Public Works
Department, which shall not unreasonably deny approval and whose decision may
be appealed to the Council. Any excavation or obstruction in the streets or
other public ways made by Company shall be guarded and protected at all times
by the placement of adequate barriers, fences, or boarding, the boundaries of
which shall be clearly designated by warning lights during periods of dusk and
darkness. In the case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or
other surfacing, Company shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner
approved by the City Engineer, replace the surface disturbed, restoring the
original pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing as nearly as
practicable to the condition existing before said work was commenced. All
trenches and filled excavations must be tamped and compacted to a 95 percent
standard proctor density.
9-2-6 CITY SIGNAGE ON COMPANY POLES.
   1.   The City reserves the right to place upon Company poles within the City
limits, without charge, wire and pole fixtures for municipal purposes including
traffic and public safety signs.
   2.   In addition, the Company may permit the City, at the City’s expense, to
install brackets on Company poles in agreed upon locations for the City’s
promotional banners. If, at the sole discretion of the Company, it is
determined that the location of the brackets or banners may create a hazardous
situation or wind or other conditions may place undue stress on specific
Company facilities, the City shall not be authorized to attach to those
facilities. If attachments are in place, upon notification by the Company of
damage or potential damage, the City shall promptly remove said banners and
brackets. The City shall, to the extent allowed by law, indemnify and save
harmless the Company for any injuries or damages that occur because of, or are
contributed to by, the existence of the City’s promotional banners or the
brackets for such banners.
   3.   Free access to the Company facilities shall not be allowed for any
communications, information, or data transmittal systems owned or leased by the
City for which subscribers pay a fee (“City systems”). In the event the City
requests that Company permit equipment for such City systems to be attached to
the Company’s facilities, the City and the Company shall enter into a pole
attachment agreement prior to the installation of any equipment for the City
systems to the Company’s facilities.
9-2-7 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The Company shall indemnify and save harmless the City from any and all
claims, suits, losses, damages, costs, or expenses, on account of injury or
damage to any person or property, caused or occasioned, in whole or in part, by
the Company’s construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation, or
maintenance of the electric or communications facilities authorized by this
franchise; provided, however, that the Company shall not be obligated to
defend, indemnify and save harmless the City for any costs or damages arising
from the negligence of the City, its officers, employees, or agents.
9-2-8 STANDARDS FOR OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The Company shall construct, operate, and maintain its facilities in
accordance with the applicable laws of the State, regulations of the Iowa
Utilities Board or its successors, and applicable ordinances, regulations, and
codes of the City.
9-2-9 STANDARDS FOR QUALITY AND QUANTITY OF SERVICE.
   During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish electric energy
in the quantity and quality consistent with applicable State laws and
regulations.
9-2-10 PROTECTION OF FACILITIES.
   All reasonable and proper police regulations shall be adopted and enforced
by the City for the protection of the facilities of the Company.
9-2-11 FRANCHISE FEE.
   In consideration of the right and franchise granted to MidAmerican Energy
Company (the “Company”) in Section
9-2-1 of this chapter, a franchise fee equal to five percent of the gross
receipts minus uncollectable amounts derived by the Company in the City for
delivery and sale of electric energy, shall be imposed from and after January
1, 2011 until December 1, 2032.
   1.   The amount of franchise fee shall be shown separately on the utility
bill to each customer. The Company shall remit collected franchise fees to the
City on a quarterly basis, within 30 days after the last day of the last
revenue month of each quarter of the calendar year (i.e., remitted by April 30,
July 31, October 31, and January 31). The City shall not modify the level of
the franchise fee more frequently than once in any 12-month period.
   2.   The City shall be solely responsible for the proper use of any amounts
collected as franchise fees, and shall only use such franchise fees for
purposes as allowed by State law and as set forth in the Revenue Purpose
Statement adopted by the City.
   3.   The franchise fee shall be applied to all customers’ bills in
accordance with Chapters 364.2(f) and 423B.5 of the Code of Iowa, except for
the City’s bills which shall be exempt from the franchise fee.
   4.   Upon receipt of a final and unappealable order or approval authorizing
annexation or changes in the corporate boundaries of the City, the Clerk shall
provide written notification to the Company of such annexation or change in the
corporate boundaries of the City, and the Company shall apply the franchise fee
to its customers who are affected by the annexation or change in the corporate
boundaries of the City, commencing no more than 90 days after receipt of the
written notice and City’s verification of the area added to the City.
   5.   To fulfill the purpose and intent of this section, the City and the
Company may enter into an agreement addressing the implementation of the
collection of the franchise fee, which agreement shall be approved by
resolution by the City.
CHAPTER 4A
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
 
9-4A-1 Franchise Granted                9-4A-6 Revocation of Franchise
9-4A-2 Right to Install and Maintain    9-4A-7 Transfer of Franchise
9-4A-3 Franchise Not Exclusive          9-4A-8 Compliance with FCC Rules
9-4A-4 Conformity with Other Ordinances 9-4A-9 Defenses of Grantee
9-4A-5 Compliance with Regulations      9-4A-10 Other Franchise More Favorable
 
9-4A-1 FRANCHISE GRANTED.
   TCI of Central Iowa, a corporation organized under the laws of the State of
Iowa, its successors and assigns (hereinafter collectively referred to as
“Grantee”), are hereby granted and vested with the right, franchise, and
authority for a period of 25 years, to acquire, construct, and operate a cable
television or community antenna television system, and to sell and supply to
individuals, firms, and corporations, public or private, at any and all places,
within the corporate limits of the City as said limits now are or hereafter at
any time may be established, audio and video communications services, subject
to the conditions and restrictions as hereinafter provided. † 13
 
Notes
13 † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 292, adopting a cable television franchise for the
   City, was passed and adopted on August 26, 1982.
9-4A-2 RIGHT TO INSTALL AND MAINTAIN.
   The City grants to Grantee, subject to the provisions herein, the right to
erect, install, construct, reconstruct, replace, repair, maintain, and operate
in or upon, under, above, across, and from the streets, avenues, highways,
sidewalks, bridges, and other public ways, easements, rights-of-way, and lands
other than parks and recreational areas, as now existing and all extensions
thereof and additions thereto, in the City, all equipment, facilities,
appurtenances, and apparatus of any nature, for the purpose of receiving,
amplifying, transmitting, and distributing electrical and electronic energy,
pictures, sounds, signals, impulses, and communications, unidirectional, and
multidirectional of any nature and description, audio and video, embracing any
and all of the frequencies of the electromagnetic spectrum, by studios,
cameras, projectors, recorders, antennas, transmitters, microwaves, wires,
cables, coaxial cables, and wave guides; and to otherwise engage in the
business, services, and activities, generally known as, and practiced now and
in the future by, cable television systems providing audio and video
communications services, in accordance with the laws of the United States of
America, the State, and the City. Provided, Grantee may not erect, install, or
construct any such equipment, facilities, appurtenances or apparatus upon any
public ways or lands until Grantee has submitted detailed plans and
specifications to the City therefor and such plans and specifications have been
approved by the Council.
9-4A-3 FRANCHISE NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The franchise shall not be exclusive and shall not restrict in any manner
the Council, or any other governing body of the City, in the exercise of any
regulatory power which it now has or which may hereafter be authorized or
permitted by the laws of the State.
9-4A-4 CONFORMITY WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   The Grantee shall, at all times during the term of the franchise, conform
with, submit to, and carry out any and all ordinances relating to any person
furnishing audio and video communications services by cable television to the
City or its inhabitants now in force or that may hereafter be enacted together
with any amendments thereto.
9-4A-5 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   Grantee shall at all times comply with the terms and conditions of Chapter
4B of this chapter, which regulates cable television systems operating within
the City.
9-4A-6 REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE.
   If Grantee shall fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter,
or default in any of its obligations hereunder, except for causes beyond the
reasonable control of Grantee, and shall fail within 30 days after written
notice from the City to commence and, within a reasonable time, complete the
correction of such default or noncompliance, the Council shall have the right
to revoke the franchise and all rights of Grantee hereunder. In the event
Grantee shall be adjudicated bankrupt or placed in receivership, the City may
declare the franchise herein granted forfeited and hereunder terminated.
9-4A-7 TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
   Grantee shall not sell, transfer, or encumber its system or the franchise,
nor shall any change of ownership in Grantee to the extent of 25 percent or
more of the now existing holdings be transferred by Grantee, without first
securing approval of the Council.
9-4A-8 COMPLIANCE WITH FCC RULES.
   Grantee shall at all times comply with all rules and regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission or any duly authorized agency of the United
States of America, and all laws duly enacted now or hereafter by the United
States Congress or State General Assembly. This chapter shall be conformed,
within one year of its date of adoption, to any and all rules and regulations
relating to the permissible terms of cable television franchises which may
hereafter be adopted by the Federal Communications Commission.
9-4A-9 DEFENSES OF GRANTEE.
   Should the Grantee, at any time, set up against the City, in any claim or
proceeding, any condition or term of the franchise as being unreasonable,
arbitrary, illegal, or void, or that the City had no power or authority to make
such term or condition, or that any section of this chapter is void,
unreasonable, arbitrary, illegal or unconstitutional, the City may, at its
option, void the franchise herein granted to Grantee in its entirety.
9-4A-10 OTHER FRANCHISE MORE FAVORABLE.
   In the event that the Grantee shall be granted and accept a cable television
franchise in the Des Moines, Iowa, metropolitan area on terms or conditions
more favorable to the governmental unit granting the franchise which is
approved by the Federal Communications Commission, then, at the option of the
City, such terms or conditions, or portions thereof, as designated by the City,
shall be applicable to the franchise granted by the City to the Grantee herein.
CHAPTER 4B
REGULATIONS
9-4B-1 Purpose                          9-4B-20 Installation and Maintenance of
                                        System
9-4B-2 System Capacity                  9-4B-21 FCC Standards
9-4B-3 Return Communications            9-4B-22 Use of Poles
9-4B-4 Service to Schools and Municipal 9-4B-23 Maps and Plats
Buildings
9-4B-5 Emergency Warning System         9-4B-24 Compliance with City Codes
9-4B-6 Television Broadcast Signals     9-4B-25 Hold Harmless
9-4B-7 Local Programming                9-4B-26 Location of Facilities
9-4B-8 Municipal Channel                9-4B-27 Restoration of Surface
9-4B-9 Use of Studio Facilities and     9-4B-28 Relocation of Facilities
Technical Assistance
9-4B-10 Noncommercial Public Access     9-4B-29 Interference with Utility
Channel                                 Fixtures
9-4B-11 Leased Channels                 9-4B-30 Temporary Removal of Wires
9-4B-12 Expansion of Access Channel     9-4B-31 Tree Trimming
Capacity
9-4B-13 Complaints                      9-4B-32 Protection of Street
                                        Obstructions
9-4B-14 Franchise Fee                   9-4B-33 Removal of Facilities on
                                        Termination
9-4B-15 Accounting                      9-4B-34 Indemnification
9-4B-16 Franchise Fee Not Tax           9-4B-35 Rates Nondiscriminatory
9-4B-17 Service Rules and Regulations   9-4B-36 Conflict of Interest
9-4B-18 Rates and Charges               9-4B-37 Regulation of Subscriber
                                        Service Rates
9-4B-19 Service Requirements             
 
9-4B-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the cable television system
within the City.
9-4B-2 SYSTEM CAPACITY.
   TCI of Central Iowa (hereinafter referred to as “Grantee”) shall install
initially in the City a cable television system with at least 120 MHz of
bandwidth (the equivalent of 20 television channels) available for immediate or
potential use. Grantee shall maintain an ability to expand the channel capacity
of the system as the demand for channel space increases pursuant to Section
9-4B-12 of this chapter.
9-4B-3 RETURN COMMUNICATIONS.
   Grantee shall design, engineer, and construct its cable television system so
that it has the potential capacity for nonvoice return communications, and
Grantee shall make this service available when it becomes practical to do so on
other than an experimental basis.
9-4B-4 SERVICE TO SCHOOLS AND MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS.
   1.   Schools and Community Buildings. Grantee shall install a color-capable
cable service line to all public and private primary and secondary schools and
all municipally owned or leased buildings located within the City, including
all external wiring, and including all internal wiring for the connection of
one outlet. Grantee shall provide maintenance for such installations at
Grantee’s cost. Grantee shall provide cable service to such buildings without
charge. Grantee shall make all improvements to such installations and service
as technology permits to serve properly such schools and municipal buildings.
   2.   School Originated Broadcasts. When available on other than an
experimental basis, and upon request by schools located in the City, Grantee
shall provide to the schools, without charge, a type of cable that will permit
selected classrooms within each school building to originate live cable
transmissions. Such a two-way cable system shall be linked at the Grantee’s
expense to Grantee’s head-end permitting cable transmissions originated in the
selected classrooms to be transmitted over the educational channels referred to
in Subsection 3 of this section.
   3.   Educational Channel. Grantee shall maintain at least one cable channel
specifically designated for use by any and all recognized educational
authorities located in the City, both public and private, for such
instructional and educational purposes as they may determine. Grantee may
establish rules prohibiting the presentation of this channel of any advertising
material designed to promote the sale of commercial products or services
(including advertising by or on behalf of candidates for public office),
lottery information, and obscene or indecent matter. A public record may be
kept of all persons or groups requesting access to such channel. Grantee shall
not charge for the maintenance of such channel, except as required by the
Federal Communications Commission and consistent with the regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission and approved by Council pursuant to the
procedures set forth in Section 9-4B-18 of this chapter. Grantee shall make no
per-channel or per-program charge of any kind to any subscriber for the
privilege of receiving the channel designated for use by the educational
authorities. Grantee shall provide to public and private schools located within
the City such textbooks as are available on matters such as equipping,
purchasing, installing, and operating the schools’ own studio facilities.
   4.   School Activities. Grantee shall not televise, tape, or in any way
reproduce or show to the general public any school activity, either as a public
service or as a commercial activity, without the prior approval of the schools
involved.
9-4B-5 EMERGENCY WARNING SYSTEM.
   Grantee shall provide an emergency warning system so that emergency
information may be given simultaneously on all channels of Grantee’s cable
television system, and during an emergency, Grantee shall allow proper City
officials the complete use of its cable television system.
9-4B-6 TELEVISION BROADCAST SIGNALS.
   Grantee shall provide, as part of its cable television service, the signals
of all television broadcast signals presently available off the air in the City
and the maximum number of additional television signals consistent with the
rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and all other
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Grantee may provide such automated
video services and such audio services as it wishes and as are consistent with
the terms of this chapter.
9-4B-7 LOCAL PROGRAMMING.
   Grantee shall provide cablecasting originated by it on one or more channels
which it shall designate for such purpose. Grantee shall use its best efforts
to present programming which deals with the needs and interests of the City and
its citizens. Grantee shall maintain the necessary studio, facilities, and
equipment to produce and transmit such programming.
9-4B-8 MUNICIPAL CHANNEL.
   Grantee shall maintain at least one cable channel specifically designated
for use by the City for whatever lawful, noncommercial purposes the City may
determine. Grantee shall not charge for the maintenance of such channel except
as required by the Federal Communications Commission and consistent with the
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and approved by the
Council pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section
9-4B-18 of this chapter. Grantee shall make no per-channel or per-program
charge of any kind to any subscriber for the privilege of receiving the channel
designated for use by the City.
9-4B-9 USE OF STUDIO FACILITIES AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
   Grantee shall allow the City and recognized educational authorities located
in the City, both public and private, to use its studio and other production
facilities, equipment, and materials, on reasonable notice, at reasonable
times, and if a charge is made, at Grantee’s cost. Grantee shall provide at no
charge such technical assistance as may be reasonably required in the
production of instructional, educational, and civic programs. Grantee shall
provide to public and private schools located within the City such equipment it
owns and technology it has, at reasonable times and upon reasonable request, as
will permit said schools to produce and transmit programs of an educational
nature without costs to the district.
9-4B-10 NONCOMMERCIAL PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL.
   Grantee shall maintain at least one specially designated, noncommercial
public access channel available to groups and individuals on a first come,
nondiscriminatory basis, together with equipment and facilities reasonably
necessary for the production of programming on such channel. Grantee shall make
production costs, if any, which are incurred in live studio presentations
exceeding five minutes. Should an additional public access channel or channels
be made available pursuant to Section
9-4B-12 of this chapter, Grantee may make such reasonable charge for the use of
the channel(s) as may be approved by the Council pursuant to Section
9-4B-18 of this chapter. Grantee may establish rules providing for access to
the public channel on a first come, nondiscriminatory basis, prohibiting the
presentation of any advertising material designed to promote the sale of
commercial products or services (including advertising by or on behalf of
candidates for public office), lottery information, and obscene or indecent
matter. A public record may be kept of the names and addresses of all persons
or groups requesting access time. Grantee shall make no per-channel or per-
program charge of any kind to any subscriber of the privilege of receiving the
channel(s) designated for public access.
9-4B-11 LEASED CHANNELS.
   Grantee may lease channel space to any organization, group, or individual at
a reasonable charge. Grantee may adopt rules governing the leasing of channel
space which provide for access on a first come, nondiscriminatory basis,
prohibit the presentation of lottery information and obscene or indecent
matter, require sponsorship identification, specify an appropriate rate
schedule, and permit public inspection of a record of the names and addresses
of all persons or groups requesting time.
9-4B-12 EXPANSION OF ACCESS CHANNEL CAPACITY.
   In the event that any of the channels provided for in Subsection
9-4B-4(3) and Sections
9-4B-8,
9-4B-10, and
9-4B-11 of this chapter shall be in use during 80 percent of the weekdays
(Monday through Friday) for 80 percent of the time during any consecutive
three-hour period for six consecutive weeks, Grantee shall make an additional
channel for that purpose available within six months for any or all of the uses
and under the conditions specified in Subsection
9-4B-4(3) and Sections
9-4B-8,
9-4B-10, and
9-4B-11 of this chapter. Nothing herein shall interfere with Grantee’s right to
add additional channels of the type described in Subsection
9-4B-4(3) and Sections
9-4B-8,
9-4B-10, and
9-4B-11 of this chapter whenever it wishes, provided that such channels are
operated in a manner consistent with those sections.
9-4B-13 COMPLAINTS.
   Grantee shall maintain an office within the City, or within an adjoining
City for the purpose of receiving, investigating, and responding to complaints
and grievances with respect to the quality of the service rendered by the
Grantee, equipment malfunctions and other similar matters pertaining to the
cable television system of the Grantee. Within 30 days from the occurrence of
the facts and circumstances giving rise to a complaint or grievance, and not
thereafter, any subscriber in the City may state a complaint or grievance to
the Grantee in writing. In the event that a written complaint or grievance is
received by the City, the City shall forward the complaint or grievance to the
Grantee. Within five days from the receipt of a complaint or grievance by the
Grantee, the Grantee shall state to the complainant its intentions with respect
to the complaint or grievance in writing. In the event that the complaint or
grievance is not resolved to the satisfaction of the complainant within 15 days
after the receipt thereof by the Grantee, the Grantee shall notify the City and
the City shall forward a copy of such notice to the complainant, with a
statement of the procedure to be followed to further prosecute the complaint.
When a complaint has not been satisfied, the complainant may file a formal
complaint with the Council, in such form and manner as prescribed by the City,
within 30 days after the date of the Grantee’s notice of refusal or inability
to satisfy the complaint. If the complainant fails to file a formal complaint
within such 30 day period, complainant will be deemed to have abandoned the
complaint, and such complaint will be deemed dismissed. Upon receipt of a
formal complaint, the Council shall ascertain the facts and shall have the
power to enforce its decision, if against Grantee, by all actions hereunder,
including the revocation of the franchise. On or before the 10th day of each
calendar month, the Grantee shall file a report in writing with the City
stating the date and substance of each complaint or grievance received by it
during the preceding calendar month, the date and nature of the action taken by
the Grantee with respect thereto, and, if still pending, the status thereof.
9-4B-14 FRANCHISE FEE.
   On or before April 1 of each year, Grantee shall pay to the City, at the
office of the Clerk, a franchise fee of five percent, subject to the approval
of the Federal Communications Commission, or such other franchise fee as is
approved by the Federal Communications Commission, but in no event to be less
than three percent of Grantee’s gross subscriber receipts received for cable
service operations in the City for the preceding calendar year during the term
of the franchise. In the event the franchise fee payable by Grantee to the City
provided herein is held invalid by any court or governmental agency having
jurisdiction thereof, then, at the option of the City, it may terminate and
revoke Grantee’s franchise. In the event that a franchise fee of five percent
is not approved by the Federal Communications Commission, as provided in this
section, then Grantee shall reimburse the City for all expenses incurred by the
City for engineering services performed by or on behalf of the City with
respect to the review of plans and specifications submitted to the City by
Grantee and for all costs of the City arising out of review, inspection, and
supervision of the erection, installation, construction, reconstruction,
replacement, repair, and maintenance of Grantee’s equipment, facilities,
appurtenances, and apparatus within the City.
9-4B-15 ACCOUNTING.
   Grantee shall keep complete records of accounts showing dates and payments
received, and shall furnish an annual accounting by a certified public
accountant to the City on the payment date as above provided. The City shall
have the right, power, and authority to inspect the monthly service charge
records of the Grantee at the premises of the Grantee during the business hours
of any workday, or at any other reasonable time and place, provided Grantee is
given no less than seven days’ notice.
9-4B-16 FRANCHISE FEE NOT TAX.
   Payments of the franchise fee by the Grantee to the City pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall not be considered in the nature of a tax but
shall be in addition to any and all taxes which are now, or hereafter, required
to be paid by any law of the United States, the State, or the City.
9-4B-17 SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Grantee shall have the right to prescribe service rules and regulations for
the conduct of its business with its subscribers and service users, not
inconsistent with the provisions of its franchise or with the rules and
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, and other applicable
laws, rules, and regulations. Grantee shall submit to the City the form of its
service agreement between Grantee and its subscribers and channel users, shall
furnish the City a full schedule of its charges to be paid by subscribers
before soliciting for subscribers within the City, and shall furnish the City
any amendments or alterations in the service agreement or schedule of charges.
9-4B-18 RATES AND CHARGES.
   In consideration for services rendered to subscribers, the Grantee shall
have the right to charge and collect from subscribers fair and reasonable
compensation calculated to offset all necessary costs for provision of the
services and including a fair rate of return on investment devoted thereto,
under efficient and economical management.
9-4B-19 SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.
   Grantee shall, during the term of its franchise, furnish reasonable,
adequate, and efficient cable television reception services to the residents of
the City wherever possible, and Grantee agrees to maintain its system in
reasonable repair and working order and to provide adequate facilities for such
maintenance. These requirements may be temporarily suspended by disaster or
emergency conditions or other circumstances beyond the reasonable control of
Grantee.
9-4B-20 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
   Grantee’s plant and equipment, including the antenna site, head-end,
distribution system, towers, structures, poles, wires, underground cable, and
appurtenances shall be installed in accordance with good engineering practices
and shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed,
repaired, maintained, and operated so as not to endanger or interfere with the
lives of persons, or to interfere with the improvements the City may deem
proper to make, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular
traffic on, to, or from public ways, places, and structures. Erection,
installation, construction, replacement, removal, repair, maintenance, and
operation of the system shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association and
National Electric Safety Code (outside work) and such applicable laws of the
State and applicable ordinances of the City, which may now be in effect or
enacted in the future. All installations shall be of a permanent nature,
durable, and maintained in a safe, suitable, and substantial condition, in good
order and repair. All installations shall be subject to the provisions of
Section
9-4A-2 of this title.
9-4B-21 FCC STANDARDS.
   Grantee’s cable television system shall meet technical standards of the
rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, and Grantee
shall perform the periodic tests and make the measurements specified in such
rules. The system shall be so designed, engineered, and maintained by Grantee
so as not to interfere with the television and radio reception of residents of
the City who are not subscribers to its services.
9-4B-22 USE OF POLES.
   1.   Right to Use Granted by City. The City hereby grants the right,
privilege, and authority to Grantee to lease, rent, or in any other manner
obtain the use of poles with overhead lines, conduits, trenches, ducts, lines,
cables, and other equipment and facilities from any and all holders of public
licenses and franchises within the corporate limits of the City, and to use
such poles, conduits, trenches, ducts, lines, and cables in the course of its
business subject to the provisions of Section
9-4A-2 of this chapter. Grantee shall install its cable on existing poles owned
by other holders of public licenses and franchises within the corporate limits
of the City whenever possible for the installation of its cable. When
installation of cable on poles is not possible, or when the holders of another
public license or franchise have installed underground cable, then in that
event, unless the Council shall otherwise decide, the cable used by Grantee
shall be installed underground. Grantee shall only be allowed to erect its own
poles upon receiving the permission of the Council to do so.
   2.   Reservation of Right to Use Poles. The City shall retain and does
hereby retain the right to utilize the existing poles for future use and to
require the removal of the cable by Grantee where existing poles are not
sufficient to adequately handle the proposed City use and Grantee’s cable.
9-4B-23 MAPS AND PLATS.
   Grantee shall file with the City Engineer a copy, true and accurate, of maps
or plats of all existing and proposed installations upon the streets. These
maps and plats shall conform to the requirements of the City Engineer and shall
be kept continuously up to date.
9-4B-24 COMPLIANCE WITH CITY CODES.
   Grantee shall be required to conform to all present City Codes, including,
but not limited to, Building, Plumbing, and Electrical Codes. All underground
street crossing shall be by drilling or pushing. Grantee shall restore all
property of the City and of the inhabitants thereof to its original condition
after the installation of either overhead or underground cable.
9-4B-25 HOLD HARMLESS.
   Grantee shall hold the City harmless from any damage which Grantee’s cable,
equipment, or other integral parts of its system may cause as a result of any
action by any City employee when carrying out said employee’s duties.
9-4B-26 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   Grantee shall install all of its wire, cable, and other lines, whether
overhead or underground, at the rear of all lots and other properties wherever
possible, as required by the City. All transmission and distribution
structures, lines, and equipment erected by Grantee within the City shall be so
located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets,
alleys, and other public ways, easements, and places, and to cause minimum
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners.
Grantee shall not install its wire, cable, and other lines through, over, or on
private property, except to serve a building located thereon, without obtaining
a written easement therefor.
9-4B-27 RESTORATION OF SURFACE.
   In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other
surfacing, Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved
by the City Engineer, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, or
surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good a condition as before said
work was commenced. Grantee shall not cut or otherwise remove any such
surfacing without first obtaining approval therefor from the City Director of
Public Works.
9-4B-28 RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   If, at any time during the period of Grantee’s franchise, the City shall
elect to alter, or change the grade of any street, alley, or public way, or
construct any public improvement, Grantee, upon reasonable notice by the City,
shall remove, re-lay, and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes, and other fixtures as requested by the City at Grantee’s
own expense.
9-4B-29 INTERFERENCE WITH UTILITY FIXTURES.
   Grantee shall not place poles or other fixtures when the same will interfere
with any gas, electric, or telephone fixtures, water hydrant or main, and all
such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall be placed at the outer
edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and those placed in alleys shall
be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said alley, and then in such
a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on said streets, alleys, and
public ways.
9-4B-30 TEMPORARY REMOVAL OF WIRES.
   Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building permit issued
by the City, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of
buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising, or lowering of wires
shall be paid by the person requesting the same and Grantee shall have the
authority to require such payment in advance. Grantee shall be given not less
than five days’ advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
9-4B-31 TREE TRIMMING.
   Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets,
alleys, sidewalks, and public places of the City so as to prevent the branches
of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of Grantee, all
trimming to be done under the supervision and direction of the City and at the
expense of Grantee.
9-4B-32 PROTECTION OF STREET OBSTRUCTIONS.
   Any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public ways made by the
Grantee in the course of the construction, operation, or removal of cable
installation shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of
adequate barriers, fences, or boarding, the bounds of which, during periods of
dusk and darkness, shall be clearly designated by warning lights. Grantee
shall, whenever it is deemed necessary by the City Director of Public Works,
install such steel plates as may be necessary to allow a public roadway to
remain open while Grantee is in the course of the construction, operation, or
removal of cable installation. Grantee shall comply with the State Highway
Commission Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
9-4B-33 REMOVAL OF FACILITIES ON TERMINATION.
   Upon the termination of its franchise, Grantee shall remove its poles, cable
television transmission, and distribution system, and other appurtenances from
the streets and sidewalks in the City, when ordered to do so by the City, and
shall restore such streets and sidewalks to their original condition.
9-4B-34 INDEMNIFICATION.
   Grantee shall at all times defend, indemnify, protect, and save harmless the
City, its officers, and employees and its political subdivisions from and
against, and agrees to pay the City for, any and all liability, losses,
physical damage to property and bodily injury or death to the City or to
persons, including payments made under workers’ compensation laws, claims,
settlements, judgments, decrees, and awards of every kind and nature, including
attorney fees, costs, and disbursements however arising out of or related to,
or be caused by the erection, construction, replacement, removal, maintenance,
and operation of Grantee’s cable television system, or the granting of its
franchise. Grantee shall carry public liability insurance for the protection of
itself and the City, its officers and employees, and its political subdivisions
in not less than $1,000,000.00 in the aggregate. Grantee shall hold the City,
its officers, and employees, and its political subdivisions harmless against
damages resulting from legal action which may be brought against it in
connection with the establishment or operation of Grantee’s cable television
system in the City, and shall defend, at its expense, any action brought
against the City, its officers, and employees and its political removal,
maintenance, and operation of Grantee’s cable television system or the granting
of its franchise. Grantee shall also carry workers’ compensation insurance
coverage on its employees who are engaged in any manner in the erection,
construction, replacement, repair, maintenance, and operations of Grantee’s
plant and equipment. Grantee shall be notified of any claim, demand, or action
brought against the City, its officers, or employees or its political
subdivisions for which the City, its officers, or employees, or its political
subdivisions may seek reimbursement or defense as provided hereunder, and the
City, its officers, or its employees, or its political subdivisions shall not
settle, capitulate, or admit any such claim, demand, or action.
9-4B-35 RATES NONDISCRIMINATORY.
   Grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules,
regulations, employment, or in any other respects, make or grant any preference
or advantage to any person nor subject any person to any prejudice or
disadvantage; provided, however, this section shall not be deemed to prohibit
the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules
to which any customer coming within such classification shall be entitled.
9-4B-36 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   Grantee shall not engage in the business of selling, leasing, renting, or
servicing television or radio receivers, or their parts and accessories, in
connection with the operation of its cable television system, nor shall Grantee
and its employees require or attempt to direct its subscribers to deal with any
particular firm or person in regard to the above activities.
9-4B-37 REGULATION OF SUBSCRIBER SERVICE RATES.
   The City shall regulate cable television basic service tier rates and
charges for related equipment, installation, and services, notwithstanding any
different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise or Municipal Code of the
City. Such regulation shall be consistent with any regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission relating thereto, whether now or hereinafter enacted.
In all cases in which the City shall pass upon such cable television rates and
charges, the City shall provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of
the views of interested parties.
CHAPTER 5
UTILITY AND FIBER OPTIC CABLE LINES
 
9-5-1 Underground Utility Lines Required 9-5-2 Fiber Optic Cable Lines
 
9-5-1 UNDERGROUND UTILITY LINES REQUIRED.
   All utility lines, except electric lines of nominal voltage in excess of
15,000 volts, shall be installed underground unless such lines can be installed
and service be provided using only existing utility poles. Such utility lines
required to be installed underground shall be installed in such a manner so as
not to interfere with other underground utilities. Incidental appurtenances to
such underground utility lines, such as pad mounted electrical equipment and
its enclosures, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meters, and meter cabinets may
be placed aboveground, but shall be located so as not to be unsightly or
hazardous to the public.
9-5-2 FIBER OPTIC CABLE LINES.
   1.   Application for License. An applicant must submit an application for a
license to install or repair fiber optic cable in, over or upon the City right-
of-way. Upon issuance of a license by the City, the applicant agrees to abide
by the terms and conditions of a license agreement to be approved by the
Council.
   2.   License Fee. Before any fiber optic cable license is issued, the
applicant may be required to pay a license fee in accordance with a fee
schedule established from time to time and approved by the Council.
TITLE 10 - BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
10-1-1 Short Title                      10-1-11 Stop Work Order
10-1-2 Purpose                          10-1-12 Deletions
10-1-3 Warning                          10-1-13 Amendments to Administration
10-1-4 Interpretation                   10-1-14 Amendments to International
                                        Residential Code
10-1-5 Adoption                         10-1-15 Amendments to International
                                        Building Code
10-1-6 Scope                            10-1-16 Conflicting Provisions
10-1-7 Indemnification                  10-1-17 Site Maintenance
10-1-8 Permit Requirements, Conditions, 10-1-18 Street Protection
and Fees
10-1-9 Building Official                10-1-19 Violations
10-1-10 Inspection                      10-1-20 Appeals
 
10-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Clive Building Code, and may be cited as
such and may also be known, referred to, and cited as the “Building Code.”
10-1-2 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders,
contractors, property owners, their agents, and others to meet their
responsibilities with respect to proper construction, construction techniques,
and premises safety, and to provide for inspection as a means of compelling
compliance therewith. It is not the purpose of this chapter to create any duty
on the part of the City, its officers, agents, or employees, owing to any
individual member of the public or to protect any particular or circumscribed
class of persons. Specifically, it is not the intent of this chapter to create
any duty or liability by the City, its officers, agents, or employees, to
premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any other person.
10-1-3 WARNING.
   No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed,
or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter as indicating the safety of or
quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter, nor
inspections made pursuant thereto, nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises
or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in the risk
associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a
premise has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in any way
constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises.
10-1-4 INTERPRETATION.
   The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take
precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the
International Building Code, 2021 edition, or International Residential Code,
2021 edition, adopted herein.
10-1-5 ADOPTION.
   Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the
International Building Code, 2021 edition, and the International Residential
Code, 2021edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., are
adopted in full except for such portions as may be hereinafter deleted,
modified, or amended, and shall constitute the “Building Code of the City of
Clive, Iowa,” to regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use,
height, area, and maintenance of buildings or structures in the City, and the
same are, by this reference, incorporated herein as fully and completely as if
set forth in full. The use of the term “Building Code” in this chapter shall be
interpreted to refer to the International Building Code, 2021 edition. The
dwelling construction under the International Residential Code, 2021 edition,
and appendix chapters to the International Residential Code may be utilized to
determine basic guidelines or acceptable solutions to code requirements
(determination to be made by the Construction Services Administrator).
Furthermore, the use of the term IBC in this chapter shall be interpreted to
refer to the International Building Code, 2021 edition, and the use of the term
IRC shall be interpreted to refer to the International Residential Code, 2021
edition. An official copy of the International Building Code, 2021 edition, and
the International Residential Code, 2021 edition, as adopted, and a certified
copy of this chapter can be viewed in the Community Development Department.
10-1-6 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this building code shall apply to:
   1.   New Construction. The construction of new buildings.
      A.   Public or private installations as governed by the IBC or IRC.
   2.   Existing Buildings.
      A.   Additions to, alterations of, and repairs to existing buildings, if
covered by this Code. The Construction Services Administrator may, when such
additions, alterations, or repairs are made, order other reasonable additions
or alterations in a building, structure, or on a premises when a danger to life
or property may result if such other additions or alterations were not made.
      B.   Installations, which were in compliance with the Code in existence
at the time such installations were made, shall be presumed to be safe and
proper, which presumption can be rebutted by evidence that the installation may
be dangerous to life or property.
      C.   If the classification of a building has been changed due to a change
in occupancy, the entire building shall comply with all the building standards
applicable to the new classification. If the occupancy of a building has been
changed to a mixed occupancy, with the required fire separation between the
mixed occupancy, each occupancy thereof shall comply with its own particular
classification.
   3.   Conversion to Condominium or Multiple Housing Cooperative.
      A.   The conversion of any building or portion thereof to a horizontal
property regime or to a multiple housing cooperative shall be treated as a
change of occupancy classification for the building.
      B.   Any person or entity seeking to establish a horizontal property
regime or multiple housing cooperative by establishing a horizontal property
regime pursuant to Chapter 499B of the Code of Iowa, or by establishing a
multiple housing cooperative pursuant to Chapter 499A of the Code of Iowa,
shall establish and document compliance with the following. In addition to the
following, the person or entity shall file and obtain approval from the
Community Development Department for the development application defined in
Subsection 3C of this section:
         (1)   That all materials, manner, and means of construction in the
proposed building meet current codes for new construction including current
Fire, Building, Plumbing, Electrical, Mechanical, Energy Conservation, and Post
Construction Stormwater Management Codes.
         (2)   That the building and site meet all requirements of the zoning
ordinance that would be required for new construction.
         (3)   That the building and site meet all requirements for handicapped
accessibility that would be required for new construction.
         (4)   That separate utility services, with separate metering, be
provided to each unit that would be required for new construction.
      C.   At least 60 days before a declaration or other instrument
establishing a horizontal property regime pursuant to Chapter 499B of the Code
of Iowa, or establishing a multiple housing cooperative pursuant to Chapter
499A of the Code of Iowa, (“declaration”) is to be recorded in the office of
the County Recorder, any person or entity shall file a development application
for approval with the community development department. In addition to the
development application, the applicant shall file the following:
         (1)   A site plan, building plans, and code analysis demonstrating
compliance with the provisions addressed above.
         (2)   A copy of the declaration or other instrument consistent with
Chapters 499A or 499B of the Code of Iowa.
      D.   The declaration shall not be recorded unless a Certificate of
Occupancy for the proposed building has been issued by the City.
10-1-7 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The applicant for any permit under this Code, by making such application,
assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property whatsoever, and
injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and
expenses incidental thereto, however arising from, or in connection with, or
related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything thereunder, or
the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such
applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code or any
other ordinance of the City; and such applicant, by making such application,
forever indemnifies the City, its officers and employees, and agrees to save it
and them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits, or liability
whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason
of the foregoing, even though acts or omissions of the City, its officers or
employees, may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions
shall be deemed to be a part of any permit issued under this Code whether
expressly recited therein or not.
10-1-8 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES.
   1.   Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, add to,
alter, relocate, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or to repair,
install, add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas,
mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this
Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall not do so without first
securing a permit from the Community Development Department.
   2.   Issuance. After proper application on forms provided by the Community
Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of the property
owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the State Division of Labor
Services, according to their rules and standards. The property owner or
authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the registration
shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not transferable unless a
new application is provided and signed by the new applicant. No permits shall
be issued to any person, firm, or corporation who has fees outstanding or who
has outstanding violations of any ordinance of the City.
   3.   Fees. There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit
fees, fees for other inspections, temporary certificate of occupancy
application fees, temporary CO extension fees, work without a permit fees, and
permit reissuance fees shall be set forth in a fee schedule established and
approved, from time to time, by the Council. Fees on all buildings or
structures constructed by any unit of the government or nonprofit organization
may be waived by the Council. No fees shall be collected on buildings or
structures constructed by or for the City.
   4.   Expiration:
      A.   Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire
by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is
not commenced within 90 days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if
the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after
the work is commenced for a period of 60 days. Expired permits are subject to
permit re-issuance fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      B.   All permits shall expire after 365 days unless an extension is
requested in writing to the Construction Services Administrator 14 days prior
to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may
refuse any extension, but shall do so in writing within seven days of receipt
of the extension request. Expired permits are subject to permit re-issuance
fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      C.   In addition, any time work is suspended or abandoned for more than
10 days, the permit shall expire due to neglect if the site is not properly
secured, including:
         (1)   Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that
makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
         (2)   A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement
foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
         (3)   Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help
prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be
given to proximity of the construction site, as described in Chapter 11 of this
title.
   5.   Revocation. Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be
summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the violation
of any provision of this Code.
   6.   Outstanding Permits. If a permit is outstanding on the effective date
hereof, the provisions of this chapter, the International Building Code, 2021
edition, and the International Residential Building Code, 2021 edition, adopted
hereby, shall apply to the work authorized by such permit, except to the extent
that the Construction Services Administrator shall determine that the
application of such provisions to said work would be unreasonable. The burden
shall be upon the holder of such permit to show the unreasonableness of such
provisions.
   7.   Work without Permit. If any repairs, additions, alterations, or
demolitions to any building or portions of any building or any electrical, gas,
mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this
Code, the work having been completed without first obtaining a permit, the
owner shall have the responsibility to certify that the work has been completed
in accordance with the applicable codes. The Construction Services
Administrator shall determine the appropriate level of special inspection
necessary to ensure that the work was completed in accordance with the
applicable codes. Special inspections shall be performed by an approved
inspector who is qualified or licensed to inspect work similar to that which is
being performed. Work without a permit, other than minor work initiated for
plan execution, will be subject to fees as set forth in the adopted fee
schedule.
10-1-9 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   For the purposes of this Code, the Construction Services Administrator may
also be referred to as the Building Official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the
Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons
may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction Services
Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise discharging their
official duties, the Construction Services Administrator, or an appointed
assistant or agent, shall have the right to enter, at any time, any building,
area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having
charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of the Construction
Services Administrator, any structure is suspected of being or found to be
defective or dangerous, or whenever, from any cause, the premises shall be in
such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers,
or the general public, the Construction Services Administrator shall at once
order the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition.
10-1-10 INSPECTION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal
or cause to be covered or concealed any new construction, electrical, plumbing,
or mechanical systems or apparatus for which a permit has been issued, until
such new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical systems or apparatus
have been inspected and approved as required by this Code. The Construction
Services Administrator shall have authority to remove or cause the removal of
any obstructions which may prevent the proper inspection of new construction,
electrical, plumbing, or mechanical systems or apparatus. Upon the completion
of the new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical systems or
apparatus in any building, it shall be the duty of the company, firm, or
individual doing the same to notify the Construction Services Administrator,
who shall inspect the same on receipt of such notice for conformance to the
provisions of this Code. Certificates of Occupancy shall not be issued unless
the new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical systems or apparatus
are in conformity with the rules and regulations set forth in this Code.
10-1-11 STOP WORK ORDER.
   1.   Authority. Whenever the Construction Services Administrator finds any
work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to the
provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Construction Services
Administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
   2.   Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the
reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property
involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other
persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
   3.   Unlawful Continuance. Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work
shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premise shall be limited to the removal or correction of the
violation or unsafe condition.
10-1-12 DELETIONS.
   The following are deleted from the IBC and IRC and are of no force or effect
in this chapter:
   1.   IBC Sections:
      A.   101.4   Referenced Codes
      B.   103.3   Deputies
      C.   104.5   Identification
      D.   104.10.1   Flood Hazard Areas
      E.   105.1.1   Annual Permit
      F.   105.1.2   Annual Permit Records
      G.   105.2    Work Exempt From Permit Under Building Subsection, Item
numbers 1, 2, 9, and 10
      H.   105.3.2   Time Limitation of Application
      I.   105.5   Expiration
      J.   105.7   Placement of Permit
      K.   110.3.6   Lath, Gypsum Board, and Gypsum Panel Product Inspection
      L.   111.2   Certificate Issued Item number 10, 11
      M.   Delete   Ch. 13 Energy Efficiency
      N.   Delete   Ch. 28 Mechanical Systems
      O.   Delete   Ch. 29 Plumbing Systems
   2.   IRC Sections:
      A.   R103.3    Deputies
      B.   R104.5    Identification
      C.   R105.2    Work Exempt from Permit Under Building Subsection, Item
numbers 1, 2, 7, and 10
      D.   R105.3    Application for Permit Item number 5
      E.   R105.3.2    Time Limit of Application
      F.   R105.5    Expiration
      G.   R105.7    Placement of Permit
      H.   R110.3   Certificate Issued Item number 8
      I.   Delete   Ch. 11 Energy Efficiency
      J.   Delete   Ch. 25- Ch. 33 Plumbing
      K.   Delete   Ch. 34-43 Electrical
10-1-13 AMENDMENTS TO ADMINISTRATION.
   The paragraphs in this section represent amendments to the requirements
contained in the IBC and IRC.
   Those section numbers preceded by “R” represent sections contained in the
IRC; those section numbers without an “R” represent sections contained in the
IBC.
   1.   Sections 103.1, R103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency. Delete section
and add the following in lieu thereof:
      A.   The Code Enforcement Agency created to enforce the provisions of
this chapter shall be known and referred to as the Community Development
Department. For purposes of this chapter, the Department of Building Safety
shall also be known and referred to as the Community Development Department.
The Building Official in charge thereof shall be known as the Construction
Services Administrator.
   2.   Sections 103.2, R103.2 Appointment. Delete section and add the
following in lieu thereof:
      A.   The Construction Services Administrator shall be appointed by the
Community Development Director.
   3.   Section 105.2 Work Exempt from Permit, Under Building Subsection.
Delete item number 6 and add the following in lieu thereof:
      A.   Private sidewalks and driveways
   4.   Section R105.2 Work Exempt from Permit, Under Building Subsection.
Delete item number 5 and add the following in lieu thereof:
      A.   Private sidewalks and driveways.
   5.   Sections 111.2, R110.3. Add the following new to form sections 111.2.1
and R110.3.1 Certificate Issued:
      A.   On all permitted construction or activity, the site improvements,
including, but not limited to, sidewalks, driveways, and approaches, seeding,
sod, trees, screening of rooftop mechanical units, and any other site plan
requirements are to be installed before a final Certificate of Occupancy is
issued.
   6.   Sections 111.3, R110.4 Temporary Occupancy. Add the following sentence
after the second sentence:
      A.   Prior to the issuance of a temporary occupancy certificate, the
permit holder shall file a temporary occupancy permit application on forms
provided by the Community Development Department. If the temporary occupancy
permit application is accepted, a temporary occupancy certificate may be issued
subject to the execution of an agreement to complete and security bond. A
permanent Certificate of Occupancy will be issued upon completion of all
outstanding improvements listed within the agreement to complete.
   7.   Sections 113.1, R112.1 add the following new subsections:
      A.   113.1.1 and R112.1.1 Granting of Hearing: Any person affected by a
decision of the Construction Services Administrator may request, and shall be
granted a hearing on the decision, as described in Title 2, Chapter 2 of this
Code of Ordinances.
   8.   Section 114.4, R113.4 Violation Penalties. Delete section and insert
the following in lieu thereof:
      A.   Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply
with any of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set
forth in Title 1, Chapter 4A of the this Code. Each day that a violation occurs
shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks court
intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may
seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions
as necessary to prevent or remedy violations.
10-1-14 AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   1.   Table R301.2 Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria: Insert the
following table:
 
                                                            Winter Ice Barrier  Flood
Ground Wind Design       Seismic  Subject to Damage From    Design Underlayment Hazard   Air      Mean
Snow                     Design                             Temp.  required              Freezing Annual
Load         Topographic Category            Frost                 Ice Barrier  NFIP     Index    Temp.
       Speed effects              Weathering Line  Termite         Required.    Adoption
                                             Depth
30 psf 115   No          A        Severe     42” Moderate -5oF   YES          Feb 2019 1833     48.6
                                                                                                  oF
 
   2.   Section R302.1 Exterior walls: Delete all exceptions and insert the
following in lieu thereof:
      A.   Accessory buildings 75 square feet or less do not require a fire
rating when placed adjacent to the principal dwelling or another accessory
building. Accessory buildings larger than 75 square feet which are located less
than five feet from a principal dwelling or another accessory building larger
than 75 square feet are required to have five-eighth inch type X gypsum board
installed throughout the accessory building. This includes all walls and
ceilings. All accessory building setbacks from property lines shall follow
table R302.1(1) and R302.1(2). If a wall rating is required, the entire walls
and ceiling of the accessory building shall be protected with five-eighth inch
type X gypsum board.
   3.   Table R302.6 Dwelling/Garage Separation. Delete the table and insert
the table below:
 
Separation                              Material
From the residence and attics           5/8-inch type X gypsum board or
                                        equivalent - applied to the garage side
From all habitable rooms above the
garage and structure(s) supporting      5/8-inch type X gypsum board or
floor/ceiling assemblies used for       equivalent applied throughout garage
separation required by this section
Accessory buildings larger than 75
square feet, including garages, located 5/8-inch type X gypsum board or
less than five feet from a dwelling     equivalent applied throughout the
unit or another accessory building      interior (walls and ceiling)
greater than 75 square feet on the same
lot
 
   4.   Section R302.13 Fire Protection of Floors. Delete Section R302.13,
exception #4 and insert in lieu thereof the following new exception:
      A.   4. Approved floor assemblies demonstrating equivalent fire
performance by an approved testing company showing length and time duration for
exposure to fire. It shall be defined by performance equivalent to 26 minutes
using ASTM E119 standard fire endurance testing with a superimposed load
simulating a maximum load condition (i.e. 100 percent design load).
   5.   Section R303.3 Bathrooms. Delete Section R303.3 and insert in lieu
thereof the following new section:
      A.   R303.3 Bathrooms. Bathrooms, water closet compartments, and similar
rooms shall be provided with natural or artificial light and be provided with a
mechanical ventilation system. The minimum ventilation rates shall be 50 cubic
feet per minute (24 L/s) for intermittent ventilation or 20 cubic feet per
minute (10 L/s) for continuous ventilation. Ventilation air from the space
shall be exhausted directly to the outside.
   6.   Section R310.1 Emergency Escape and Rescue Opening Required. Delete the
words “habitable attics” from the first sentence and replace it with “habitable
stories above and below grade.”
   7.   Section R310.1 Emergency Escape and Rescue Opening Required. Add the
following exception:
      A.   4. Habitable stories below the base flood elevation within flood
hazard areas as determined by the City’s floodplain manager.
   8.   Section R310.2.1 Minimum Size. Add the following subsection:
      A.   Section 310.2.1.1 Removals. Removal of a window sash to gain a
larger clear opening size is not permitted.
   9.   Section R310.2.3 Maximum Height from Floor. Add the following
exception:
      A.   A landing may be provided to meet the maximum sill height of 44
inches above the floor or landing provided. The landing shall be not less than
36 inches wide, not less than 12 inches out from the exterior wall, and not
more than 24 inches in height. The landing shall be permanently affixed to the
floor below or the wall under the window it serves.
   10.   Section R310.4.3 Drainage. Add the following subsection:
      A.   Section R310.4.3.1 Sump Pump or Other: All area wells shall be
designed for proper drainage by connecting to the perimeter foundation drainage
system or another approved alternate means. The drainage system shall connect
to a sump pit that contains a pump that will discharge the drainage to a storm
sewer. Stormwater shall not discharge into the sanitary sewer system. Alternate
discharge may be approved if a storm sewer service has not been provided to the
property.
   11.   Section R310.5 Replacement Windows for Emergency Escape and Rescue
Openings. Delete this section and insert the following language:
      A.   Where replacement windows are required to provide emergency escape
and rescue openings, the replacement windows shall meet all the following
conditions:
         (1)   Buildings built prior to January 1, 1972:
            a.   The replacement window is the manufacturer’s largest standard
size window that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening.
The replacement window is of the same operating style as the existing window or
a style that provides for an equal or greater window opening area than the
existing window.
            b.   The minimum net clear opening height shall be 20 inches and
the minimum net clear opening width shall be 20 inches.
            c.   In no case shall the replacement window provide less than
four-point zero square feet of net clear opening.
            d.   The bottom of the clear opening of the replacement window
shall not be greater than 48 inches above the finished floor or Code-approved
window platform.
   Exception. Existing window openings that open directly to existing finished
grade level are allowed up to 52 inches above the finished floor or Code
approved window platform to accommodate existing taller foundations.
         (2)   Buildings built after January 1, 1972:
            a.   The replacement window is the manufacturer’s largest standard
size window that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening.
The replacement window is of the same operating style as the existing window or
a style that provides for an equal or greater window opening area than the
existing window.
            b.   In no case shall the measurement from the bottom of the window
opening to the finished floor and minimum net opening width and height
requirements be less than the Code applicable when the building was built.
   12.   Section R310.6 Dwelling Additions. Delete exception #3.
   13.   Section R310.7 Alterations or Repairs of Existing Basements. Delete
this section and replace with the following language.
      A.   New sleeping rooms and new habitable stories below grade, that are
newly created in an existing basement, shall be provided with emergency escape
and rescue openings in accordance with Section R310.1. If the sleeping rooms or
other habitable spaces contain existing windows in compliance with R310.7.1 of
this Code, the existing windows shall be considered compliant.
   14.   Section R310.7.1 Existing Emergency Escape and Rescue Openings. Delete
this section and insert the following language:
      A.   Where a change of occupancy would require an emergency escape and
rescue opening at locations identified within the International Residential
Code, existing operable windows serving as the emergency escape and rescue
opening shall meet all the following conditions:
         (1)   Buildings built prior to January 1, 1972:
            a.   The window is the manufacturer’s largest standard size window
that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening. The window
is of the same operating style as the existing window or a style that provides
for an equal or greater window opening area than the existing window.
            b.   The minimum net clear opening height shall be 20 inches and
the minimum net clear opening width shall be 20 inches.
            c.   In no case shall the window provide less than four-point zero
square feet of net clear opening.
            d.   The bottom of the clear opening of the window shall not be
greater than 48 inches above the finished floor or Code-approved window
platform.
   Exception. Existing window openings that open directly to existing finished
grade level are allowed up to 52 inches above the finished floor or Code-
approved window platform to accommodate existing taller foundations.
         (2)   Buildings built after January 1, 1972:
            a.   The window is the manufacturer’s largest standard size window
that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening. The window
is of the same operating style as the existing window or a style that provides
for an equal or greater window opening area than the existing window.
            b.   In no case shall the measurement from the bottom of the window
opening to the finished floor and minimum net opening width and height
requirements be less than the Code applicable when the building was built.
   15.   Section R311.3 Floors and Landings at Exterior Doors. Add the
following sub-section:
      A.   Section R311.3.4 Frost Protection of Landings. Exterior landings at
doors shall be provided with frost protection per table 301.2.
   16.   Section R311.3.2 Floor Elevations at Other Exterior Doors. Delete the
exception and insert in lieu thereof the following new exception:
      A.   A top landing is not required where a stairway of not more than four
risers is located on the exterior side of a door, provided the door does not
swing over the stairway.
   17.   Section R311.7.5.1 Risers. Add the following exception:
      A.   The dimensions of the top and bottom riser of a stair may vary up to
one inch (25.4 mm) from the stairway riser dimension. In no case shall the
riser height exceed the maximum height of seven and three-fourths inches.
   18.   Section R311.7.8.4 Continuity. Add the following exception:
      A.   Handrails within a dwelling unit or serving a dwelling unit shall be
permitted to be interrupted at one location in a straight stair. The rail may
terminate into a wall or ledge. The extension of rail after the termination
shall immediately continue.
   19.   Section R313.1 Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. Delete
section R313.1 and insert in lieu thereof the following new section:
      A.   R313.1 Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler System. An automatic
residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses.
         (1)   Exceptions:
            a.   1. Townhouse structures that contain eight or less dwelling
units.
            b.   2. Townhouse structures less than 18,000 square feet of floor
space. The calculation of square footage is inclusive of any attached garages
and exclusive of any unenclosed spaces.
   20.   Section R313.2 One- and Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Systems.
Delete Section R313.2 and insert in lieu thereof the following new section:
      A.   R313.2 One- and Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Sprinkler
Systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in
one- and two-family dwellings.
         (1)   Exception:
            a.   One- and two-family dwellings containing less than 8,000
square feet of floor space. The calculation of square footage is inclusive of
attached garages and exclusive of any unenclosed areas.
   21.   Section R314.3: Smoke Alarm Location. Add the following:
      A.   Immediate vicinity shall mean the following distances from the alarm
to the bedroom door.
         (1)   25 feet for alarms with primary power from building wiring
         (2)   10 feet for battery operated alarms
      B.   In theater rooms, exercise rooms, and mechanical rooms. Mechanical
closets less than 16 square feet are exempt from the requirement of having a
smoke alarm within the closet if another smoke detector is located within the
immediate vicinity of the closet door as determined above.
   22.   Section R315.3 Carbon Monoxide Alarm Location. Add the following
language:
      A.   Immediate vicinity shall mean the following distances from the alarm
to the bedroom door.
         (1)   25 feet for alarms with primary power from building wiring or
per manufacturer recommendations, whichever is less.
         (2)   10 feet for battery operated alarms or per manufacturer
recommendations, whichever is less.
   23.   Section R315.5 Carbon Monoxide Alarm Interconnectivity. Delete the
exception.
   24.   Section R322.1 Flood Resistant Construction. Add the following
exception:
      A.   Buildings and structures constructed in whole, or in part, in flood
hazard areas, and substantial improvements and restoration of substantial
damage of buildings and structures in flood hazard areas, shall also be
regulated in accordance with Chapter 11 of the Zoning Ordinance.
   25.   Section R322.1.3 Flood-Resistant Construction. Add the following sub-
sections:
      A.   Section R322.1.3.1 Foundation Protection. Fill Materials Used to
Elevate Buildings within the Regulatory Floodplain. All proposed fill materials
used for elevating and backfilling new buildings and additions within the
regulatory floodplain shall:
         (1)   Be designed by a registered design professional in accordance
with Section 1803 (Geotechnical Investigations) and Section 1804.5 (Grading and
Fill in Flood Hazard Areas) of the 2021 International Building Code, or ASCE
24, or equivalent.
         (2)   Be designed for protection against erosion and scour.
         (3)   Be inspected and tested by a qualified geotechnical material
testing agency.
   26.   Section R322.1.3.2 Foundation Protection. Local Drainage. Foundation
drainage within the regulatory floodplain shall be done in accordance with
Section R401.3 Drainage.
   27.   Section R322.1.3.3 Minimum Protection Elevation. When an engineer has
designed a minimum protection elevation for a given lot within or not within a
flood hazard area, the lowest building opening(s) shall be placed above this
elevation. An elevation survey shall be completed by the owner/builder of said
lot and the as-built drawing shall be submitted to the City for review and for
record keeping purposes.
      A.   Exception. Basement window openings may be placed below the minimum
protection elevation, provided that a waterproof, concrete window well is
installed to an elevation which meets or exceeds the prescribed minimum
protection elevation. The concrete window well shall have standard building
footings for support and shall match the foundation wall for thickness and
design. The window well shall be poured with the basement wall to create a
seamless transition and the outside surface of the window well shall be
waterproofed to the same extent as the foundation walls.
   28.   Add section R401.5 As-built Foundation Survey. Any foundation, which
supports roof loads, that is closer than one foot from a required setback line
or easement line, shall be surveyed in place. An as-built drawing shall be
submitted to the City for review and for record-keeping purposes.
   29.   Section R403.1.1 Minimum Size. Amend this section by adding the new
paragraph and table below.
      A.   Assuming 2000 psf is required for the footing, the following
adjusted footing dimensions and reinforcement may be used for the soil
conditions specified in the table below, unless specific engineering problems
exist. The dimensions specified in this table are typically accepted dimensions
for conventionally designed single-family dwelling structures of one or two
stories in height, intended to be constructed on undisturbed, non-expansive
soils.
 
Soil Bearing Pressure Conventional Footing and Reinforcement
2,000 psf             8”x16” with two #4 reinforcement bars
1,850 psf             9”x20” with two #4 reinforcement bars
1,500 psf             10”x20” with two #5 reinforcement bars
1,250 psf             11”x28” with three #5 reinforcement bars
1,000 psf             12”x32” with three #5 reinforcement bars
 
   30.   Section R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection. Delete Exceptions 1 and 2 and
insert the following in lieu thereof:
      A.   Protection of freestanding accessory buildings with an area of 400
square feet and under of light-framed construction and with an eave height of
10 feet or less shall not be required to have frost footings. A means of hold-
down on a minimum of four corners shall be provided.
      B.   Protection of freestanding accessory buildings with an area of 400
square feet and under of other than light-framed construction and with an eave
height of 10 feet or less shall have reinforced 12-inch by 12-inch thickened
edge footings below a four-inch concrete slab. All vegetation or debris shall
be removed and the area under the slab shall be provided with a minimum of
three inches of compacted aggregate backfill.
      C.   Protection of freestanding accessory buildings with an area of 401
to 600 square feet of light-framed construction and with an eave height of 10
feet or less shall have reinforced 12-inch by 12-inch thickened edge footing
below a four-inch concrete slab. All vegetation or debris shall be removed and
the area under the slab shall be provided with a minimum of three inches of
compacted aggregate backfill.
      D.   Protection of freestanding accessory buildings over 600 square feet
shall meet the requirement of Table 301.2.
      E.   Decks not supported by a dwelling or accessed from a dwelling need
not be provided with footings that extend below the frost line.
   31.   Section R404.1.3.2 Reinforcement for Foundation Walls. Add the
following subsection:
      A.   Section R404.1.3.2.3 Cast-In-Place Concrete Foundation Walls (8’-10’
Walls).
         (1)   Cast-in-place concrete foundation walls shall be of concrete
having a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch at 28
days. All materials, proportioning, and placing shall conform to the
requirements of Chapter 19 of the IBC.
         In addition:
            a.   The minimum thickness of the wall shall be eight inches.
            b.   The reinforcing steel shall be a minimum of ASTM grade 40.
            c.   Minimum reinforcement for eight feet tall walls is three
horizontal #4 bars, located at one foot, four feet, and seven feet from the
bottom of the wall. Vertical bars shall be #4 bars placed every four feet on
center.
            d.   The minimum reinforcement for over eight foot up to 10 foot
tall walls is five horizontal #4 bars, located 24 inches on center and vertical
reinforcement shall be #4 bars spaced at 20 inches on center or #5 bars spaced
at 30 inches on center.
            e.   All wall reinforcement shall be located in the area from the
center of the wall towards the inner face of the wall, with the minimum
clearance being two inches from the inner face of the wall.
            f.   All reinforcement bar splices shall be lapped a minimum 20
times the bar diameter.
            g.   Bars shall bend around corners, and the minimum bend radius is
six times the diameter of the bar.
            h.   Reinforcement around window and door openings shall comply
with the requirements of Chapter 19 of the IBC.
            i.   Foundation drainage shall be provided. 12 inches of granular
fill shall extend above the drainage pipe.
            j.   The wood sole plate shall be anchored to the top of the wall
with a minimum of half-inch anchor bolts spaced a maximum of six feet on
center. When the floor joists are parallel to the wall, solid blocking between
the rim joist and the adjoining joist shall be provided, spaced at a maximum of
six feet on center. Approved anchors shall be provided, spaced a maximum of six
feet on center. Anchor bolts, solid blocking, and anchors shall be placed in
close proximity to each other.
   32.   Section R405.2.3 Drainage System. Delete the last sentence and insert
the following in lieu thereof:
      A.   The sump pump shall discharge to the provided storm sewer service
line provided at the right-of-way or within an easement. Stormwater shall not
discharge into the sanitary sewer system. Alternate discharge may be approved
if a storm sewer service has not been provided to the property.
   33.   Section M1502.4.2 Dryer Duct Installation. Delete this section and
insert the following in lieu thereof:
      A.   Exhaust ducts shall be supported at intervals not to exceed four
feet, and shall be secured in place. The insert end of the duct shall extend
into the adjoining duct or fitting in the direction of airflow. Exhaust duct
joints shall be sealed in accordance with Section M1601.4.1 and shall be
mechanically fastened. Ducts shall not be joined with screws or similar
fasteners. Where dryer exhaust ducts are enclosed in a wall or ceiling
cavities, such cavities shall be of sufficient size to allow the installation
of the duct, without changing the configuration of the duct.
      B.   Exception. Dryer duct sections that are longer than four feet shall
be supported minimally every six feet.
   34.   Section M1601.3 Duct Insulation Materials. Add the following:
      A.   5. The use of air-inflated/encapsulated duct wrap to achieve
required R-values shall be prohibited.
   35.   Section M1601.4 Installations. Add the following subsection:
      A.   Section M1601.4.11 Air Plenum and Duct Separation. Air plenums and
ducts located in the floor and wall cavities shall be separated from
unconditioned spaces by construction with sufficient insulation to meet Energy
Code requirements. The areas include, but are not limited to, exterior walls,
cantilevered floors, and floors above garages.
   36.   Section M1602. Return Air. Add the following subsection.
      A.   Section M1602.3 Return Air Separation. Return air openings shall be
located a minimum of four feet, measured in any direction, from a supply air
diffuser.
   37.   Section G2414.4.4 Corrugated Stainless-Steel Tubing (CSST). Delete
this section and replace with the following:
      A.   Arc resistant corrugated stainless steel tubing shall be listed in
accordance with ANSI LC1 (Optional Section 5.16)/CSA 6.26.
   38.   Section G2415.2 CSST.
   Delete this section and replace with the following:
      A.   Only CSST with an Arc Resistant Jacket or Covering System listed in
accordance with ANSI LC1 (Optional Section 5.16)/CSA 6.26-2016 shall be
installed in accordance with the terms of its approval, the conditions of
listing, the manufacturer’s instructions and this Code, including electrical
bonding requirements in Section G2411. CSST shall not be used for through-wall
penetrations from the point of delivery of the gas supply to the inside of the
structure. CSST shall not be installed in locations where subject to physical
damage unless protected in an approved manner.
   39.   Section P2904 Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler Systems. Adopt this section
in full as a supplement to NFPA 13D. All sprinkler systems shall be installed
per the Fire Department’s requirements and adoptions.
   40.   Appendix AM of the IRC.
   Home Day Care- R-3 Occupancy is hereby adopted in full.
10-1-15 AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
   1.   Section 308.5.4 Five or Fewer Persons Receiving Care in a Dwelling
Unit: Delete Section 308.5.4 and insert in lieu thereof the following new
section and exception:
      A.   Section 308.5.4 Eight or Fewer Persons Receiving Care in a Dwelling
Unit. A facility such as the above within a dwelling unit and having eight or
fewer persons receiving custodial care shall be classified as a Group R-
3 occupancy or shall comply with the International Residential Code.
      B.   Exception. Daycare facilities that provide custodial care for 16 or
fewer persons for less than 24 hours per day in a single-family dwelling, and
where registered with the State Department of Human Services as child
development homes on or before January 1, 2017, are permitted to comply with
the International Residential Code.
   2.   Section 310.4.1 Care Facilities within a Dwelling. Delete section
310.4.1 and insert in lieu thereof the following new section and exception:
      A.   Section 310.4.1 Care Facilities within a Dwelling: A facility such
as the above within a dwelling unit and having eight or fewer persons receiving
custodial care shall be classified as a Group R-3 occupancy or shall comply
with the International Residential Code.
      B.   Exception: Daycare facilities that provide custodial care for 16 or
fewer persons for less than 24-hours per day in a single-family dwelling, and
where registered with the State Department of Human Services as child
development homes on or before January 1, 2017, are permitted to comply with
the International Residential Code.
   3.   Section 403.3.2 Water Supply to Required Fire Pumps. Delete Section
403.3.2 and insert in lieu thereof the following section.
      A.   Section 403.3.2 Water Supply to Required Fire Pumps. Required fire
pumps shall be supplied by connections to a minimum of two water mains located
in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each
connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply
piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow
and pressure required for the pumps to operate.
      B.   Exception. Two connections to the same main shall be permitted
provided the main is valved such that an interruption can be isolated so that
the water supply will continue without interruption through at least one of the
connections.
   4.   Section 406.3.2.1 Dwelling Unit/Garage Separation. Insert five-eighth
inch Type X gypsum board at all locations listed as half-inch.
   5.   Section 423.5 Group E Occupancies. Delete this section including the
subsections and replace with the following section and subsections.
      A.   Section 423.5 Group E Occupancy. In areas where the shelter design
wind speed for tornadoes is 250 mph in accordance with Figure 304.2 (1) of ICC
500, all group E occupancies with a program occupant load of 50 or more shall
have a storm shelter constructed in accordance with Chapters 1 through 5 and 8
of ICC 500.
      B.   The installation of portable buildings for utilization on the campus
or site for educational purposes is considered new construction and classified
as group E occupancies.
      C.   Exceptions.
         (1)   1. Group E day-care facilities
         (2)   2. Group E occupancies accessory to place of religious worship
         (3)   3. Buildings meeting the requirements for shelter design in ICC
500
         (4)   4. Accessory structures to existing group E sites where the
occupancy classification of said structures are classified as Groups A-5 and U.
   6.   Section 423.5.1 Required Occupant Capacity. The required occupant
capacity of the storm shelter shall include all buildings classified as a group
E occupancy on the campus or site (whichever is larger) and shall be the
greater of the following:
      A.   The total occupant load of the classrooms, vocational rooms and
offices in the group E occupancy.
      B.   The occupant load of any indoor assembly space that is associated
with the group E occupancy.
      C.   Exceptions.
         (1)   Where a new building is being added on an existing group E site,
and where the new building is not of sufficient size to accommodate the
required occupant capacity of the storm shelter for all of the buildings on
site, the storm shelter shall at a minimum accommodate the required capacity
for the new building.
         (2)   Where approved by the Code Official, the required occupant
capacity of the shelter shall be permitted to be reduced by the occupant
capacity of any existing storm shelters on the campus or site.
   7.   Section 423.5.2 Location. Storm shelters shall be located within the
buildings they serve, or shall be located where the maximum distance of travel
from not fewer than one exterior door of each building to a door of the shelter
serving the building does not exceed 1,000 feet.
   8.   Section 502.1 Address Identification. Delete this section and add this
section in lieu thereof.
      A.   Section 502.1 Address Identification. New and existing buildings
shall have approved address numbers, building numbers, or approved building
identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from
the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall be black or white
and shall contrast with their background. Where required by the Fire Code
Official, address numbers shall be provided in greater dimension or additional
approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Address numbers shall be
Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers and letters shall be a minimum
height and a minimum stroke width as dictated by Table 502.1. Where access is
by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public
way, a monument, pole, or other sign or means shall be used to identify the
structure. Address numbers shall be maintained.
      B.   Table 502.1 Minimum Height and Stroke Width.
 
Table 502.1 Minimum Height and Stroke Width^,^^
Distance from the centerline Minimum Height (inches) Minimum Stroke Width
of the public way (feet)                             (inches)
Less than 100                4                       1/2
100-199                      6                       3/4
200-299                      8                       1
For each additional 100      Increase 2”           Increase ½”
^Exterior suite identification, minimum height shall be four inches and
stroke width shall be half-inch.
^^Interior suite identification, minimum height shall be two inches and
stroke width shall be one-fourth inch.
 
   9.   Section 508.5 Live/Work Units. Delete the exception and replace with
the following two exceptions.
      A.   Dwelling or sleeping units that include an office that is less than
10 percent of the area of the dwelling unit are permitted to be classified as
dwelling units with accessory occupancies in accordance with Section 508.2.
      B.   Detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhomes that include an
office that is less than 20 percent of the area of the dwelling unit and
constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code are not
required to comply with Sections 508.5 through 508.5.11.
   10.   Section 508.5.1 Limitations. Delete number 3 of this section and
replace with the following.
      A.   The nonresidential area function shall be limited to floors of the
live/work unit with exit at the first story or a basement walkout of the live/
work unit.
   11.   Section 508.5.2 Occupancies. Add the following additional exception.
      A.   2. Live/work units located within detached one- and two-family
dwellings and townhouses may be constructed in accordance with the
International Residential Code.
   12.   Section 902.1.1 Access. Add the following subsection:
      A.   902.1.1.1 Fire Sprinkler Riser Room. Add the following language.
         (1)   A fire sprinkler riser room shall be separated from the
electrical room. The riser room shall have no electrical panels, devices, or
apparatus inside the room other than the outlets or support equipment
(lighting, air compressor, and heater) required for the use of the fire
sprinkler system or fire alarm panel. The sprinkler riser room shall not be
accessed from the electrical room, but the electrical room may be accessed from
the fire riser room.
   13.   Section 903.2 Automatic Sprinkler Systems: Where Required. Add the
following language:
      A.   Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures
shall be provided as required per the local Fire Code.
   14.   Section 903.4.2 Alarms. Delete section 903.4.2 and insert in lieu
thereof the following section.
      A.   903.4.2 Alarms. An approved weatherproof audible device suitable for
outdoor use with 110 candela visual signal shall be connected to every
automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be
activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the
smallest orifice sized installed in the system. Alarm devices shall be provided
on the exterior of the building in an approved location. Where a fire alarm
system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate
the building fire alarm system.
   15.   Section 907 Fire Alarm and Detection Systems General. Insert the
following new section:
      A.   Section 907.1.4 Fire Alarm Control Panels (FACP). Each building
shall have no more than one fire alarm control panel. Installation of fire
alarm control panel shall not exceed six feet in height measured from the floor
to the top of the control panel.
      B.   Exception. Suppression system releasing panels are not required to
meet the height requirement or the limitation in the number of panels.
   16.   Section 907.2 Fire Alarm and Detection Systems. Where Required-New
Buildings and Structures: Add the following language.
      A.   Approved fire alarm and detection systems in new buildings and
structures shall be provided as required per the local Fire Code.
   17.   Section 907.6.6 Monitoring. Delete section 907.6.6 and insert in lieu
thereof the following new section:
      A.   Section 907.6.6 Monitoring. Fire alarm systems required by this
chapter or by the International Fire Code shall be monitored by a central
station approved and listed under UL 827 in accordance with NFPA 72.
      B.   Exception. Monitoring is not required for automatic sprinklers and
fire alarm systems in one- and two-family dwellings.
   18.   Section 1008.3.1 General. Delete section 1008.3.1 and insert in lieu
thereof the following new section:
      A.   Section 1008.3.1 General. In the event of the power supply failure
in rooms and spaces that require two or more means of egress or are 400 square
feet or greater, an emergency electrical system shall automatically illuminate
all of the following areas:
         (1)   Aisles
         (2)   Corridors
         (3)   Exit access stairways and ramps
   19.   Section 1008.3.2 Buildings. Delete section 1008.3.2 and insert in lieu
thereof the following new section:
      A.   Section 1008.3.2 Buildings. In the event of the power supply failure
in rooms and spaces that require two or more means of egress or are 400 square
feet or greater, an emergency electrical system shall automatically illuminate
all the following areas:
         (1)   Interior exit access stairways and ramps.
         (2)   Interior and exterior exit stairways and ramps.
         (3)   Exit passageways.
         (4)   Vestibules and areas on the level of exit discharge used for
exit discharge in accordance with Section 1028.
         (5)   Exterior landings as required by Section 1010.1.5 for exit
doorways that lead directly to exit discharge.
   20.   Section 1008.3.3 Rooms and Spaces. Replace item #5 with the following:
      A.   5. Restrooms containing more than one water closet/urinal or that
are accessible.
   21.   Section 1009.2 Continuity and Components. Add the following to this
section:
      A.   11. Components of exterior walking surfaces shall be concrete,
asphalt, or other approved hard surface.
   22.   Section 1010.1.5 Landings at Doors. Add the following subsections:
      A.   Section 1010.1.5.1 Frost Protection of Landings. Exterior landings
at doors shall be provided with frost protection.
   23.   Section 1013.1 Where Required. Add the following subsection:
      A.   Section 1013.1.1 Additional Exit Signs. Exit signs may be required
at the discretion of the building official to clarify an exit or exit access.
   24.   Section 1014.4 Continuity. Add the following exception.
      A.   6. Handrails within a dwelling unit or serving an individual
dwelling unit of groups R-2 and R-3 shall be permitted to be interrupted at one
location in a straight stair when the rail terminates into a wall or ledge and
is offset and immediately continues.
   25.   Section 1028.5 Access to Public Way. Add the following subsection.
      A.   Section 1028.5.1 Exterior Walking Surfaces: Components of exterior
walking surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, or other approved hard surfaces.
   26.   Section 1031.3.3 Maximum Height from Floor. Add the following
exception.
      A.   A landing may be provided to meet the maximum sill height of 44
inches above the floor or landing provided. The landing shall be not less than
36 inches wide, not less than 12 inches out from the exterior wall, and not
more than 24 inches in height. The landing shall be permanently affixed to the
floor below or the wall under the window it serves.
   27.   Section 1031.5 Area Wells. Add the following subsection:
      A.   1031.5.3 Drainage. All window wells shall be designed for proper
drainage by connecting to the perimeter foundation drainage system or another
approved alternate means. The drainage system shall connect to a sump pit that
contains a pump that will discharge the drainage to a storm sewer. Stormwater
shall not discharge into the sanitary sewer system. Alternate discharge may be
approved if a storm sewer service has not been provided to the property.
   28.   Section 1102.1 Design. Delete this section and insert the following
new section.
      A.   Section 1102.1 Design. Buildings and facilities shall be designed
and constructed to be accessible in accordance with this Code and ICC A117.1-
2009. All references to accessibility shall refer to the ICCA117.1-2009.
   29.   Section 1110.15 Controls, Operating Mechanisms, and Hardware. Delete
exception 3 and insert the following exceptions:
      A.   3. Receptacle outlets servicing dedicated use.
      B.   4. Where two or more receptacle outlets are provided in a kitchen
above a length of countertop that is uninterrupted by a sink or appliance, one
receptacle outlet shall not be required to comply with this section.
      C.   5. In a kitchen, where a clear floor space for a parallel approach
cannot be located at a countertop in a corner between appliances, receptacles
over the countertop shall not be required to comply with this section provided
the countertop area does not exceed nine square feet.
      D.   6. Floor receptacle outlets.
      E.   7. HVAC diffusers.
      F.   8. Controls mounted on ceiling fans.
      G.   9. Where redundant controls other than light switches are provided
for single element, one control in each space shall not be required to comply
with this section.
      H.   10. Reset buttons and shut-offs serving appliances, piping, and
plumbing fixtures.
      I.   11. Electrical panelboards shall not be required to comply with
Section 309.4 of ICC A117.1.
      J.   12. Emergency aid devices, such as Fire Department hose connections,
valve controls, gauges, police call boxes, and annunciator panels shall not be
required to comply with this section provided that they are used only for
emergencies by emergency personnel acting in their official capacity.
   30.   Section 1608.2 Ground Snow Loads. Delete this section and insert the
following in lieu thereof:
      A.   The ground snow load to be used in determining the design snow load
for roofs is hereby established at 30 pounds per square foot. Subsequent
increases or decreases shall be allowed as otherwise provided in the Building
Code, except that the minimum allowable flat roof snow load may be reduced to
not less than 80 percent of the ground snow load.
   31.   Section 1612.1 General. Delete this section and insert the following
in lieu thereof:
      A.   Section 1612.1 General. Buildings and structures constructed in
whole or in part, in flood hazard areas, and substantial improvements and
restoration of substantial damage of buildings and structures in flood hazard
areas shall also be regulated in accordance with Chapter 11 of the zoning
ordinance.
   32.   Section 1612.2 Design and Construction. Add the following sub-
sections:
      A.   Section 1612.2.1 Foundation Protection. Fill Materials Used to
Elevate Buildings Within the Regulatory Floodplain. All proposed fill materials
used for elevating and backfilling new buildings and additions within the
regulatory floodplain shall:
         (1)   Be designed by a registered design professional in accordance
with Section 1803 (Geotechnical Investigations) and section 1804.5 (Grading and
Fill in Flood Hazard Areas) of the 2021 International Building Code or ASCE 24
or equivalent.
         (2)   Be designed for protection against erosion and scour.
         (3)   Be inspected and tested by a qualified geotechnical material
testing agency.
   33.   Section 1612.2.2 Foundation Protection. Local Drainage. Foundation
drainage within the regulatory floodplain shall be done in accordance with
Section 1804.4 Site Grading.
   34.   Section 1612.3 Establishment of Flood Hazard Areas. Fill in section
with: City of Clive and February, 2019.
   35.   Section 1809.5 Frost Protection. Delete Exceptions 2 and 3 and insert
the following in lieu thereof:
      A.   1. Protection of freestanding accessory buildings with an area of
400 square feet and under of light-framed construction and with an eave height
of 10 feet or less shall not be required to have frost footings. A means of
hold down on a minimum of four corners shall be provided.
      B.   2. Protection of freestanding accessory buildings with an area of
400 square feet and under of other than light-framed construction and with an
eave height of 10 feet or less shall have reinforced 12-inch by 12-inch
thickened edge footings below a four-inch concrete slab. All vegetation or
debris shall be removed and the area under the slab shall be provided with a
minimum of three inches of compacted aggregate backfill.
      C.   3. Protection of freestanding accessory buildings with an area of
401 to 600 square feet of light-framed construction and with an eave height of
10 feet or less shall have reinforced 12-inch by 12-inch thickened edge footing
below a four-inch concrete slab. All vegetation or debris shall be removed and
the area under the slab shall be provided with a minimum of three inches of
compacted aggregate backfill.
      D.   4. Protection of freestanding accessory buildings over 600 square
feet shall meet the requirement of Table 301.2(1).
      E.   5. Decks not supported by a dwelling or accessed from a dwelling
need not be provided with footings that extend below the frost line.
   36.   Appendix E of the IBC.
      Supplementary Accessibility Requirement is hereby adopted in full.
10-1-16 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the Building Code
adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict with a provision of the Code of
Iowa, or a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance
or Code of the City, the provision which establishes the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall
prevail.
10-1-17 SITE MAINTENANCE.
   1.   A. It shall be the permit holder’s responsibility to inspect the
construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of
excess debris. In no case shall debris, refuse, or junk be permitted to blow,
drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
   2.   B. Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for
controlling erosion on site throughout the duration of the construction
project. Erosion control shall be managed in accordance with Chapter 11 of this
title.
10-1-18 STREET PROTECTION.
   No person performing construction of any nature or furnishing materials or
performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street
curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
10-1-19 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any
of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in
Title 1, Chapter 4A of this Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation
occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks
court intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City
may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful
actions as necessary to prevent or remedy violations.
10-1-20 APPEALS.
   Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator
may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the decision, as described in
Title 2 Chapter 2 of this Code.
CHAPTER 2
ELECTRICAL CODE
10-2-1 Short Title                               10-2-11 Connection to System
10-2-2 Purpose                                   10-2-12 Building Official
10-2-3 Warning                                   10-2-13 Inspection
10-2-4 Interpretation                            10-2-14 Stop Work Order
10-2-5 Adoption                                  10-2-15 Amendments
10-2-6 Scope                                     10-2-16 Conflicting Provisions
10-2-7 Indemnification                           10-2-17 Site Maintenance
10-2-8 Permit Requirements, Conditions, and Fees 10-2-18 Street Protection
10-2-9 Electrical Contractors License            10-2-19 Violations
10-2-10 Installation by Owner                    10-2-20 Appeals
 
10-2-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Clive Electrical Code, and may be cited
as such and may also be known, referred to and cited as the “Electrical Code.”
10-2-2 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders,
contractors, property owners, their agents, and others to meet their
responsibilities with respect to proper electrical installation, material
selection, installation methods, and premises safety, and to provide for
inspection as a means of compelling compliance therewith. It is not the purpose
of this chapter to create any duty on the part of the City, its officers,
agents, or employees, owing to any individual member of the public or to
protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is
not the intent of this chapter to create any duty or liability by the City, its
officers, agents, or employees, to premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any
other person.
10-2-3 WARNING.
   No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed,
or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter as indicating the safety of or
quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor
inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises
or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in the risk
associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a
premise has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not, in any way,
constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises.
10-2-4 INTERPRETATION.
   The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take
precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the National
Electrical Code, adopted herein.
10-2-5 ADOPTION.
   Pursuant to State published notice and public hearing, as required by State
law, the National Electrical Code (NEC), published by the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA 70), year and edition as amended and adopted by
the State Electrical Board, is adopted in full except for such portions of the
National Electrical Code as may be hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended,
and shall constitute the “Electrical Code of the City of Clive, Iowa.” The use
of the term “Electrical Code” in this chapter shall be interpreted to refer to
the National Electrical Code (NEC), year and edition as adopted by the State.
An official copy of the National Electrical Code, as adopted, and a certified
copy of this chapter, can be viewed in the Community Development Department.
10-2-6 SCOPE.
   This Code shall regulate the design, installation, maintenance, alteration,
and inspection of electrical systems. The provisions of this Electrical Code
shall apply to:
   1.   New Construction.
      A.   Public or private electrical installations as governed by the
National Electrical Code.
   2.   Existing Buildings.
      A.   Additions to, alterations of, and repairs to existing electrical if
covered by this Electrical Code. The Construction Services Administrator may,
when such additions, alterations, or repairs are made, order other reasonable
additions or alterations to the electrical on a premises when a danger to life
or property may result, if such other additions or alterations were not made.
      B.   Installations, which were in compliance with the Electrical Code in
existence at the time such installations were made, shall be presumed to be
safe and proper, which presumption can be rebutted by evidence that the
installation may be dangerous to life or property. Any of the provisions
required by the “Electrical Update Code” shall take precedence over this
section of Code.
      C.   If the classification of a building has been changed due to a change
in occupancy, the electrical in the entire building shall comply with all the
electrical standards applicable to the new classification. If the occupancy of
a building has been changed to a mixed occupancy, with the required fire
separation between the mixed occupancy, each occupancy shall comply with its
own particular classification and shall be wired in compliance with the
electrical standards of its particular classification.
10-2-7 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The applicant for any permit under this Code, by making such application,
assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property whatsoever, and
injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and
expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in connection with or
related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything thereunder, or
the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such
applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code or any
other ordinance of the City; and such applicant, by making such application,
forever indemnifies the City, its officers and employees, and agrees to save it
and them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits, or liability
whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason
of the foregoing even though acts or omissions of the City, its officers or
employees, may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions
shall be deemed to be a part of any permit issued under this Code whether
expressly recited therein or not.
10-2-8 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES.
   1.   Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, install,
add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any electrical system or part thereof,
of which is regulated by this Electrical Code, or to cause any such work to be
done, shall not do so without first securing a permit from the Community
Development Department.
      A.   Exceptions.
         (1)   Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting.
         (2)   Replacement of 120 volt lighting fixtures, receptacles, or
switches.
         (3)   Single phase overcurrent protection devices of the same capacity
and location.
         (4)   Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus, or equipment
operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts
of energy.
   2.   Issuance. After proper application on forms provided by the Community
Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of the property
owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the State Division of Labor
Services, according to their rules and standards. The property owner or
authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the registration
shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not transferable. No
permits shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation who has fees
outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any ordinance of the City.
   3.   Fees. There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit
fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved, from time to time by the Council. Fees on all
buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government or nonprofit
organization may be waived by the Council. No fees shall be collected on
buildings or structures constructed by or for the City.
   4.   Expiration.
      A.   Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire
by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit
is not commenced within 90 days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if
the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after
the work is commenced for a period of 60 days. Expired permits are subject to
permit re-issuance fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      B.   All permits shall expire after 365 days unless an extension is
requested in writing to the Construction Services Administrator 14 days prior
to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may
refuse any extension, but shall do so in writing within seven days of receipt
of the extension request. Expired permits are subject to permit re-issuance
fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      C.   In addition, any time work is suspended or abandoned for more than
10 days, the permit shall expire due to neglect, if the site is not properly
secured, including:
         (1)   Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that
makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
         (2)   A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement
foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
         (3)   Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help
prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be
given to proximity of the construction site, as described in Chapter 11 of this
title.
   5.   Revocation. Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be
summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the violation
of any provision of this Code.
   6.   Outstanding Permits. If a permit is outstanding on the effective date
hereof, the provisions of this chapter and the National Electrical Code,
adopted hereby, shall apply to the work authorized by such permit, except to
the extent that the Construction Services Administrator shall determine that
the application of such provisions to said work would be unreasonable. The
burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to show the unreasonableness of
such provisions.
   7.   Work without Permit. If any repairs, additions, alterations,
conversions, or demolitions to any electrical system, which is regulated by
this Code, the work having been completed without first obtaining a permit, the
owner shall have the responsibility to certify that the work has been completed
in accordance with the applicable codes. The Construction Services
Administrator shall determine the appropriate level of special inspection
necessary to ensure that the work was completed in accordance with the
applicable codes. Special inspections shall be performed by an approved
electrical inspector who is qualified or licensed to inspect work similar to
that which is being performed. Work without a permit, other than minor work
initiated for plan execution, will be subject to fees as set forth in the
adopted fee schedule.
10-2-9 ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall engage or represent
themselves to the public as engaging in the activity or business of installing,
altering, or repairing any electrical systems or apparatus for which permits
are required by this Electrical Code, unless such person shall have first
obtained from the State, Department of Public Safety, State Fire Marshal
Division, an Electrical Contractors License, as provided for in Chapter 100C of
the Code of Iowa.
10-2-10 INSTALLATION BY OWNER.
   Homeowners (owner/occupant) who qualify for the homestead tax exemption may
acquire permits for their principal residence (not apartment) and appurtenant
accessory structures for remodel electrical work if such residence is an
existing dwelling rather than new construction, and is not larger than a single
family dwelling. The installation of service conductors, service disconnects,
service grounding, and panel boards shall not be allowed under this provision.
The Construction Services Administrator may require the homeowner to pass an
electrical exam as they see fit.
10-2-11 CONNECTION TO SYSTEM.
   It is unlawful for any person(s) to generate or distribute electrical
current for private use or commercial use within the City without first
acquiring proper permits and inspections. Permission shall also be granted by
the utility provider if such current is back-fed to the commercial grid.
Documentation of the utility provider’s approval shall be provided to the
Construction Services Administrator before any inspections are conducted. Any
person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon written notice from
the Construction Services Administrator, immediately remove such connection and
cut off such current.
10-2-12 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   For the purposes of this Code, the Construction Services Administrator may
also be referred to as the Building Official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the
Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons
may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction Services
Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise discharging their
official duties, the Construction Services Administrator, or an appointed
assistant or agent, shall have the right to enter at any time any building,
area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having
charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of the Construction
Services Administrator, any electrical is suspected of being or found to be
defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the premises shall be in
such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers,
or the general public, the Construction Services Administrator shall at once
order the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition.
10-2-13 INSPECTION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal
or cause to be covered or concealed, any electrical wiring or electrical
apparatus for which a permit has been issued, until such wiring or electrical
apparatus has been inspected and approved as required by this Code. The
Construction Services Administrator shall have authority to remove, or cause
the removal of, any obstructions which may prevent the proper inspection of the
electrical wiring or electrical apparatus. Upon the completion of any wiring or
electrical installation in any building, it shall be the duty of the company,
firm, or individual doing the same to notify the Construction Services
Administrator, who shall inspect the same on receipt of such notice for
conformance to the provisions of this Code. Certificates of Occupancy shall not
be issued unless all the electrical installations are in conformity with the
rules and regulations set forth in this Code.
10-2-14 STOP WORK ORDER.
   1.   Authority. Whenever the Construction Services Administrator finds any
work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to the
provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Construction Services
Administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
   2.   Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the
reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property
involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other
persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
   3.   Unlawful Continuance. Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work
shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premise shall be limited to the removal or correction of the
violation or unsafe condition.
10-2-15 AMENDMENTS.
   1.   Add section 215.13 Feeder Location in Townhomes.
      A.   Feeders supplying townhomes shall not extend through any townhome
unit other than the unit served. For the purposes of this provision, the term
townhome shall mean a single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of two
or more attached units in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and
with a yard or public way on not less than two sides.
         (1)   Exception:
            a.   If a recorded easement is established in a concealed space or
attic within a townhome unit, feeders are allowed within that easement.
10-2-16 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the Electrical Code
adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict with a provision of the Code of
Iowa, or a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance
or Code of the City, the provision which establishes the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall
prevail.
10-2-17 SITE MAINTENANCE.
   1.   It shall be the permit holder’s responsibility to inspect the
construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of
excess debris. In no case shall debris, refuse, or junk be permitted to blow,
drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
   2.   Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for
controlling erosion on site throughout the duration of the construction
project. Erosion control shall be managed in accordance with Chapter 11 of this
title.
10-2-18 STREET PROTECTION.
   No person performing construction of any nature, or furnishing materials, or
performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street
curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
10-2-19 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any
of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in
Title 1 Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks court
intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may
seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions
as necessary to prevent or remedy violations.
10-2-20 APPEALS.
   Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as described in
Title 2 Chapter 2 of this Code.
CHAPTER 2A
ELECTRICAL UPDATE CODE
10-2A-1 Short Title                          10-2A-11 Connection to System
10-2A-2 Purpose                              10-2A-12 Building Official
10-2A-3 Warning                              10-2A-13 Inspection
10-2A-4 Interpretation                       10-2A-14 Stop Work Order
10-2A-5 Adoption                             10-2A-15 Code Provisions
10-2A-6 Scope                                10-2A-16 Conflicting Provisions
10-2A-7 Indemnification                      10-2A-17 Site Maintenance
10-2A-8 Permit Requirements, Conditions, and 10-2A-18 Street Protection
Fees
10-2A-9 Electrical Contractors Licenses      10-2A-19 Violations
10-2A-10 Installation by Owner               10-2A-20 Appeals
 
10-2A-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Clive Electrical Update Code, and may be
cited as such, and may also be known, referred to, and cited as the “Electrical
Update Code.”
10-2A-2 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders,
contractors, property owners, their agents, and others to meet their
responsibilities with respect to proper electrical installation, material
selection, installation methods, and premises safety, and to provide for
inspection as a means of compelling compliance therewith. It is not the purpose
of this chapter to create any duty on the part of the City, its officers,
agents, or employees, owing to any individual member of the public or to
protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is
not the intent of this chapter to create any duty or liability by the City, its
officers, agents, or employees, to premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any
other person.
10-2A-3 WARNING.
   No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed,
or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter as indicating the safety of or
quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor
inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises
or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in the risk
associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a
premise has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not, in any way,
constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises.
10-2A-4 INTERPRETATION.
   The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take
precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the National
Electrical Code, adopted herein.
10-2A-5 ADOPTION.
   Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the
Code provisions herein and the National Electrical Code (NEC), published by the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 70), year and edition as amended and
adopted by the State Electrical Board, is adopted in full except for such
portions of the National Electrical Code as may be hereinafter deleted,
modified, or amended, and shall constitute the “electrical update Code of the
City of Clive, Iowa.” An official copy of the National Electrical Code as
adopted, and a certified copy of this chapter, can be viewed in the Community
Development Department.
10-2A-6 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this Electrical Update Code shall apply to existing
buildings when:
   1.   A new electrical service replaces an existing electrical service.
   2.   A 100-amp or greater sub-panel is installed on an existing electrical
service.
   3.   The Code Official, upon substantial evidence, determines the existing
service is, or existing installations are, unsafe and pose(s) a risk to
property or life.
   4.   If the classification of a building has been changed due to a change in
occupancy, the electrical system in the entire building shall comply with all
the electrical standards applicable to the new classification. If the occupancy
of a building has been changed to a mixed occupancy, with the required fire
separation between the mixed occupancy, each occupancy shall comply with its
own particular classification and shall be wired in compliance with the
electrical standards of its particular classification.
10-2A-7 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The applicant for any permit under this Code, by making such application,
assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property whatsoever, and
injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and
expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in connection with or
related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything thereunder, or
the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such
applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code or any
other ordinance of the City; and such applicant, by making such application,
forever indemnifies the City, its officers and employees and agrees to save it
and them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits, or liability
whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason
of the foregoing, even though acts or omissions of the City, its officers or
employees may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions
shall be deemed to be a part of any permit issued under this Code whether
expressly recited therein or not.
10-2A-8 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES.
   1.   Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, install,
add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any electrical system or part thereof,
of which is regulated by this Electrical Update Code, or to cause any such work
to be done, shall not do so without first securing a permit from the Community
Development Department.
      A.   Exceptions:
         (1)   Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting.
         (2)   Replacement of 120-volt lighting fixtures, receptacles, or
switches.
         (3)   Single phase overcurrent protection devices of the same capacity
and location.
         (4)   Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus, or equipment
operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts
of energy.
   2.   Issuance. After proper application on forms provided by the Community
Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of the property
owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the State Division of Labor
Services, according to their rules and standards. The property owner or
authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the registration
shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not transferable. No
permits shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation who has fees
outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any ordinance of the City.
   3.   Fees. There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit
fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved, from time to time, by the Council. Fees on all
buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government or nonprofit
organization may be waived by the Council. No fees shall be collected on
buildings or structures constructed by or for the City.
   4.   Expiration.
      A.   Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire
by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit
is not commenced within 90 days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if
the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after
the work is commenced for a period of 60 days. Expired permits are subject to
permit re-issuance fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      B.   All permits shall expire after 365 days unless an extension is
requested in writing to the Construction Services Administrator 14 days prior
to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may
refuse any extension but shall do so in writing within seven days of receipt of
the extension request. Expired permits are subject to permit re-issuance fees
as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      C.   In addition, any time work is suspended or abandoned for more than
10 days, the permit shall expire due to neglect, if the site is not properly
secured, including:
         (1)   Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that
makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
         (2)   A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement
foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
         (3)   Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help
prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be
given to proximity of the construction site, as described in Chapter 11 of this
title.
   5.   Revocation. Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be
summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the violation
of any provision of this Code.
   6.   Outstanding Permits. If a permit is outstanding on the effective date
hereof, the provisions of this chapter and the National Electrical Code , year
and edition amended, and adopted by the State Electrical Board, adopted hereby,
shall apply to the work authorized by such permit, except to the extent that
the Construction Services Administrator shall determine that the application of
such provisions to said work would be unreasonable. The burden shall be upon
the holder of such permit to show the unreasonableness of such provisions.
   7.   Work without Permit. If any repairs, additions, alterations,
conversions, or demolitions to any electrical system, which is regulated by
this Code, the work having been completed without first obtaining a permit, the
owner shall have the responsibility to certify that the work has been completed
in accordance with the applicable codes. The Construction Services
Administrator shall determine the appropriate level of special inspection
necessary to ensure that the work was completed in accordance with the
applicable codes. Special inspections shall be performed by an approved
electrical inspector who is qualified or licensed to inspect work similar to
that which is being performed. Work without a permit, other than minor work
initiated for plan execution, will be subject to fees as set forth in the
adopted fee schedule.
10-2A-9 ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS LICENSES.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall engage or represent
themselves to the public as engaging in the activity or business of installing,
altering, or repairing any electrical systems or apparatus for which permits
are required by this Electrical Code unless such person shall have first
obtained from the State, Department of Public Safety, State Fire Marshal
Division, an Electrical Contractors License, as provided for in Chapter 100C of
the Code of Iowa.
10-2A-10 INSTALLATION BY OWNER.
   Homeowners (owner/occupant) who qualify for the homestead tax exemption may
acquire permits for their principal residence (not apartment) and appurtenant
accessory structures for electrical work if such residence is an existing
dwelling rather than new construction, and is not larger than a single-family
dwelling. The installation of service conductors, service disconnects, service
grounding, and panel boards shall not be allowed under this provision. The
Construction Services Administrator may require the homeowner to pass an
electrical exam as they see fit.
10-2A-11 CONNECTION TO SYSTEM.
   It is unlawful for any person(s) to generate or distribute electrical
current for private use or commercial use within the City without first
acquiring proper permits and inspections. Permission shall also be granted by
the utility provider if such current is back-fed to the commercial grid. This
permission shall be available to the Construction Services Administrator before
any inspections are conducted. Any person violating the provisions of this
section shall, upon written notice from the Construction Services
Administrator, immediately remove such connection and cut off such current.
10-2A-12 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   For the purposes of this Code, the Construction Services Administrator may
also be referred to as the Building Official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the
Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons
may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction Services
Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise discharging their
official duties, the Construction Services Administrator or an appointed
assistant or agent, shall have the right to enter, at any time, any building,
area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having
charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of the Construction
Services Administrator, any electrical is suspected of being, or found to be
defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the premises shall be in
such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers,
or the general public, the Construction Services Administrator shall at once
order the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition.
10-2A-13 INSPECTION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal,
or cause to be covered or concealed, any electrical wiring or electrical
apparatus for which a permit has been issued, until such wiring or electrical
apparatus has been inspected and approved as required by this Code. The
Construction Services Administrator shall have authority to remove, or cause
the removal of, any obstructions which may prevent the proper inspection of the
electrical wiring or electrical apparatus. Upon the completion of any wiring or
electrical installation in any building, it shall be the duty of the company,
firm, or individual doing the same to notify the Construction Services
Administrator, who shall inspect the same on receipt of such notice for
conformance to the provisions of this Code. Certificates of Occupancy shall not
be issued unless all the electrical installations are in conformity with the
rules and regulations set forth in this Code.
10-2A-14 STOP WORK ORDER.
   1.   Authority. Whenever the Construction Services Administrator finds any
work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to the
provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Construction Services
Administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
   2.   Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the
reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property
involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other
persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
   3.   Unlawful Continuance. Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work
shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premise shall be limited to the removal or correction of the
violation or unsafe condition.
10-2A-15 CODE PROVISIONS.
   The following provision, along with the National Electrical Code, as adopted
by the State Electrical Board, shall be applied to all updates:
   1.   Residential Dwellings.
      A.   Services.
         (1)   A minimum of a 100-amp electrical service panel shall be
provided.
         (2)   The first point of disconnect shall be either on the exterior of
the dwelling or immediately inside the exterior wall. For the purposes of this
Code, section immediately inside the exterior wall shall mean the conductors
shall not extend more than five feet inside the dwelling.
         (3)   All service updates and repairs where the service and meter are
being replaced are required to install the Emergency Disconnect as required by
the National Electrical Code, year and edition per State adoption.
         (4)   When service equipment, per definition in the National
Electrical Code, is replaced, a surge-protection device shall be installed on
the service where the work is being conducted.
      B.   Kitchens.
         (1)   Kitchens shall be provided with a minimum of two receptacle
outlets.
         (2)   Kitchens shall be provided with at least one electric luminaire.
         (3)   All countertop receptacle outlets, including those installed in
an island or peninsula, and receptacle outlets within six feet of the outside
edge of a sink shall be ground fault circuit interceptor (GFCI) protected. If
no equipment ground is available within these specific receptacle outlets, the
GFCI shall be labeled (no equipment ground).
      C.   Bathrooms.
         (1)   A minimum of one ground fault circuit interrupter protected
receptacle outlet shall be provided to serve the lavatory or lavatories. This
shall not be established through a lighting fixture with a convenience outlet
attached.
         (2)   Each bathroom shall be provided with at least one electric
luminaire.
         (3)   Lighting fixtures and exhaust fans installed above or within
bathtub or shower areas shall be effectively ground fault circuit interrupter
protected. If no equipment ground is available within these specific outlets,
the GFCI shall be labeled (no equipment ground).
         (4)   All receptacles shall be ground fault circuit interrupter
protected. If no equipment ground is available within these specific receptacle
outlets, the GFCI shall be labeled (no equipment ground).
      D.   Laundry Rooms.
         (1)   A minimum of one 120-volt grounded or ground fault circuit
interrupter protected receptacle outlet shall be provided within the laundry
room. If no equipment ground is available within this specific receptacle
outlet, the GFCI shall be labeled (no equipment ground).
         (2)   All receptacle outlets within six feet of a sink basin shall be
ground fault circuit interrupter protected. If no equipment ground is available
within these specific outlets, the GFCI shall be labeled (no equipment ground).
      E.   Bedrooms and Other Habitable Rooms.
         (1)   All bedrooms and habitable rooms shall be provided with a
minimum of two receptacle outlets.
         (2)   All bedrooms and habitable rooms shall be provided with an
electric luminaire.
         (3)   All 120-volt receptacle and lighting outlets within bedrooms
shall be protected by an appropriate ARC fault protected device as required by
the National Electrical Code.
      F.   Unfinished Basements.
         (1)   Any deficient wiring identified as a hazard shall be corrected.
         (2)   A minimum of one ground fault circuit interrupter protected
receptacle shall be provided.
         (3)   All receptacle outlets shall be ground fault circuit interrupter
protected. If no equipment ground is available within these specific receptacle
outlets, the GFCI shall be labeled (no equipment ground).
         (4)   Basements and areas around equipment shall be provided with an
electric luminaire.
      G.   Attics.
         (1)   Any identified deficient wiring shall be corrected. Wiring,
boxes, and outlets will not be required to have the attic insulation removed
during the update process. It is assumed the old wiring covered by the
insulation is compliant.
      H.   Exterior Receptacle Outlets and Lights.
         (1)   All exterior receptacle outlets shall be ground fault circuit
interrupter protected.
         (2)   All exterior lighting fixtures shall be listed for exterior use.
      I.   Furnaces, A/C units, and Corrugated Stainless-Steel Tubing (CSST).
         (1)   There shall be a means to disconnect the furnace at the furnace
or within the line of sight of the panel board breaker controlling the furnace.
         (2)   The A/C condenser or equipment shall have a disconnect within
six feet of the condenser or equipment.
         (3)   The overcurrent protection device for the A/C condenser or
equipment shall be sized according to the manufacturer nameplate rating.
         (4)   Corrugated stainless steel tubing shall be bonded to the
electrical grounding system or panelboard utilized by the existing electrical
service. This shall be done according to the tubing manufacturer’s
recommendations.
      J.   Garages and Accessory Buildings.
         (1)   All receptacle outlets installed in garages and accessory
buildings shall be ground fault circuit interrupter protected. If no equipment
ground is available within these specific receptacle outlets, the GFCI shall be
labeled (no equipment ground).
      K.   Smoke Alarms and Carbon Monoxide Alarms.
         (1)   Smoke alarms and carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed in
all locations required by the currently adopted version of the International
Residential Code and per the manufacturer’s specifications.
         (2)   All new smoke alarms and carbon monoxide alarms shall be
interconnected. Physical interconnection of smoke alarms shall not be required
where listed wireless alarms are installed and all alarms sound upon activation
of one alarm.
      L.   Knob and Tube Wiring.
         (1)   If knob and tube wiring is identified within the residence, it
shall be removed and replaced with Code compliant wiring.
10-2A-16 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the Electrical Code
adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict with a provision of the Code of
Iowa, or a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance
or Code of the City, the provision which establishes the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall
prevail.
10-2A-17 SITE MAINTENANCE.
   1.   It shall be the permit holder’s responsibility to inspect the
construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of
excess debris. In no case shall debris, refuse, or junk be permitted to blow,
drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
   2.   Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for
controlling erosion on site throughout the duration of the construction
project. Erosion control shall be managed in accordance with Chapter 11 of this
title.
10-2A-18 STREET PROTECTION.
   No person performing construction of any nature or furnishing materials or
performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street
curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
10-2A-19 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any
of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in
Title 1 Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks court
intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may
seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions
as necessary to prevent or remedy violations.
10-2A-20 APPEALS.
   Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as described in
Title 2 Chapter 2 of this Code.
CHAPTER 3
PLUMBING CODE
10-3-1 Short Title                          10-3-12 Building Official
10-3-2 Purpose                              10-3-13 Inspection
10-3-3 Warning                              10-3-14 Stop Work Order
10-3-4 Interpretation                       10-3-15 Deletions
10-3-5 Adoption                             10-3-16 Amendments
10-3-6 Scope                                10-3-17 Backflow Prevention with
                                            Containment
10-3-7 Indemnification                      10-3-18 Conflicting Provisions
10-3-8 Permit Requirements, Conditions, and 10-3-19 Site Maintenance
Fees
10-3-9 Plumbing Contractors License         10-3-20 Street Protection
10-3-10 Installation by Owner               10-3-21 Violations
10-3-11 Connection to City-Owned System     10-3-22 Appeals
 
10-3-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Clive Plumbing Code, and may be cited as
such, and may also be known, referred to, and cited as the “Plumbing Code.”
10-3-2 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders,
contractors, property owners, their agents, and others to meet their
responsibilities with respect to proper plumbing installation, material
selection, installation methods, and premises safety, and to provide for
inspection as a means of compelling compliance therewith. It is not the purpose
of this chapter to create any duty on the part of the City, its officers,
agents, or employees, owing to any individual member of the public or to
protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is
not the intent of this chapter to create any duty or liability by the City, its
officers, agents, or employees, to premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any
other person.
10-3-3 WARNING.
   No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed,
or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter as indicating the safety of or
quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter, nor
inspections made pursuant thereto, nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises
or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in the risk
associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a
premise has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in any way
constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises.
10-3-4 INTERPRETATION.
   The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take
precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the Uniform
Plumbing Code, adopted herein.
10-3-5 ADOPTION.
   Pursuant to State published notice and public hearing, as required by State
law, the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC), published by the International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, year and edition as amended
and adopted by the State Plumbing and Mechanical Systems Board, is adopted in
full except for such portions of the UPC as may be hereinafter deleted,
modified, or amended and shall constitute the “Plumbing Code of the City of
Clive, Iowa.” The use of the term “plumbing code” in this chapter shall be
interpreted to refer to the Uniform Plumbing Code, year and edition as adopted
by the State. An official copy of the Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted, and a
certified copy of this chapter can be viewed in the Community Development
Department.
10-3-6 SCOPE.
   This Code shall regulate the design, installation, maintenance, alteration,
and inspection of plumbing systems. The provisions of this Code shall apply to:
   1.   New Construction.
      A.   Public or private plumbing installations as governed by the Uniform
Plumbing Code.
   2.   Existing Buildings.
      A.   Additions to, alterations of, and repairs to existing plumbing, if
covered by this plumbing code. The Construction Services Administrator may,
when such additions, alterations, or repairs are made, order other reasonable
additions or alterations to the plumbing on a premises when a danger to life or
property may result if such other additions or alterations were not made.
      B.   Installations, which were in compliance with the Plumbing Code in
existence at the time such installations were made, shall be presumed to be
safe and proper, which presumption can be rebutted by evidence that the
installation may be dangerous to life or property.
      C.   If the classification of a building has been changed due to a change
in occupancy, the plumbing in the entire building shall comply with all the
plumbing standards applicable to the new classification. If the occupancy of a
building has been changed to a mixed occupancy, each occupancy shall comply
with its own particular classification and shall be plumbed in compliance with
the plumbing standards of its particular classification.
10-3-7 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The applicant for any permit under this Plumbing Code, by making such
application, assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property
whatsoever, and injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in
connection with or related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of
anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents,
employees, or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the
provisions of this Plumbing Code or any other ordinance of the City; and such
applicant, by making such application, forever indemnifies the City, its
officers, and employees, and agrees to save it and them harmless from any and
all claims, demands, lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage,
injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even though
acts or omissions of the City, its officers, or employees may have caused or
contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be a part of
any permit issued under this Plumbing Code whether expressly recited therein or
not.
10-3-8 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES.
   1.   Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, install,
add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any plumbing system or part thereof, of
which is regulated by this Plumbing Code, or to cause any such work to be done,
shall not do so without first securing a permit from the Community Development
Department.
   2.   Issuance. After proper application on forms provided by the Community
Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of the property
owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the State Division of Labor
Services, according to their rules and standards. The property owner or
authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the registration
shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not transferable. No
permits shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation who has fees
outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any ordinance of the City.
   3.   Fees. There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit
fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved, from time to time, by the Council. Fees on all
buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government may be waived
by the Council. No fees shall be collected on buildings or structures
constructed by or for the City.
   4.   Expiration.
      A.   Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire
by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit
is not commenced within 90 days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if
the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after
the work is commenced for a period of 60 days. Expired permits are subject to
permit re-issuance fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      B.   All permits shall expire after 365 days unless an extension is
requested in writing to the Construction Services Administrator 14 days prior
to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may
refuse any extension, but shall do so in writing within seven days of receipt
of the extension request. Expired permits are subject to permit re-issuance
fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      C.   In addition, any time work is suspended or abandoned for more than
10 days, the permit shall expire due to neglect, if the site is not properly
secured, including:
         (1)   Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that
makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
         (2)   A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement
foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
         (3)   Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help
prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be
given to proximity of the construction site, as described in Chapter 11 of this
title.
   5.   Revocation. Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be
summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the violation
of any provision of this Code.
   6.   Outstanding Permits. If a permit is outstanding on the effective date
hereof, the provisions of this chapter and the Uniform Plumbing Code, adopted
hereby, shall apply to the work authorized by such permit, except to the extent
that the Construction Services Administrator shall determine that the
application of such provisions to said work would be unreasonable. The burden
shall be upon the holder of such permit to show the unreasonableness of such
provisions.
   7.   Work without Permit. If any repairs, additions, alterations, or
demolitions to any building or portions of any plumbing system, which is
regulated by this Code, the work having been completed without first obtaining
a permit, the owner shall have the responsibility to certify that the work has
been completed in accordance with the applicable codes. The Construction
Services Administrator shall determine the appropriate level of special
inspection necessary to ensure that the work was completed in accordance with
the applicable codes. Special inspections shall be performed by an approved
plumbing inspector who is qualified or licensed to inspect work similar to that
which is being performed. Work without a permit, other than minor work
initiated for plan execution, will be subject to fees as set forth in the
adopted fee schedule.
10-3-9 PLUMBING CONTRACTORS LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall engage or represent
themselves to the public as engaging in the activity or business of installing,
altering, or repairing any plumbing systems or apparatus for which permits are
required by this Plumbing Code, unless such person shall have first obtained
from the State Department of Health, a plumbing license, as provided for in
Chapter 105 of the Code of Iowa.
10-3-10 INSTALLATION BY OWNER.
   Homeowners who qualify for the homestead tax exemption may acquire permits
for their principal residence for remodel plumbing work if such residence is an
existing dwelling rather than new construction, and is not larger than a
single-family dwelling. The Construction Services Administrator may require the
homeowner to pass a plumbing exam as they see fit.
10-3-11 CONNECTION TO CITY OWNED SYSTEM.
   It is unlawful for any person(s) to connect their plumbing system to a City
owned sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or water service without proper permits. Any
person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon written notice from
the Construction Services Administrator, immediately remove or cut off such
connection.
10-3-12 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   For the purposes of this Code, the Construction Services Administrator may
also be referred to as the Building Official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the
Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons
may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction Services
Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise discharging their
official duties, the Construction Services Administrator, or an appointed
assistant or agent, shall have the right to enter, at any time, any building,
area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having
charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of the Construction
Services Administrator, any structure is suspected of being or found to be
defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the premises shall be in
such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers or
the general public, the Construction Services Administrator shall at once order
the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition.
10-3-13 INSPECTION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal,
or cause to be covered or concealed, any new construction, electrical,
plumbing, or mechanical systems or apparatus for which a permit has been
issued, until such new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
systems or apparatus have been inspected and approved as required by this Code.
The Construction Services Administrator shall have authority to remove, or
cause the removal of, any obstructions which may prevent the proper inspection
of new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical systems or apparatus.
Upon the completion of the new construction, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical systems or apparatus in any building, it shall be the duty of the
company, firm, or individual doing the same to notify the Construction Services
Administrator, who shall inspect the same on receipt of such notice for
conformance to the provisions of this Code. Certificates of Occupancy shall not
be issued unless the new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
systems or apparatus are in conformity with the rules and regulations set forth
in this Code.
10-3-14 STOP WORK ORDER.
   1.   Authority. Whenever the Construction Services Administrator finds any
work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to the
provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Construction Services
Administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
   2.   Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the
reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property
involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other
persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
   3.   Unlawful Continuance. Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work
shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premise shall be limited to the removal or correction of the
violation or unsafe condition.
10-3-15 DELETIONS.
   The following are deleted from the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) and are of no
force or effect in this chapter:
   1.   UPC Sections:
      A.   101.1   Title
      B.   101.2   Scope
      C.   101.3   Purpose
      D.   104.3.2   Plan Review Fees
      E.   104.3.3   Time Limitation of Application
      F.   104.4.3   Expiration
      G.   104.4.4   Extensions
      H.   104.5   Fees
      I.   107.0   Board of Appeals
      J.   612.0   Residential Fire Sprinkler Systems
      K.   1204   Certificate of Inspection
      L.   1205   Authority to Render Gas Service
      M.   1207   Temporary Use of Gas
      N.   1211.3   Arc-Resistant Jacketed CSST
10-3-16 AMENDMENTS.
   The paragraphs in this section represent amendments to the requirements
contained in the Uniform Plumbing Code.
   1.   Subsection 314.4.1 Installation of Thermoplastic Pipe and Fittings.
Delete this subsection and replace with the following:
      A.   Trench width for thermoplastic pipe shall be limited to six times
the outside diameter of the piping at the base. Thermoplastic piping shall be
bedded in not less than four inches of aggregate bedding material supporting
the pipe. Initial backfill shall encompass the pipe. Aggregate material shall
be three-eighths inch p-gravel or one inch clean class one bedding.
   2.   Add section 321 Clive Water Division Rules and Regulation. Add the
following subsections under 321:
      A.   Section 321.1 Water Meters. Water meters shall be installed
according to the most recently adopted Clive Water Division Rules and
Regulations.
   3.   Section 321.2 City Right-of-Way. All work conducted within the City
right-of-way shall be done in accordance with the Urban Standard Specifications
and the most recently adopted Clive Water Division Rules and Regulations. A
right-of-way permit shall be attained before working within the right-of-way.
   4.   Section 321.3 Building Ownership. Each separately owned building or
dwelling unit shall have a separate sewer and water service connection for each
building or dwelling unit.
   5.   Section 407.3 Limitation of Hot Water Temperature for Public
Lavatories. Modify this section by adding the following sentence to the end of
the section:
      A.   These devices shall be installed at or as close as possible to the
point of use.
   6.   Section 408.4 Waste Outlet. Modify this section by adding the following
exception to the end of this section:
      A.   Exception: In a residential dwelling unit where a two-inch waste
pipe is not readily available and approval of the authority having jurisdiction
has been granted, the waste outlet, fixture tailpiece, trap and trap arm may be
one and one-half inch when an existing tub is being replaced by a shower sized
per Section 408.6 (2). This exception only applies where one shower head rated
at two point five gpm is installed.
   7.   Section 409.4 Limitation of Hot Water in Bathtubs and Whirlpool
Bathtubs. Modify this section by adding the following sentence to the end of
the section:
      A.   These devices shall be installed at or as close as possible to the
point of use.
   8.   Section 410.3 Limitation of Water Temperature in Bidets. Modify this
section by adding the following sentence to the end of the section:
      A.   These devices shall be installed at or as close as possible to the
point of use.
   9.   Section 418.3 Location of Floor Drains. Modify this section by adding
the following to the end of the section:
      A.   Rooms equipped with a water heater.
   10.   Section 422.1 Fixture Count. Modify this section by deleting the first
paragraph and inserting the following in lieu thereof:
      A.   Plumbing fixtures shall be provided in each building for the type of
building occupancy and in the minimum number shown in Table 403.1 of the
International Plumbing Code. The design occupant load and occupancy
classification shall be determined in accordance with Section 1004 of the
International Building Code. Required public facilities shall be designated by
a legible sign for each sex. Signs shall be readily visible and located near
the entrance to each toilet facility.
   11.   Subsection 422.1.1 Family or Assisted-Use Toilet and Bathing
Facilities. Modify this subsection by adding the following sentence to the end
of the subsection:
      A.   Required family or assisted-use fixtures are permitted to be
included in the number of required fixtures for either the male or female
occupants in assembly and mercantile occupancies.
   12.   Section 422.2 Separate Facilities. Modify this section by adding an
additional exception:
      A.   (4) Separate facilities shall not be required where rooms having
both water closets and lavatory fixtures are designed for use by any gender and
sufficient privacy for water closets is installed. Partitions or compartment
walls shall extend from no more than one inch from the floor to no less than 84
inches from the floor. Urinals shall be located in an area visually separated
from the remainder of the facility or each urinal that is provided shall be
located in a stall.
   13.   Add Section 422.6 Pay Facilities. Where pay facilities are installed,
such facilities shall be in excess of the required minimum facilities. Required
facilities shall be free of charge.
   14.   Add Section 422.7 Substitution for Water Closets. In each bathroom or
toilet room, urinals shall not be substituted for more than 67 percent of the
required water closets in assembly and educational occupancies. Urinals shall
not be substituted for more than 50 percent of the required water closets in
all other occupancies.
   15.   Section 609 Installation, Testing, Unions, and Locations. Delete the
last two sentences and add the following in lieu of
      A.   Building supply water piping shall be not less than 60 inches below
earth cover.
   16.   Section 609.12 Pipe Insulation. Modify this section by deleting this
section and inserting the following in lieu thereof:
      A.   Insulation of domestic hot water piping shall be in accordance with
the applicable energy conservation code.
   17.   Section 611.4 Sizing of Residential Softeners. Modify this section by
adding the following to the end of the last sentence in this section:
      A.   Or as specified in the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
   18.   Section 710.1 Backflow Protection. Add the following to this section:
      A.   The requirement for the installation of a backwater valve shall
apply only when determined necessary by the authority having jurisdiction.
   19.   Section 717.1 General. Add the following to this section:
      A.   The minimum diameter for a building sewer shall be four inches.
   20.   Section 807.3 Domestic Dishwashing Machine. Delete this section and
replace it with the following:
      A.   No domestic dishwashing machine shall be directly connected to a
drainage system or food waste disposer without the use of an approved
dishwasher air gap fitting on the discharge side of the dishwashing machine, or
by looping the discharge line of the dishwasher as high as possible near the
flood level of the kitchen sink where the waste disposer is connected. Listed
air gap fittings shall be installed with the flood level marking at or above
the flood level of the sink or drainboard, whichever is higher.
   21.   Section 901.2 Vents Required. Add the following to this section:
      A.   In every new construction basement, there shall be not less than one
two inch dry vent pipe installed within the basement for future use. The vent
pipe shall be connected to a properly sized vent stack that exits through the
roof. The vent pipe shall be labeled as future vent and shall be capped or
connected to the sewer. The vent pipe shall also be extended through all
construction materials so that it is visible from the finished floor.
   22.   Section 902 Vents Not Required. Add the following to this section.
      A.   A vent is not required on a three-inch residential basement floor
drain provided its drain branches into the building drain on the sewer side at
a distance of five feet or more from the base of the stack and the branch line
to such floor drain is not more than 12 feet in length.
   23.   Section 906.7 Frost or Snow Closure. Modify this section by deleting
two inches in the first sentence and inserting three inches in lieu thereof.
   24.   Table 1002.2 Horizontal Lengths of Trap Arms. Delete the table and
insert the following table in lieu thereof:
Horizontal Lengths of Trap Arms
(Except for Water Closets and Similar Features) Notes: 1,2
Trap Arm Diameter(Inches) Distance Trap to Vent Minimum  Length Maximum(Feet)
                          (inches)
Horizontal Lengths of Trap Arms
(Except for Water Closets and Similar Features) Notes: 1,2
Trap Arm Diameter(Inches) Distance Trap to Vent Minimum  Length Maximum(Feet)
                          (inches)
1 ¼                      2 ½                           5
1 ½                      3                              6
2                         4                              8
3                         6                              12
4                         8                              12
Exceeding 4               2 x Diameter                   12
For SI Units: 1 inch = 25.4mm
Notes to table 1002.2:
1Maintain ¼ inch per foot slope (20.8 mm/m.)
2The developed length between the trap of a water closet or similar fixture
(measured from the top of the closet flange to the inner edge of the vent)
and its vent shall not exceed 6 feet (1829 mm).
 
   25.   Section 1014.1 General. The City will work with the state Wastewater
Reclamation Authority for the sizing and installation requirements of grease
interceptors.
   26.   Subsection 1014.1.3 Food Waste Disposers and Dishwashers. Modify this
subsection by deleting the second sentence and inserting the following in lieu
thereof:
      A.   Commercial food waste disposers shall discharge into the building’s
drainage system in accordance with the requirements of the authority having
jurisdiction.
   27.   Add subsection 1014.1.4 Odor Containment Device. Any required venting
for a grease interceptor shall be capped with an approved odor containment
device. The odor containment device shall be periodically inspected,
maintained, and replaced by the owner in accordance with the manufacturer’s
requirements.
   28.   Add subsection 1101.12.3 Storm Drainage Discharge. All sumps and
pumping systems shall be connected to the City’s storm sewer system, if
available. In the case that the City’s storm sewer system is not available for
connection, the discharge may be permitted to grade provided that the discharge
is made at least 10 feet from a public sidewalk and five feet from a property
line, or as determined by the Construction Services Administrator.
   29.   Section 1208.6.4.5 Corrugated Stainless Steel Tubing. Delete this
section and insert the following:
      A.   Only CSST with an arc-resistant jacket or covering system listed in
accordance with ANSI LC-1 (Optional Section 5.16)/CSA 6.26-2016 shall be
installed in accordance with the terms of its approval, the conditions of the
listing, the manufacturer’s instructions, and this Code, including electrical
bonding requirements in section 1211.2. CSST shall not be used for through-wall
penetrations from the point of delivery of the gas supply to the inside of the
structure. CSST shall not be installed in locations where subject to physical
damage unless protected in an approved manner.
10-3-17 BACKFLOW PREVENTION WITH CONTAINMENT.
   All backflow prevention with containment shall be installed and maintained
in accordance with the Clive Water Division Rules and Regulations as adopted,
from time to time, by Council.
10-3-18 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the Uniform Plumbing
Code, adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict with the Code of Iowa, or a
provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or Code of
the City, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion
and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail.
10-3-19 SITE MAINTENANCE.
   1.   It shall be the permit holder’s responsibility to inspect the
construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of
excess debris. In no case shall debris, refuse, or junk be permitted to blow,
drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
   2.   Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for
controlling erosion on-site throughout the duration of the construction
project. Erosion control shall be managed in accordance with Chapter 11 of this
title.
10-3-20 STREET PROTECTION.
   No person performing construction of any nature or furnishing materials, or
performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street
curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
10-3-21 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any
of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in
Title 1 Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks court
intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may
seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions
as necessary to prevent or remedy violations.
10-3-22 APPEALS.
   Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as described in
Title 2 Chapter 2 of this Code.
CHAPTER 4
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
10-4-1 Short Title 10-4-9 Building Official
10-4-1 Short Title                               10-4-9 Building Official
10-4-2 Purpose                                   10-4-10 Inspection
10-4-3 Warning                                   10-4-11 Stop Work Order
10-4-4 Interpretation                            10-4-12 Conflicting Provisions
10-4-5 Adoption                                  10-4-13 Site Maintenance
10-4-6 Scope                                     10-4-14 Street Protection
10-4-7 Indemnification                           10-4-15 Violations
10-4-8 Permit Requirements, Conditions, and Fees 10-4-16 Appeals
 
10-4-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Clive Energy Conservation Code, and may
be cited as such, and may also be known, referred to, and cited as the “Energy
Code.”
10-4-2 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders,
contractors, property owners, their agents, and others to meet their
responsibilities with respect to proper construction, construction techniques,
and premises safety, and to provide for inspection as a means of compelling
compliance therewith. It is not the purpose of this chapter to create any duty
on the part of the City, its officers, agents, or employees, owing to any
individual member of the public or to protect any particular or circumscribed
class of persons. Specifically, it is not the intent of this chapter to create
any duty or liability by the City, its officers, agents, or employees, to
premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any other person.
10-4-3 WARNING.
   No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed,
or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter, as indicating the safety of or
quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor
inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises
or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in the risk
associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a
premise has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in any way
constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises.
10-4-4 INTERPRETATION.
   The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take
precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the
International Energy Conservation Code, adopted herein.
10-4-5 ADOPTION.
   Pursuant to State published notice and public hearing, as required by State
law, the International Energy Conservation Code, published by the International
Code Council Inc., year and edition as amended and adopted by the State
Building Code Bureau, is adopted in full and shall constitute the “Energy Code
of the City of Clive, Iowa.” The use of the term “energy code” in this chapter
shall be interpreted to refer to the International Energy Conservation Code,
year and edition as adopted by the State. An official copy of the International
Energy Conservation Code, as adopted, and a certified copy of this chapter, can
be viewed in the Community Development Department.
10-4-6 SCOPE.
   This Code shall establish thermal energy efficiency standards for the design
of new buildings and structures, or portions thereof, additions to existing
buildings, and renovation and remodeling of existing buildings.
   1.   Exception. The renovation and remodeling of residential buildings of
one and two dwelling units, which are intended for human occupancy, and which
are heated or cooled by regulating their exterior envelopes and selection of
their heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning systems, service water heating
systems and equipment for the efficient use of energy, and lighting efficiency
standards for buildings intended for human occupancy which are lighted.
10-4-7 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The applicant for any permit under this Code, by making such application,
assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property whatsoever, and
injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and
expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in connection with or
related to the issuance of such permit, or the doing of anything thereunder, or
the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such
applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code or any
other ordinance of the City; and such applicant, by making such application,
forever indemnifies the City, its officers, and employees and agrees to save it
and them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits, or liability
whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason
of the foregoing even though acts or omissions of the City, its officers, or
employees may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions
shall be deemed to be a part of any permit issued under this Code whether
expressly recited therein or not.
10-4-8 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES.
   1.   Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, add to,
alter, relocate, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building of which is
regulated by this Energy Conservation Code, or to cause any such work to be
done, shall not do so without first securing a building permit from the
Community Development Department. All building plans will be reviewed for
energy compliance as specified in this Energy Conservation Code.
   2.   Issuance. After proper application and a full staff review, permits
shall be issued in the name of the property owner or of a firm or corporation
registered with the State Division of Labor Services, according to their rules
and standards. The property owner or authorized representative of the firm or
corporation named on the registration shall sign all applications for permits.
Permits are not transferable. No permits shall be issued to any person, firm,
or corporation who has fees outstanding or who has outstanding violations of
any ordinance of the City.
   3.   Fees. There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit
fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved, from time to time, by the Council. Fees on all
buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government or nonprofit
organization may be waived by the Council. No fees shall be collected on
buildings or structures constructed by or for the City.
   4.   Expiration.
      A.   Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire
by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit
is not commenced within 90 days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if
the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after
the work is commenced for a period of 60 days. Expired permits are subject to
permit re-issuance fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      B.   All permits shall expire after 365 days unless an extension is
requested in writing to the Construction Services Administrator 14 days prior
to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may
refuse any extension, but shall do so in writing within seven days of receipt
of the extension request. Expired permits are subject to permit re-issuance
fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      C.   In addition, any time work is suspended or abandoned for more than
10 days, the permit shall expire due to neglect if the site is not properly
secured, including:
         (1)   Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that
makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
         (2)   A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement
foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
         (3)   Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help
prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be
given to proximity of the construction site, as described in Chapter 11 of this
title.
   5.   Revocation. Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be
summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the violation
of any provision of this Code.
   6.   Outstanding Permits. If a permit is outstanding on the effective date
hereof, the provisions of this chapter and the International Energy
Conservation Code, adopted hereby, shall apply to the work authorized by such
permit, except to the extent that the Construction Services Administrator shall
determine that the application of such provisions to said work would be
unreasonable. The burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to show the
unreasonableness of such provisions.
   7.   Work without Permit. If any repairs, additions, alterations, or
demolitions to any building or portions of any electrical, gas, mechanical, or
plumbing system, which is regulated by this Code, the work having been
completed without first obtaining a permit, the owner shall have the
responsibility to certify that the work has been completed in accordance with
the applicable codes. The Construction Services Administrator shall determine
the appropriate level of special inspection necessary to ensure that the work
was completed in accordance with the applicable codes. Special inspections
shall be performed by an approved energy inspector who is qualified or licensed
to inspect work similar to that which is being performed. Work without a
permit, other than minor work initiated for plan execution, will be subject to
fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
10-4-9 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   For the purposes of this Code, the Construction Services Administrator may
also be referred to as the Building Official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the
Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons
may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction Services
Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise discharging their
official duties, the Construction Services Administrator, or an appointed
assistant or agent, shall have the right to enter, at any time, any building,
area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having
charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of the Construction
Services Administrator, any structure is suspected of being, or found to be
defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the premises shall be in
such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers or
the general public, the Construction Services Administrator shall at once order
the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition.
10-4-10 INSPECTION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal,
or cause to be covered or concealed, any mandatory energy conservation
requirement, for which a permit has been issued, until such requirements have
been inspected and approved as required by this Code. The Construction Services
Administrator shall have authority to remove or cause the removal of any
obstructions which may prevent the proper inspection of the building envelope
or equipment. After the energy conservation measures have been installed and
verification is needed, it shall be the duty of the company, firm, or
individual doing the same to notify the Construction Services Administrator,
who shall inspect the same on receipt of such notice for conformance to the
provisions of this Code. The Construction Services Administrator has the
authority to allow an approved third-party energy inspector to conduct
inspections and tests as required by this Code. Inspection reports and tests
results shall be made available to the Construction Services Administrator.
Certificates of Occupancy shall not be issued unless the energy conservation
requirements are in conformity with the rules and regulations set forth in this
Code.
10-4-11 STOP WORK ORDER.
   1.   Authority. Whenever the Construction Services Administrator finds any
work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to the
provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Construction Services
Administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
   2.   Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the
reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property
involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other
persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
   3.   Unlawful Continuance. Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work
shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premise shall be limited to the removal or correction of the
violation or unsafe condition.
10-4-12 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the International
Energy Conservation Code, adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict with a
provision of the Code of Iowa or a provision of any zoning, building, fire,
safety, or health ordinance or code of the City, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health
and safety of the people shall prevail.
10-4-13 SITE MAINTENANCE.
   1.   It shall be the permit holder’s responsibility to inspect the
construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of
excess debris. In no case shall debris, refuse, or junk be permitted to blow,
drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
   2.   Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for
controlling erosion on-site throughout the duration of the construction
project. Erosion control shall be managed in accordance with Chapter 11 of this
title.
10-4-14 STREET PROTECTION.
   No person performing construction of any nature, or furnishing materials, or
performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street
curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
10-4-15 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any
of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in
Title 1 Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks court
intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may
seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions
as necessary to prevent or remedy violations.
10-4-16 APPEALS.
   Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as described in
Title 2 Chapter 2 of this Code.
CHAPTER 5
MECHANICAL CODE
10-5-1 Short Title                               10-5-11 Building Official
10-5-2 Purpose                                   10-5-12 Inspection
10-5-3 Warning                                   10-5-13 Stop Work Order
10-5-4 Interpretation                            10-5-14 Deletions
10-5-5 Adoption                                  10-5-15 Amendments
10-5-6 Scope                                     10-5-16 Conflicting Provisions
10-5-7 Indemnification                           10-5-17 Site Maintenance
10-5-8 Permit Requirements, Conditions, and Fees 10-5-18 Street Protection
10-5-9 Mechanical Contractors License            10-5-19 Violations
10-5-10 Installation by Owner                    10-5-20 Appeals
 
10-5-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Clive Mechanical Code, and may be cited
as such, and may also be known, referred to, and cited as the “Mechanical
Code.”
10-5-2 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders,
contractors, property owners, their agents, and others to meet their
responsibilities with respect to proper mechanical installation, material
selection, installation methods, and premises safety, and to provide for
inspection as a means of compelling compliance therewith. It is not the purpose
of this chapter to create any duty on the part of the City, its officers,
agents, or employees, owing to any individual member of the public or to
protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is
not the intent of this chapter to create any duty or liability by the City, its
officers, agents, or employees, to premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any
other person.
10-5-3 WARNING.
   No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed,
or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter as indicating the safety of or
quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter, nor
inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises
or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in the risk
associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a
premise has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in any way
constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises.
10-5-4 INTERPRETATION.
   The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take
precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the
International Mechanical Code, 2021 edition, or the International Residential
Code Chapters 12-24, 2021 edition, adopted herein.
10-5-5 ADOPTION.
   Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the
International Mechanical Code, 2021 edition, and International Residential Code
Chapters 12-24, 2021 edition, published by the International Code Council Inc.,
are adopted in full except for such portions as may be hereinafter deleted,
modified, or amended, and shall constitute the “Mechanical Code of the City of
Clive, Iowa.” The use of the term “Mechanical Code” in this chapter shall be
interpreted to refer to the International Mechanical Code, 2021 edition, and
International Residential Code Chapters 12-24, 2021 edition. An official copy
of the International Mechanical Code, 2021 edition, and International
Residential Code Chapters 12-24, 2021 edition, as adopted, and a certified copy
of this chapter can be viewed in the Community Development Department.
10-5-6 SCOPE.
   This Code shall regulate the design, installation, maintenance, alteration,
and inspection of mechanical systems. The provisions of this Mechanical Code
shall apply to:
   1.   New Construction.
      A.   Public or private mechanical installations as governed by this
Mechanical Code.
      B.   Detached one- and two- family dwellings and multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories high with separate means of
egress and their accessory structures shall comply with Chapters 12-24 of the
International Residential Code, 2021 edition.
   2.   Existing Buildings.
      A.   Additions to, alterations of, and repairs to existing mechanical
systems, if covered by this Mechanical Code. The Construction Services
Administrator may, when such additions, alterations, or repairs are made, order
other reasonable additions or alterations to the mechanical systems on a
premises when a danger to life or property may result if such other additions
or alterations were not made.
      B.   Detached one- and two- family dwellings and multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories high with separate means of
egress and their accessory structures shall comply with Chapters 12-24 of the
International Residential Code, 2021 edition.
      C.   Installations, which were in compliance with the Mechanical Code in
existence at the time such installations were made, shall be presumed to be
safe and proper, which presumption can be rebutted by evidence that the
installation may be dangerous to life or property.
      D.   If the classification of a building has been changed due to a change
in occupancy, the mechanical systems in the entire building shall comply with
all the mechanical standards applicable to the new classification. If the
occupancy of a building has been changed to a mixed occupancy, with the
required fire separation between the mixed occupancy, each occupancy shall
comply with its own particular classification and shall have mechanical systems
installed in compliance with the mechanical standards of its particular
classification.
10-5-7 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The applicant for any permit under this Code, by making such application,
assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property whatsoever, and
injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and
expenses incident thereto, however arising from, or in connection with, or
related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything thereunder, or
the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such
applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code or any
other ordinance of the City; and such applicant, by making such application,
forever indemnifies the City, its officers, and employees and agrees to save it
and them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits, or liability
whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason
of the foregoing even though acts or omissions of the City, its officers, or
employees may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions
shall be deemed to be a part of any permit issued under this Code whether
expressly recited therein or not.
10-5-8 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES.
   1.   Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, install,
add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any mechanical system or part thereof,
of which is regulated by this Mechanical Code, or to cause any such work to be
done, shall not do so without first securing a permit from the Community
Development Department.
   2.   Issuance. After proper application on forms provided by the Community
Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of the property
owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the State Division of Labor
Services, according to their rules and standards. The property owner or
authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the registration
shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not transferable. No
permits shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation who has fees
outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any ordinance of the City.
   3.   Fees. There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit
fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved, from time to time, by the Council. Fees on all
buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government or nonprofit
organization may be waived by the Council. No fees shall be collected on
buildings or structures constructed by or for the City.
   4.   Expiration.
      A.   Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire
by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit
is not commenced within 90 days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if
the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after
the work is commenced for a period of 60 days. Expired permits are subject to
permit re-issuance fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      B.   All permits shall expire after 365 days unless an extension is
requested in writing to the Construction Services Administrator 14 days prior
to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may
refuse any extension, but shall do so in writing within seven days of receipt
of the extension request. Expired permits are subject to permit re-issuance
fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      C.   In addition, any time work is suspended or abandoned for more than
10 days, the permit shall expire due to neglect, if the site is not properly
secured, including:
         (1)   Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that
makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
         (2)   A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement
foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
         (3)   Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help
prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be
given to proximity of the construction site, as described in Chapter 11 of this
title.
   5.   Revocation. Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be
summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the violation
of any provision of this Code.
   6.   Outstanding Permits. If a permit is outstanding on the effective date
hereof, the provisions of this chapter and the International Mechanical Code,
2021 edition, and International Residential Code Chapters 12-24, 2021 edition,
adopted hereby, shall apply to the work authorized by such permit, except to
the extent that the Construction Services Administrator shall determine that
the application of such provisions to said work would be unreasonable. The
burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to show the unreasonableness of
such provisions.
   7.   Work without Permit. If any repairs, additions, alterations, or
demolitions to any building or portions of any mechanical system, which is
regulated by this Code, the work having been completed without first obtaining
a permit, the owner shall have the responsibility to certify that the work has
been completed in accordance with the applicable codes. The Construction
Services Administrator shall determine the appropriate level of special
inspection necessary to ensure that the work was completed in accordance with
the applicable codes. Special inspections shall be performed by an approved
mechanical inspector who is qualified or licensed to inspect work similar to
that which is being performed. Work without a permit, other than minor work
initiated for plan execution, will be subject to fees as set forth in the
adopted fee schedule.
10-5-9 MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall engage or represent
themselves to the public as engaging in the activity or business of installing,
altering, or repairing any mechanical systems or apparatus for which permits
are required by this Mechanical Code, unless such person shall have first
obtained from the State Department of Health, a mechanical license, as provided
for in Chapter 105 of the Code of Iowa.
10-5-10 INSTALLATION BY OWNER.
   Homeowners who qualify for the homestead tax exemption may acquire permits
for their principal residence for remodel mechanical work if such residence is
an existing dwelling rather than new construction, and is not larger than a
single-family dwelling. The Construction Services Administrator may require the
homeowner to pass a mechanical exam as they see fit.
10-5-11 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   For the purposes of this Code, the Construction Services Administrator may
also be referred to as the Building Official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the
Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons
may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction Services
Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise discharging their
official duties, the Construction Services Administrator, or an appointed
assistant or agent, shall have the right to enter, at any time, any building,
area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having
charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of the Construction
Services Administrator, any structure is suspected of being, or found to be,
defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the premises shall be in
such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers or
the general public, the Construction Services Administrator shall at once order
the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition.
10-5-12 INSPECTION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal,
or cause to be covered or concealed, any new construction, electrical,
plumbing, or mechanical systems or apparatus for which a permit has been
issued, until such new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
systems or apparatus have been inspected and approved as required by this Code.
The Construction Services Administrator shall have authority to remove or cause
the removal of any obstructions which may prevent the proper inspection of new
construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical systems or apparatus. Upon
the completion of the new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
systems or apparatus in any building, it shall be the duty of the company,
firm, or individual doing the same to notify the Construction Services
Administrator, who shall inspect the same on receipt of such notice for
conformance to the provisions of this Code. Certificates of Occupancy shall not
be issued unless the new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
systems or apparatus are in conformity with the rules and regulations set forth
in this Code.
10-5-13 STOP WORK ORDER.
   1.   Authority. Whenever the Construction Services Administrator finds any
work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to the
provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Construction Services
Administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
   2.   Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the
reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property
involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other
persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
   3.   Unlawful Continuance. Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work
shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premise shall be limited to the removal or correction of the
violation or unsafe condition.
10-5-14 DELETIONS.
   The following are deleted from the International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2021
edition, and International Residential Code Chapters 12-24, 2021 edition, and
are of no force or effect in this chapter:
   1.   IMC Sections.
      A.   103.3   Deputies
      B.   104.5   Identification
      C.   106.1.1   Annual Permit
      D.   106.1.2   Annual Permit Records
      E.   106.3.2   Time Limitation of Application
      F.   106.4.3   Permits: Expiration
      G.   106.4.4   Permits: Extensions
      H.   106.4.7   Posting of Permit
      I.   109   Fees
      J.   113   Means of Appeal
      K.   114   Board of Appeals
      L.   504.9.4.2   Manufacturer’s Instructions
      M.   504.9.5   Length Identification
   2.   IRC Sections.
      A.   M1502.4.5.2   Manufacturer’s Instructions
      B.   M1502.4.6   Length Identification
      C.   G2439.7   Domestic Clothes Dryer Exhaust Ducts
10-5-15 AMENDMENTS.
   The paragraphs in this section represent amendments to the requirements
contained in the International Mechanical Code, 2021 edition, and the
International Residential Code, Chapters 12-24, 2021 edition.
   1.   Delete all references to the “International Plumbing Code” and insert
in lieu thereof:
      A.   Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Iowa
   2.   Delete all reference to the electrical provisions of the International
Residential Code, 2021 edition, and insert in lieu thereof:
      A.   National Electrical Code, as adopted by the State of Iowa.
   3.   Section 504.9.2 Duct Installation. Delete this section and insert the
following in lieu thereof:
      A.   Exhaust ducts shall be supported at intervals not to exceed four
feet, and shall be secured in place. The insert end of the duct shall extend
into the adjoining duct or fitting in the direction of airflow. Exhaust duct
joints shall be sealed in accordance with Section 603.9 and shall be
mechanically fastened. Ducts shall not be joined with screws or similar
fasteners. Where dryer exhaust ducts are enclosed in a wall or ceiling
cavities, such cavities shall be of sufficient size to allow the installation
of the duct, without changing the configuration of the duct.
      B.   Exception. Dryer duct sections that are longer than four feet shall
be supported minimally every six feet.
   4.   Section IRC M1502.4.2 Duct Installation. Delete this section and insert
the following in lieu thereof:
      A.   Exhaust ducts shall be supported at intervals not to exceed four
feet, and shall be secured in place. The insert end of the duct shall extend
into the adjoining duct or fitting in the direction of airflow. Exhaust duct
joints shall be sealed in accordance with Section M1601.4.1 and shall be
mechanically fastened. Ducts shall not be joined with screws or similar
fasteners. Where dryer exhaust ducts are enclosed in a wall or ceiling
cavities, such cavities shall be of sufficient size to allow the installation
of the duct, without changing the configuration of the duct.
      B.   Exception. Dryer duct sections that are longer than four feet shall
be supported minimally every six feet.
   5.   Section 604.3 Coverings and Linings. Insert the following to the
existing text.
      A.   The use of air-inflated/encapsulated duct wrap to achieve required
R-values shall be prohibited.
   6.   Section IRC M1601.3 Duct Insulation Materials. Add the following:
      A.   5. The use of air-inflated/encapsulated duct wrap to achieve
required R-values shall be prohibited.
   7.   Section 603.1 General. Add the following to the existing text.
      A.   Air plenums and ducts located in the floor and wall cavities shall
be separated from unconditioned spaces by construction with sufficient
insulation to meet Energy Code requirements. The areas include, but are not
limited to, exterior walls, cantilevered floors, and floors above garages.
   8.   Section IRC M1601.4 Installations. Add the following subsection:
      A.   Section IRC M1601.4.11 Air Plenum and Duct Separation.
         (1)   Air plenums and ducts located in the floor and wall cavities
shall be separated from unconditioned spaces by construction with sufficient
insulation to meet Energy Code requirements. The areas include, but are not
limited to, exterior walls, cantilevered floors, and floors above garages.
   9.   Add section 602.5: Return Air Separation.
      A.   Return air openings shall be located a minimum of four feet,
measured in any direction, from a supply air diffuser.
   10.   Section IRC M1602. Return Air. Add the following subsection.
      A.   Section IRC M1602.3 Return Air Separation.
         (1)   Return air openings shall be located a minimum of four feet,
measured in any direction, from a supply air diffuser.
   11.   Section IRC G2414.5.4 Corrugated Stainless-Steel Tubing (CSST). Delete
this section and replace with the following:
      A.   Arc resistant corrugated stainless steel tubing shall be listed in
accordance with ANSI LC1 (Optional Section 5.16)/CSA 6.26.
   12.   Section IRC G2415.2 CSST.
      Delete this section and replace with the following:
      A.   Only CSST with an Arc Resistant Jacket or Covering System listed in
accordance with ANSI LC1 (Optional Section 5.16)/CSA 6.26-2016 shall be
installed in accordance with the terms of its approval, the conditions of
listing, the manufacturer’s instructions and this Code including electrical
bonding requirements in Section G2411. CSST shall not be used for through-wall
penetrations from the point of delivery of the gas supply to the inside of the
structure. CSST shall not be installed in locations where subject to physical
damage unless protected in an approved manner.
10-5-16 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the International
Mechanical Code, 2021 edition, or International Residential Code Chapters 12-
24, 2021 edition, adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict with a provision
of the Code of Iowa, or a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or
health ordinance or code of the City, the provision which establishes the
higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of
the people shall prevail.
10-5-17 SITE MAINTENANCE.
   1.   It shall be the permit holder’s responsibility to inspect the
construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of
excess debris. In no case shall debris, refuse, or junk be permitted to blow,
drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
   2.   Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for
controlling erosion on-site throughout the duration of the construction
project. Erosion control shall be managed in accordance with Chapter 11 of this
title.
10-5-18 STREET PROTECTION.
   No person performing construction of any nature or furnishing materials, or
performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street
curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
10-5-19 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any
of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in
Title 1 Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks court
intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may
seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions
as necessary to prevent or remedy violations.
10-5-20 APPEALS.
   Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as described in
Title 2 Chapter 2 of this Code.
CHAPTER 6
FUEL GAS CODE
10-6-1 Short Title                               10-6-11 Inspection
10-6-2 Purpose                                   10-6-12 Stop Work Order
10-6-3 Warning                                   10-6-13 Deletions
10-6-4 Interpretation                            10-6-14 Amendments
10-6-5 Adoption                                  10-6-15 Conflicting Provisions
10-6-6 Scope                                     10-6-16 Site Maintenance
10-6-7 Indemnification                           10-6-17 Street Protection
10-6-8 Permit Requirements, Conditions, and Fees 10-6-18 Violations
10-6-9 Plumbing or Mechanical Contractor’s     10-6-19 Appeals
License
10-6-10 Building Official                         
 
10-6-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Clive Fuel Gas Code, and may be cited as
such, and may also be known, referred to, and cited as the “Fuel Gas Code.”
10-6-2 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders,
contractors, property owners, their agents, and others to meet their
responsibilities with respect to proper fuel gas installation, material
selection, installation methods, and premises safety, and to provide for
inspection as a means of compelling compliance therewith. It is not the purpose
of this chapter to create any duty on the part of the City, its officers,
agents, or employees, owing to any individual member of the public or to
protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is
not the intent of this chapter to create any duty or liability by the City, its
officers, agents, or employees, to premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any
other person.
10-6-3 WARNING.
   No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed,
or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter as indicating the safety of or
quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter, nor
inspections made pursuant thereto, nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises
or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in the risk
associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a
premise has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in any way
constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises.
10-6-4 INTERPRETATION.
   The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take
precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the
International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, or the International Residential
Code Chapter 24, 2018 edition, adopted herein.
10-6-5 ADOPTION.
   Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the
International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 edition, and International Residential Code
Chapter 24, 2021 edition, published by the International Code Council Inc., are
adopted in full except for such portions as may be hereinafter deleted,
modified, or amended, and shall constitute the “Fuel Gas Code of the City of
Clive, Iowa.” The use of the term “Fuel Gas Code” in this chapter shall be
interpreted to refer to the International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 edition, and
International Residential Code Chapter 24, 2021 edition. An official copy of
the International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 edition, and International Residential
Code Chapter 24, 2021 edition, as adopted, and a certified copy of this
chapter, can be viewed in the Community Development Department.
10-6-6 SCOPE.
   This Code shall regulate the design, installation, maintenance, alteration,
and inspection of fuel gas systems. The provisions of this Fuel Gas Code shall
apply to:
   1.   New Construction.
      A.   Public or private mechanical installations as governed by this Fuel
Gas Code.
      B.   Detached one- and two- family dwellings and multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories high with separate means of
egress and their accessory structures shall comply with Chapter 24 of the
International Residential Code, 2021 edition.
   2.   Existing Buildings.
      A.   Additions to, alterations of, and repairs to existing fuel gas
systems, if covered by this Fuel Gas Code. The Construction Services
Administrator may, when such additions, alterations, or repairs are made, order
other reasonable additions or alterations to the fuel gas systems on a premises
when a danger to life or property may result if such other additions or
alterations were not made.
      B.   Detached one- and two- family dwellings and multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories high with separate means of
egress and their accessory structures shall comply with Chapter 24 of the
International Residential Code, 2021 edition.
      C.   Installations, which were in compliance with the Fuel Gas Code in
existence at the time such installations were made, shall be presumed to be
safe and proper, which presumption can be rebutted by evidence that the
installation may be dangerous to life or property.
      D.   If the classification of a building has been changed due to a change
in occupancy, the fuel gas systems in the entire building shall comply with all
the fuel gas standards applicable to the new classification. If the occupancy
of a building has been changed to a mixed occupancy, with the required fire
separation between the mixed occupancy, each occupancy shall comply with its
own particular classification and shall have fuel gas systems installed in
compliance with the fuel gas standards of its particular classification.
10-6-7 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The applicant for any permit under this Code, by making such application,
assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property whatsoever, and
injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and
expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in connection with, or
related to the issuance of such permit, or the doing of anything thereunder, or
the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such
applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code or any
other ordinance of the City; and such applicant, by making such application,
forever indemnifies the City, its officers and employees and agrees to save it
and them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits, or liability
whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason
of the foregoing even though acts or omissions of the City, its officers or
employees may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions
shall be deemed to be a part of any permit issued under this Code whether
expressly recited therein or not.
10-6-8 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES.
   1.   Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, install,
add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any fuel gas system or part thereof, of
which is regulated by this Fuel Gas Code, or to cause any such work to be done,
shall not do so without first securing a permit from the Community Development
Department.
   2.   Issuance. After proper application on forms provided by the Community
Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of the property
owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the State Division of Labor
Services, according to their rules and standards. The property owner or
authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the registration
shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not transferable. No
permits shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation who has fees
outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any ordinance of the City.
   3.   Fees. There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit
fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved, from time to time by the Council. Fees on all
buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government or nonprofit
organization may be waived by the Council. No fees shall be collected on
buildings or structures constructed by or for the City.
   4.   Expiration.
      A.   Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire
by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit
is not commenced within 90 days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if
the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after
the work is commenced for a period of 60 days. Expired permits are subject to
permit re-issuance fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      B.   All permits shall expire after 365 days unless an extension is
requested in writing to the Construction Services Administrator 14 days prior
to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may
refuse any extension, but shall do so in writing within seven days of receipt
of the extension request. Expired permits are subject to permit re-issuance
fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      C.   In addition, any time work is suspended or abandoned for more than
10 days, the permit shall expire due to neglect, if the site is not properly
secured, including:
         (1)   Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that
makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
         (2)   A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement
foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
         (3)   Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help
prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be
given to proximity of the construction site, as described in Chapter 11 of this
title.
   5.   Revocation. Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be
summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the violation
of any provision of this Code.
   6.   Outstanding Permits. If a permit is outstanding on the effective date
hereof, the provisions of this chapter and the International Fuel Gas Code,
2021 edition, and International Residential Code chapter 24, 2021 edition,
adopted hereby, shall apply to the work authorized by such permit, except to
the extent that the Construction Services Administrator shall determine that
the application of such provisions to said work would be unreasonable. The
burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to show the unreasonableness of
such provisions.
   7.   Work without Permit. If any repairs, additions, alterations, or
demolitions to any building or portions of any fuel gas system, which is
regulated by this Code, the work having been completed without first obtaining
a permit, the owner shall have the responsibility to certify that the work has
been completed in accordance with the applicable codes. The Construction
Services Administrator shall determine the appropriate level of special
inspection necessary to ensure that the work was completed in accordance with
the applicable codes. Special inspections shall be performed by an approved
fuel gas inspector who is qualified or licensed to inspect work similar to that
which is being performed. Work without a permit, other than minor work
initiated for plan execution, will be subject to fees as set forth in the
adopted fee schedule.
10-6-9 PLUMBING OR MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR’S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall engage or represent
themselves to the public as engaging in the activity or business of installing,
altering, or repairing any fuel gas system or apparatus for which permits are
required by this Code, unless such person shall have first obtained from the
State Department of Health, a plumbing or mechanical license, as provided for
in Chapter 105 of the Code of Iowa.
10-6-10 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   For the purposes of this Code, the Construction Services Administrator may
also be referred to as the Building Official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the
Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons
may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction Services
Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise discharging their
official duties, the Construction Services Administrator or an appointed
assistant or agent, shall have the right to enter, at any time, any building,
area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having
charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of the Construction
Services Administrator, any structure is suspected of being or found to be
defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the premises shall be in
such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers or
the general public, the Construction Services Administrator shall at once order
the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition.
10-6-11 INSPECTION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal,
or cause to be covered or concealed, any new construction, electrical,
plumbing, mechanical, or fuel gas system or apparatus for which a permit has
been issued, until such new construction, electrical, plumbing, mechanical,
fuel gas system, or apparatus have been inspected and approved as required by
this Code. The Construction Services Administrator shall have authority to
remove, or cause the removal of, any obstructions which may prevent the proper
inspection of new construction, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or fuel gas
system or apparatus. Upon the completion of the new construction, electrical,
plumbing, mechanical, or fuel gas system or apparatus in any building, it shall
be the duty of the company, firm, or individual doing the same to notify the
Construction Services Administrator, who shall inspect the same on receipt of
such notice for conformance to the provisions of this Code. Certificates of
Occupancy shall not be issued unless the new construction, electrical,
plumbing, mechanical, or fuel gas system or apparatus are in conformity with
the rules and regulations set forth in this Code.
10-6-12 STOP WORK ORDER.
   1.   Authority. Whenever the Construction Services Administrator finds any
work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to the
provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Construction Services
Administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
   2.   Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the
reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property
involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other
persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
   3.   Unlawful Continuance. Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work
shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premise shall be limited to the removal or correction of the
violation or unsafe condition.
10-6-13 DELETION.
   The following are deleted from the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2021
edition, and IRC Chapter 24, 2021 edition, and are of no force or effect in
this chapter:
   1.   IFGC Sections:
      A.   103.3   Deputies
      B.   104.5   Identification
      C.   106.1.1   Annual Permit
      D.   106.1.2   Annual Permit Records
      E.   106.3.1   Time Limitation of Application
      F.   106.5.3   Permits: Expiration
      G.   106.5.4   Permits: Extensions
      H.   106.5.7   Posting of Permit
      I.   109   Fees
      J.   113   Means of Appeal
      K.   114   Board of Appeals
      L.   614.9.4.2   Manufacturer’s Instructions
      M.   614.9.5   Length Identification
10-6-14 AMENDMENTS.
   The paragraphs in this section represent amendments to the requirements
contained in the International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 edition, and the
International Residential Code, Chapter 24, 2021 edition.
   1.   Delete all references to the “International Plumbing Code” and insert
in lieu thereof:
      A.   Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State.
   2.   Delete all reference to the electrical provisions of the International
Residential Code, 2021 edition, and insert in lieu thereof:
      A.   National Electrical Code, as adopted by the State.
   3.   Section 403.4.5 Corrugated Stainless-Steel Tubing (CSST). Delete this
section and replace with the following:
      A.   Arc resistant corrugated stainless-steel tubing shall be listed in
accordance with ANSI LC1 (Optional Section 5.16)/CSA 6.26.
   4.   Section IRC G2414.4.4 Corrugated Stainless-Steel Tubing (CSST). Delete
this section and replace with the following:
      A.   Arc resistant corrugated stainless-steel tubing shall be listed in
accordance with ANSI LC1 (Optional Section 5.16)/CSA 6.26.
   5.   Section 404.2 CSST.
   Delete this section and replace with the following:
      A.   Only CSST with an Arc Resistant Jacket or Covering System listed in
accordance with ANSI LC1 (Optional Section 5.16)/CSA 6.26-2016 shall be
installed in accordance with the terms of its approval, the conditions of
listing, the manufacturer’s instructions, and this Code, including electrical
bonding requirements in Section 310. CSST shall not be used for through-wall
penetrations from the point of delivery of the gas supply to the inside of the
structure. CSST shall not be installed in locations where subject to physical
damage unless protected in an approved manner.
   6.   Section IRC 2415.2 CSST.
   Delete this section and replace with the following:
      A.   Only CSST with an Arc Resistant Jacket or Covering System listed in
accordance with ANSI LC1 (Optional Section 5.16)/CSA 6.26-2016 shall be
installed in accordance with the terms of its approval, the conditions of
listing, the manufacturer’s instructions, and this Code, including electrical
bonding requirements in Section G2411. CSST shall not be used for through-wall
penetrations from the point of delivery of the gas supply to the inside of the
structure. CSST shall not be installed in locations where subject to physical
damage unless protected in an approved manner.
   7.   Section 614.9.2 Duct Installation. Delete this section and insert the
following in lieu thereof:
      A.   Exhaust ducts shall be supported at intervals not to exceed four
feet and shall be secured in place. The insert end of the duct shall extend
into the adjoining duct or fitting in the direction of airflow. Exhaust duct
joints shall be sealed in accordance with Section 603.9 of the 2021
International Mechanical Code, and shall be mechanically fastened. Ducts shall
not be joined with screws or similar fasteners. Where dryer exhaust ducts are
enclosed in a wall or ceiling cavities, such cavities shall be of sufficient
size to allow the installation of the duct, without changing the configuration
of the duct.
      B.   Exception. Dryer duct sections that are longer than four feet shall
be supported minimally every six feet.
   8.   Section G2439.7.2 Duct Installation. Delete this section and insert the
following in lieu thereof:
      A.   Exhaust ducts shall be supported at intervals not to exceed four
feet and shall be secured in place. The insert end of the duct shall extend
into the adjoining duct or fitting in the direction of airflow. Exhaust duct
joints shall be sealed in accordance with Section M1601.4.1 and shall be
mechanically fastened. Ducts shall not be joined with screws or similar
fasteners. Where dryer exhaust ducts are enclosed in a wall or ceiling
cavities, such cavities shall be of sufficient size to allow the installation
of the duct, without changing the configuration of the duct.
      B.   Exception. Dryer duct sections that are longer than four feet shall
be supported minimally every six feet.
10-6-15 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the International Fuel
Gas Code, 2021 edition, or International Residential Code, Chapter 24, 2021
edition, adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict with a provision of the
Code of Iowa, or a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health
ordinance or Code of the City, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
people shall prevail.
10-6-16 SITE MAINTENANCE.
   1.   It shall be the permit holder’s responsibility to inspect the
construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of
excess debris. In no case shall debris, refuse, or junk be permitted to blow,
drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
   2.   Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for
controlling erosion on-site throughout the duration of the construction
project. Erosion control shall be managed in accordance with Chapter 11 of this
title.
10-6-17 STREET PROTECTION.
   No person performing construction of any nature, or furnishing materials, or
performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street
curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
10-6-18 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any
of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in
Title 1 Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks court
intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may
seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions
as necessary to prevent or remedy violations.
10-6-19 APPEALS.
   Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as described in
Title 2 Chapter 2 of this Code.
CHAPTER 7
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
10-7-1 Short Title                               10-7-10 Inspection
10-7-2 Purpose                                   10-7-11 Stop Work Order
10-7-3 Warning                                   10-7-12 Deletions
10-7-4 Interpretation                            10-7-13 Amendments
10-7-5 Adoption                                  10-7-14 Conflicting Provisions
10-7-6 Scope                                     10-7-15 Site Maintenance
10-7-7 Indemnification                           10-7-16 Street Protection
10-7-8 Permit Requirements, Conditions, and Fees 10-7-17 Violations
10-7-9 Building Official                         10-7-18 Appeals
 
10-7-1 SHORT TITLE.
   The chapter shall be known as the Clive Existing Building Code and may be
cited as such, and may also be known, referred to, and cited as the “Existing
Building Code.”
10-7-2 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders,
contractors, property owners, their agents, and others, to meet their
responsibilities with respect to proper construction, construction techniques,
and premises safety and to provide for inspection as a means of compelling
compliance therewith. It is not the purpose of this chapter to create any duty
on the part of the City, its officers, agents, or employees, owing to any
individual member of the public or to protect any particular or circumscribed
class of persons. Specifically, it is not the intent of this chapter to create
any duty or liability by the City, its officers, agents, or employees, to
premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any other person.
10-7-3 WARNING.
   No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed,
or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter, as indicating the safety of or
quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter, nor
inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises
or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in the risk
associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a
premise has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not, in any way,
constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises.
10-7-4 INTERPRETATION.
   The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take
precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the
International Existing Building Code, 2021 edition, adopted herein.
10-7-5 ADOPTION.
   Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the
International Existing Building Code, 2021 edition, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is adopted in full except for such portions
as may be hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, and shall constitute the
“Existing Building Code of the City of Clive, Iowa,” to regulate the erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition,
conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of
structures in the City, and the same are, by this reference, incorporated
herein as fully and completely as if set forth in full. The use of the term
IEBC in this chapter shall be interpreted to refer to the International
Existing Building Code, 2021 edition. An official copy of the International
Existing Building Code, 2021 edition, as adopted, and a certified copy of this
chapter can be viewed in the Community Development Department.
10-7-6 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this Code shall apply to:
   1.   Existing Buildings.
      A.   Additions to, alterations of, relocations of, and repairs to
existing buildings, if covered by this Code. The Construction Services
Administrator may, when such additions, alterations, relocations, or repairs
are made, order other reasonable additions or alterations in a building,
structure, or on a premises when a danger to life or property may result if
such other additions or alterations were not made. In addition to the Code
requirements of this Existing Building Code, the construction requirements for
existing buildings identified in the International Fire Code, Chapter 11, shall
also apply.
      B.   Installations, which were in compliance with the Code in existence
at the time such installations were made, shall be presumed to be safe and
proper, which presumption can be rebutted by evidence that the installation may
be dangerous to life or property.
      C.   If the classification of a building has been changed due to a change
in occupancy, the entire building shall comply with all the building standards
applicable to the new classification. If the occupancy of a building has been
changed to a mixed occupancy, with the required fire separation between the
mixed occupancy, each occupancy thereof shall comply with its own particular
classification.
   2.   Conversion to Condominium or Multiple Housing Cooperative.
      A.   The conversion of any building or portion thereof to a horizontal
property regime or to a multiple housing cooperative shall be treated as a
change of occupancy classification for the building.
      B.   Any person or entity seeking to establish a horizontal property
regime or multiple housing cooperative by establishing a horizontal property
regime pursuant to Chapter 499B of the Code of Iowa, or by establishing a
multiple housing cooperative pursuant to Chapter 499A of the Code of Iowa,
shall establish and document compliance with the following, by filing and
obtaining approval from the Community Development Department of the development
application defined in Subsection 2C of this section:
         (1)   That all materials, manner, and means of construction in the
proposed building meet current codes for new residential construction including
current fire, building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, energy conservation,
and post construction stormwater management codes.
         (2)   That the building and site meet all requirements of the zoning
ordinance that would be required for new residential construction.
         (3)   That the building and site meet all requirements for handicapped
accessibility that would be required for new residential construction.
         (4)   That separate utility services, with separate metering, be
provided to each dwelling unit that would be required for new residential
construction.
      C.   At least 60 days before a declaration or other instrument
establishing a horizontal property regime pursuant to Chapter 499B of the Code
of Iowa, or establishing a multiple housing cooperative pursuant to Chapter
499A of the Code of Iowa (“declaration”) is to be recorded in the office of the
County Recorder, any person or entity shall file a development application for
approval with the Community Development Department. In addition to the
development application, the applicant shall file the following:
         (1)   A site plan, building plans, and code analysis demonstrating
compliance with the provisions addressed above.
         (2)   A copy of the declaration or other instrument consistent with
Chapters 499A or 499B of the Code of Iowa.
      D.   The declaration shall not be recorded unless a Certificate of
Occupancy for the proposed building has been issued by the City.
10-7-7 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The applicant for any permit under this Building Code, by making such
application, assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property
whatsoever, and injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from, or in
connection with, or related to the issuance of such permit, or the doing of
anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents,
employees, or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the
provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the City; and such applicant,
by making such application, forever indemnifies the City, its officers, and
employees and agrees to save it and them harmless from any and all claims,
demands, lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or
death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even though acts or
omissions of the City, its officers or employees may have caused or contributed
thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be a part of any permit
issued under this Building Code whether expressly recited therein or not.
10-7-8 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES.
   1.   Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, add to,
alter, relocate, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or to repair,
install, add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas,
mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this
Building Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall not do so without
first securing a permit from the Community Development Department.
   2.   Issuance. After proper application on forms provided by the Community
Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of the property
owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the State Division of Labor
Services, according to their rules and standards. The property owner or
authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the registration
shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not transferable. No
permits shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation who has fees
outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any ordinance of the City.
   3.   Fees. There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit
fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved, from time to time, by the Council. Fees on all
buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government or nonprofit
organization may be waived by the Council. No fees shall be collected on
buildings or structures constructed by or for the City.
   4.   Expiration.
      A.   Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire
by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit
is not commenced within 90 days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if
the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after
the work is commenced for a period of 60 days. Expired permits are subject to
permit re-issuance fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      B.   All permits shall expire after 365 days unless an extension is
requested in writing to the Construction Services Administrator 14 days prior
to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may
refuse any extension, but shall do so in writing within seven days of receipt
of the extension request. Expired permits are subject to permit re-issuance
fees as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
      C.   In addition, any time work is suspended or abandoned for more than
10 days, the permit shall expire due to neglect, if the site is not properly
secured, including:
         (1)   Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that
makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
         (2)   A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement
foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
         (3)   Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help
prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be
given to proximity of the construction site, as described in Chapter 11 of this
title.
      D.   Revocation. Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may
be summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the
violation of any provision of this Code.
      E.   Outstanding Permits. If a permit is outstanding on the effective
date hereof, the provisions of this chapter, the International Existing
Building Code, 2021 edition, adopted hereby, shall apply to the work authorized
by such permit, except to the extent that the Construction Services
Administrator shall determine that the application of such provisions to said
work would be unreasonable. The burden shall be upon the holder of such permit
to show the unreasonableness of such provisions.
      F.   Work without Permit. If any repairs, additions, alterations, or
demolitions to any building or portions of any building or any electrical, gas,
mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this
Code, the work having been completed without first obtaining a permit, the
owner shall have the responsibility to certify that the work has been completed
in accordance with the applicable codes. The Construction Services
Administrator shall determine the appropriate level of special inspection
necessary to ensure that the work was completed in accordance with the
applicable codes. Special inspections shall be performed by an approved
building inspector who is qualified or licensed to inspect work similar to that
which is being performed. Work without a permit, other than minor work
initiated for plan execution, will be subject to fees as set forth in the
adopted fee schedule. Work without a permit, other than minor work initiated
for plan execution, will be subject to fees as set forth in the adopted fee
schedule.
10-7-9 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   For the purposes of this Code, the Construction Services Administrator may
also be referred to as the Building Official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the
Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons
may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction Services
Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise discharging their
official duties, the Construction Services Administrator, or an appointed
assistant or agent, shall have the right to enter at any time any building,
area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having
charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of the Construction
Services Administrator, any structure is suspected of being, or found to be,
defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the premises shall be in
such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers or
the general public, the Construction Services Administrator shall at once order
the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition.
10-7-10 INSPECTION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal,
or cause to be covered or concealed, any new construction, electrical,
plumbing, or mechanical systems or apparatus for which a permit has been
issued, until such new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
systems or apparatus have been inspected and approved as required by this Code.
The Construction Services Administrator shall have authority to remove or cause
the removal of any obstructions which may prevent the proper inspection of new
construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical systems or apparatus. Upon
the completion of the new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
systems or apparatus in any building, it shall be the duty of the company,
firm, or individual doing the same to notify the Construction Services
Administrator, who shall inspect the same on receipt of such notice for
conformance to the provisions of this Code. Certificates of Occupancy shall not
be issued unless the new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
systems or apparatus are in conformity with the rules and regulations set forth
in this Code.
10-7-11 STOP WORK ORDER.
   1.   Authority. Whenever the Construction Services Administrator finds any
work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to the
provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Construction Services
Administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
   2.   Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the
reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property
involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other
persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
   3.   Unlawful Continuance. Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work
shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premise shall be limited to the removal or correction of the
violation or unsafe condition.
10-7-12 DELETIONS.
   The following are deleted from the Existing Building Code, 2021 Edition,
(hereinafter known as the IEBC), and are of no force or affect in this chapter:
   1.   101.1      Title
   2.   101.2      Scope
   3.   103.0      Code Compliance Agency
   4.   105.1.1   Annual Permit
   5.   105.1.2   Annual Permit Records
   6.   105.3.2   Time Limitation of Application
   7.   105.5      Expiration
   8.   105.7      Placement of Permit
   9.   108.0      Fees
   10.   109.3.5   Lath or Gypsum Board Inspection
   11.   112.0      Means of Appeals
10-7-13 AMENDMENTS.
   The paragraphs in this section represent amendments to the requirements
contained in the International Existing Building Code, 2021 edition.
   1.   Section 105.2 Work Exempt from Permit. Delete item number 1 and add the
following in lieu thereof:
      A.   Private sidewalks and driveways
   2.   Section 303 Storm Shelters. Delete this section and insert the
following code sections and language.
      A.   Section 303.2 Additions to Group E Occupancy. Where an addition is
added to an existing Group E occupancy located in an area where the shelter
design wind speed for tornadoes is 250 mph in accordance with Figure 304.2 (1)
of ICC 500, and the program occupant load of the addition is 50 or more, the
addition shall have a storm shelter constructed in accordance with Chapters 1
through 5 and 8 of ICC 500.
      B.   For the purposes of this section, the installation of portable
buildings for utilization on the campus or site for educational purposes shall
be considered as an addition.
      C.   Exceptions.
         (1)   Group E daycare facilities
         (2)   Group E occupancies accessory to place of religious worship
         (3)   Additions meeting the requirements for shelter design in ICC 500
         (4)   Accessory structures to existing Group E sites where the
occupancy classification of said structures are classified as Groups A-5 and U.
      D.   The aggregate area of all additions within a 10-year period shall be
factored when determining the requirements of this section.
   3.   Section 303.2.1 Required Occupant Capacity. The required occupant
capacity of the storm shelter shall include all buildings classified as a Group
E occupancy on the campus or site, (whichever is larger) and shall be the
greater of the following:
      A.   The total occupant load of the classrooms, vocational rooms, and
offices in the Group E occupancy.
      B.   The occupant load of any indoor assembly space that is associated
with the group E occupancy.
      C.   Exceptions:
         (1)   Where an addition is being added on an existing Group E site,
and where the addition is not of sufficient size to accommodate the required
occupant capacity of the storm shelter for all of the buildings on site, the
storm shelter shall, at a minimum, accommodate the required capacity for the
addition.
         (2)   Where approved by the code official, the required occupant
capacity of the shelter shall be permitted to be reduced by the occupant
capacity of any existing storm shelters on the campus or site.
   4.   Section 303.2.2 Location. Storm shelters shall be located within the
buildings they serve or shall be located where the maximum distance of travel
from not fewer than one exterior door of each building to a door of the shelter
serving that building does not exceed 1,000 feet.
   5.   Section 303.2.3 Occupancy Classification. The occupancy classification
for storm shelters shall be determined in accordance with Section 423.3 of the
International Building Code.
   6.   Section 306.7 Alterations. Strike International Building Code, ICC
A117.1 and replace with International Building Code, 2009 ICC A117.1 and local
accessibility amendments identified in the 2021 Clive Building Code.
   7.   Section 502.6 Enhanced Classroom Acoustics. Delete the requirements of
this section; however, preserve language if enhanced classroom acoustics are
proposed.
   8.   Section 503.16 Enhanced Classroom Acoustics. Delete the requirements of
this section; however, preserve language if enhanced classroom acoustics are
proposed.
   9.   Section 505.3 Replacement Window for Emergency Escape and Rescue
Openings. Delete this section and insert the following language:
      A.   Where replacement windows are required to provide emergency escape
and rescue openings in Group R-2 and R-3 occupancies and one-and two-family
dwellings and townhouses regulated by the International Residential Code, these
replacement windows shall meet all the following conditions:
         (1)   Buildings built prior to January 1, 1972:
            a.   The replacement window is the manufacturer’s largest standard
size window that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening.
The replacement window is of the same operating style as the existing window or
a style that provides for an equal or greater window opening area than the
existing window.
            b.   The minimum net clear opening height shall be 20 inches and
the minimum net clear opening width shall be 20 inches.
            c.   In no case shall the replacement window provide less than four
point zero square feet of net clear opening.
            d.   The bottom of the clear opening of the replacement window
shall not be greater than 48 inches above the finished floor or Code approved
window platform.
      B.   Exception. Existing window openings that open directly to existing
finished grade level are allowed up to 52 inches above the finished floor or
Code approved window platform to accommodate existing taller foundations.
         (1)   Buildings built after January 1, 1972:
            a.   The replacement window is the manufacturer’s largest standard
size window that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening.
The replacement window is of the same operating style as the existing window or
a style that provides for an equal or greater window opening area than the
existing window.
            b.   In no case shall the measurement from the bottom of the window
opening to the finished floor and minimum net opening width and height
requirements be less than the Code applicable when the building was built.
   10.   Section 506.6 Enhanced Classroom Acoustics. Delete the requirements of
this section; however, preserve language if enhanced classroom acoustics are
proposed.
   11.   Section 702.5 Replacement Window for Emergency Escape and Rescue
Openings. Delete this section and insert the following language:
      A.   Where replacement windows are required to provide emergency escape
and rescue openings in Group R-2 and R-3 occupancies and one-and two-family
dwellings and townhouses regulated by the International Residential Code, these
replacement windows shall meet all the following conditions:
         (1)   Buildings built prior to January 1, 1972:
            a.   The replacement window is the manufacturer’s largest standard
size window that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening.
The replacement window is of the same operating style as the existing window or
a style that provides for an equal or greater window opening area than the
existing window.
            b.   The minimum net clear opening height shall be 20 inches and
the minimum net clear opening width shall be 20 inches.
            c.   In no case shall the replacement window provide less than four
point zero square feet of net clear opening.
            d.   The bottom of the clear opening of the replacement window
shall not be greater than 48 inches above the finished floor or Code approved
window platform.
      B.   Exception. Existing window openings that open directly to existing
finished grade level are allowed up to 52 inches above the finished floor or
Code approved window platform to accommodate existing taller foundations.
         (1)   Buildings built after January 1, 1972:
            a.   The replacement window is the manufacturer’s largest standard
size window that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening.
The replacement window is of the same operating style as the existing window or
a style that provides for an equal or greater window opening area than the
existing window.
            b.   In no case shall the measurement from the bottom of the window
opening to the finished floor and minimum net opening width and height
requirements be less than the Code applicable when the building was built.
   12.   Section 1011.5.6 Existing Emergency Escape and Rescue Openings. Delete
this section and insert the following language:
      A.   Where a change of occupancy would require an emergency escape and
rescue opening at locations identified within the International Building Code
or International Residential Code, existing operable windows serving as the
emergency escape and rescue opening shall meet all the following conditions:
         (1)   Buildings built prior to January 1, 1972:
            a.   The window is the manufacturer’s largest standard size window
that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening. The window
is of the same operating style as the existing window or a style that provides
for an equal or greater window opening area than the existing window.
            b.   The minimum net clear opening height shall be 20 inches and
the minimum net clear opening width shall be 20 inches.
            c.   In no case shall the window provide less than four point zero
square feet of net clear opening.
            d.   The bottom of the clear opening of the window shall not be
greater than 48 inches above the finished floor or Code approved window
platform.
      B.   Exception. Existing window openings that open directly to existing
finished grade level are allowed up to 52 inches above the finished floor or
Code approved window platform to accommodate existing taller foundations.
         (1)   Buildings built after January 1, 1972:
            a.   The window is the manufacturer’s largest standard size window
that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening. The window
is of the same operating style as the existing window or a style that provides
for an equal or greater window opening area than the existing window.
            b.   In no case shall the measurement from the bottom of the window
opening to the finished floor and minimum net opening width and height
requirements be less than the Code applicable when the building was built.
10-7-14 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the International
Existing Building Code, 2021 edition adopted hereby, are found to be in
conflict with a provision of the Code of Iowa, or a provision of any zoning,
building, fire, safety or health ordinance or Code of the City, the provision
which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people shall prevail.
10-7-15 SITE MAINTENANCE.
   1.   It shall be the permit holder’s responsibility to inspect the
construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of
excess debris. In no case shall debris, refuse, or junk be permitted to blow,
drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
   2.   Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for
controlling erosion on site throughout the duration of the construction
project. Erosion control shall be managed in accordance with Chapter 11 of this
title.
10-7-16 STREET PROTECTION.
   No person performing construction of any nature or furnishing materials, or
performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street
curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
10-7-17 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any
of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in
Title 1 Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks court
intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may
seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions
as necessary to prevent or remedy violations.
10-7-18 APPEALS.
   Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as described in
Title 2 Chapter 2 of this Code.
CHAPTER 8
FIRE CODE
 
10-8-1 Adoption of International Fire   10-8-7 Liability for Damages
Code
10-8-2 Duties of Fire Department        10-8-8 Outstanding Permits
10-8-3 Storage of Flammables; Districts 10-8-9 Indemnity
Established
10-8-4 Amendments to International Fire 10-8-10 Repeal of Conflicting Standards
Code
10-8-5 Appeals                          10-8-11 Violations; Penalties
10-8-6 New Materials, Processes, or     10-8-12 Fireworks
Occupancies; Permits
 
10-8-1 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   The International Fire Code (IFC), 2021 edition, recommended by the
participating communities of the Central Iowa Code Consortium, is hereby
adopted by the Council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from
the storage, handling, and use of hazardous substances, materials, and devices,
and from conditions hazardous to life and property in the occupancy of
buildings and premises in the City; providing for the issuance of permits for
hazardous use or operations; that a certain document known as the International
Fire Code, including Appendix, Chapters B, C, and D as published by the
International Fire Code Council, being particularly the 2021 editions thereof
and the whole thereof, save and except those portions as are hereinafter
deleted, modified, or amended by Section
10-8-4, one copy of the local amendments which have been and are now filed in
the office of the Clerk and one complete set of the International Fire Code,
2021 edition, to include local amendments filed in the fire administrative
offices, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully set out at
length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the
provision thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City
10-8-2 DUTIES OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The International Fire Code as adopted and amended herein shall be enforced
by the Fire Prevention Bureau of the City, which is hereby established and
which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire
Department.
10-8-3 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLES; DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   Establishment of limits and districts referred to and placed upon certain
sections of the International Fire Code, 2021 edition, are as follows:
   1.   The limits referred to in Section 5806.2, in which flammable cryogenic
fluids storage in stationary containers are prohibited, are hereby established
as follows: the entire City except M-1 Light Industrial and M-2 Heavy
Industrial District.
   2.   The limits that are placed on Chapter 57 in which outside aboveground
storage of flammable or combustible liquids is restricted are hereby
established as follows: the entire City except as allowed as a principal,
accessory, or conditional use in the M-1 Light Industrial District and M-
2 Heavy Industrial District. Exceptions:
      A.   An aggregate amount of 1,000 gallons or less may be stored above-
ground on a premises if used exclusively for heating fuel oil. A permit is
required and the proposed installation must be approved by the Code Official
prior to the issuance of a permit.
      B.   After July 1, 2005, any new above ground installations of Class I
liquids shall have an aggregate total of not more than 1,100 gallons; Class II
liquids shall have an aggregate total of not more than 5,000 gallons; and
storage of more than 1,100 gallons shall be restricted to an approved vaulted
tank above-ground where allowed as a principal, accessory, or conditional use
in the M-1 and M-2 Zoning Districts; or 10,000 gallons or less of Class I or
Class II liquids on construction sites, per legal lot or contiguous lots under
common ownership. A permit is required and the proposed installation must be
approved by the Code Official prior to the issuance of a permit.
      C.   After July 1, 2005, any new outside installation of a generator
shall be limited to a maximum of 1,500 gallons of Type II fuel in a NFPA/UL
compliant sub-base tank; quantities greater than 1,500 gallons, but less than
5,001 gallons of a Type II fuel shall be stored in an approved vaulted tank.
Exception: Fuel storage requirements for generator use only shall not be
limited to only M-1 and M2 Districts.
   3.   The limits that are placed on Chapter 57 in which new bulk plants and
terminals for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited, are hereby
established as follows: the entire City.
   4.   The limits that are placed on Section 6104.2 (seeSection
10-8-4, “Amendments to International Fire Code,” of this chapter) in which
storage of liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted are hereby established
as follows: the entire City.
   5.   The limits that are placed on Section 5601.1 in which storage of
explosives and blasting agents is to be restricted are hereby established as
follows: the entire City.
   6.   The limits that are placed on Section 5301.1 Exception 2, in which the
storage of compressed natural gas is prohibited, are hereby established as
follows: the entire City with the exception of M-1 and M-2 Districts.
10-8-4 AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   The International Fire Code is amended and changed in the following
respects.
   1.   Chapter 1 Section 101.1 Insert in Section 101.1 “the City of Clive.”
   2.   Section 103.1.1 Add section 103.1.1 Definitions.
      A.   Wherever the word “jurisdiction” is used in the International Fire
Code, it is the City of Clive, Iowa.
      B.   Where the party responsible for the enforcement of the International
Fire Code is given a title of “Fire Marshal”, and the following definition:
“Fire Marshal is the Code Official of the Fire Prevention Bureau” or a duly
authorized representative.
      C.   Whenever the words “Department of Fire Prevention” are used they
shall be held to mean “Fire Prevention Bureau.”
      D.   The word “shall” is mandatory, and the word “may” is permissive.
   3.   Section 112.4 Amend Section 112.4 Violation Penalties. 112.4 to read as
follows: Persons who shall violate a provision of this Code, or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, install,
alter, repair, or do work in violation of the approved construction documents
or directive of the Fire Code Official, or of a permit or certificate used
under the provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor crime
punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30
days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
   4.   Section 113.4 Amend Section 113.4 Failure to Comply. 113.4 to read as
follows: Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a
stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine as provided
for in Section
10-8-11.
      A.   Reinspection Fees
 
First reinspection          No charge
Second reinspection         $100.00
Third reinspection          $200.00
Fourth reinspection         $400.00
Fifth or more reinspections $800.00
 
   5.   Section 107.7 Mitigation Reimbursement Fees. Add Section 107.7
Mitigation Reimbursement Fees. Reimbursement fees that are actual and necessary
expenses incurred in carrying out the mitigation of specialized emergencies
including, but not limited to, hazardous materials, specialized rescue, and
crime scenes (including arson) shall be invoiced to the responsible person,
firm, or corporation. An available fee schedule shall be reviewed and posted
annually by the Fire Chief's office. Fees may include, but not be limited to,
personnel compensation, apparatus use, equipment use, and specialized contract
labor associated with the mitigation of the specialized emergency.
   6.   Section 107.8 Negligent False Alarms. Add Section 107.8 Negligent false
alarms. A negligent false alarm shall be determined by the Fire Chief or
designee as an alarm due to cleaning, construction, maintenance, repair, or any
other act determined to be negligent in nature. Negligence shall be further
defined as any activity where the life safety system shall be placed on test
prior to the activity being performed or any careless act causing an activation
of an alarm system. The fee schedule is defined below.
 
The first false alarms during a calendar year                   $500.00
The second false alarm during a calendar year                   $500.00
The third false alarm during a calendar year                    $1,000.00
The fourth false alarm and each false alarm thereafter during a $1,500.00
calendar year
 
   7.   Section 107.9 Excessive False Alarms Add Section 107.9 Excessive False
Alarms. Because a false alarm for security, intrusion, robbery and other
nonfire causes usually requires from one to three police officers to respond in
individual vehicular units, depending on the type of alarm, and a false alarm
for fire suppression or other firefighting incidents usually requires multiple
firefighters from the Fire Department to respond in multiple and specialized
firefighting equipment, depending on the type of alarm, the City shall assess a
service charge fee to any alarm user that generates an unnecessary number of
false alarm responses during a calendar year as listed below (“false alarm
fee.”) The alarm user shall pay the City the assessed false alarm fee within 20
days of the date an invoice is given to the alarm user for any false alarm
created by the alarm user’s alarm system in accordance with the following
schedule:
 
The first and second false alarms during a calendar year                $0.00
The third false alarm during a calendar year                            $75.00
The fourth false alarm during a calendar year                           $100.00
The fifth false alarm and each false alarm thereafter during a calendar $150.00
year
 
      A.   After the second false alarm, the alarm user shall receive a written
notice from the Chief. The notice shall require that, by a specified date, the
alarm user shall have their alarm system inspected by an alarm company and
alarm user shall review operational procedures with the alarm system operator
and any other individuals having access to the use and operation of the alarm
system. Notice or billing from the City to any alarm user shall be deemed to
have been given or rendered on the date such notice or billing is deposited in
the U.S. mail, first class postage, addressed to the alarm user at the address
shown for the alarm user. The alarm user shall notify the applicable Chief, in
writing, after the inspection by the alarm company has been completed, and
shall provide to the Chief a copy of any report of service, repair, or
inspection of the alarm system given by the alarm company. An alarm company
providing an inspection or repair of an alarm system shall notify the Chief in
advance of such service. The alarm company shall be assessed a fee of $100.00
by the City when the Police Department or Fire Department respond to a false
alarm and it is determined by the City that an on-site employee of the alarm
company directly caused the false alarm. In such a circumstance, the false
alarm shall not count against the alarm user.
   8.   Section 115 Life Safety Plans. Add Section 115 Life Safety Plans. All
life safety plans submitted for review to include, but not limited to, fire
sprinkler system plans, fire alarm system plans, and clean agent system plans
shall be designed and stamped by a person with a minimum of a NICET III
certification, fire protection engineer, qualified engineer with two years
demonstrated experience in life safety system design or equivalency as
determined by the Code Official. Plan approval will be based upon the plans
submitted by the equipment supplier utilizing the above requirements.
   9.   Add section 115.1. All Life Safety Plans submitted to the Clive Fire
Department will require a technical assistance review from a third-party firm.
Life Safety Plans submitted that currently bear the stamp of a licensed Fire
Protection Engineer shall be exempt from this requirement.
   10.   Section 116 Inspection Tags. Add Section 116 Inspection Tags. Tags for
inspection of fire suppression systems, fire extinguishers, and fire alarm
systems are required to be purchased from the West Des Moines Fire Prevention
Bureau for use in the City of Clive as part of the West Metro licensing for
fire protection contractors.
   11.   Chapter 2 Section 202 Definitions. Add to section 202:
      A.   Business is a commercial enterprise or establishment that is not
part of a home occupation, for the purpose of the Fire Code.
      B.   Commercial buildings or structures are buildings that are used for
purposes other than detached dwellings, for the purpose of the Fire Code.
      C.   Condominium is a building or structure of residential occupancies
containing sleeping units, or more than two dwelling units where the occupants
are primarily permanent in nature, having public space, unless defined as a
townhouse, for purpose of the Fire Code.
      D.   Fire Prevention Bureau is the Fire Department of the jurisdiction.
      E.   Home Occupation is any occupation or profession conducted solely by
the resident occupants in their place of abode, involving primarily service and
limited sale of commodities upon the premises, for the purposes of the Fire
Code.
      F.   Licensed daycare is a daycare that is licensed with the State.
      G.   Licensed Fire Alarm Monitoring Service is a business that supplies
or contracts with a UL listed remote station monitoring service.
      H.   WestCom is the 9-1-1 dispatch center that serves the City.
   12.   Amend Section 202 Amend the following definitions:
      A.   [M] Commercial Cooking Appliances are appliances used in a
commercial food service establishment for heating or cooking food and which
produce grease laden vapors, steam, fumes, smoke, or odors that are required to
be removed through a local exhaust ventilation system. Such appliances include
deep fat fryers; upright broilers; griddles; broilers; steam-jacketed kettles;
hot-top ranges; under-fired broilers; (charbroilers); ovens; barbecues;
rotisseries; residential stoves/ovens and similar appliances. For the purposes
of this definition, a food service establishment shall include any commercial
building, or a portion thereof, used for the preparation and serving of food
including for employee purposes.
      B.   Dwelling is a detached building on a building site designed for and
used exclusively for residential purposes by one and two families and
containing one or two dwelling units, for the purpose of the Fire Code.
      C.   Dwelling Unit is one room or rooms connected together and containing
independent cooking, sleeping, and bathroom facilities, constituting a
separate, independent housekeeping establishment for one family, for owner
occupancy, or rental or lease to the same family for a time period of more than
31 consecutive days and physically separated from any other dwelling unit by a
wall or yard.
   13.   Chapter 3 General Precautions Against Fire.
      A.   Add Section 307.2.1.1 Responsible Agencies for Open Burning. Within
the City limits; in Polk County, approval from Polk County Water, Air, and
Waste Management Department and the Code Official; in Dallas County, approval
from State IDNR and the Code Official; future annexed land shall use the County
Water, Air, and Waste Management Department of record or IDNR and the Code
Official.
      B.   Amend Section 307.4.1: Bonfires are prohibited within the City.
      C.   Amend Section 307.4.2: Open burning is prohibited within the City.
      D.   Add Section 307.6: Outdoor fires are permitted when they meet the
following requirements:
         (1)   Contained in a fireplace or grill, defined by the following
requirements:
            a.   Fireplace: A structure, with an open recess at the base or a
chimney or stack, with a grate for food preparation and provisions for under-
fire air, for holding an outdoor fire off the ground.
               i.   Fuel shall consist of wood or charcoal only.
               ii.   Firewood shall be larger than two inches in diameter, and
no longer than three feet in length. This requirement shall not apply to wood
used/needed to start the fire (kindling).
               iii.   Device shall be no closer than 10 feet from any
structure.
               iv.    Wood or charcoal within the device, shall not sit more
than three feet above the base of the device.
               v.   Smoke shall not exit the user’s property at or below the
user’s roof line.
               vi.   Shall not be used to dispose of yard waste, leaves, or
twigs.
         (2)   Grill. A cooking utensil with a grate for food preparation and
provisions for under-fire air, for holding an outdoor fire off the ground.
               i.   Fuel shall consist of wood or charcoal only.
               ii.   Firewood shall be larger than two inches in diameter, and
no longer than three feet in length. This requirement shall not apply to wood
used/needed to start the fire (kindling).
               iii.   Device shall be no closer than 10 feet from any
structure.
               iv.   Wood or charcoal within the device, shall not sit more
than three feet above the base of the device.
               v.   Smoke shall not exit the user’s property at or below the
user’s roof line.
               vi.   Shall not be used to dispose of yard waste, leaves, or
twigs.
      E.   Amend section 308.1.4 Open Flame Cooking Devices. Replace with: No
barbecue grills or other devices which produce ashes or embers shall be
operated or stored within 20 feet of multi-story buildings such as apartment
buildings and condominiums. A maximum of one 20# propane cylinder attached to
the cooking device shall be allowed. Exception: One- and two-family dwellings
and townhomes. Cooking devices or the propane cylinders shall not be stored
inside the living unit of apartment buildings or condominiums.
   14.   Chapter 5 Fire Service Features.
      A.   Add section 507.5.1.2 Hydrant for Fire Department Connections.
Buildings equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system with Fire Department
connections installed per NFPA 13 shall have a fire hydrant within 100 feet of
the Fire Department connections.
         (1)   Exception: The distance shall be permitted to exceed 100 feet
where approved by the Fire Code Official.
   15.   Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems.
      A.   For the purposes of this section, “story” shall be defined as any
level of a structure, whether above or below grade capable of occupancy.
      B.   Open corridors/hallways shall be required to have fire sprinklers
installed in them when the building they are constructed in is required by this
Code to have a fire sprinkler system.
      C.   An approved complete automatic fire extinguishing system shall be
installed on all levels (including wood attics and wood cocklofts, but not wood
attics and wood cocklofts in one- and two-family dwellings) in all buildings
and structures erected from and after the effective date of the ordinance
codified by this chapter, in which the gross square floor area exceeds the
amounts specified in the following tables. An “approved automatic fire
extinguishing system” includes, but is not limited to, a complete automatic
fire sprinkler system. The following sections requiring complete automatic fire
sprinkler systems shall install the fire sprinkler system following NFPA 13
standards unless otherwise noted. Alternative automatic extinguishing systems
may be used if in the opinion of the Code Official the same life safety and
property conservation measures are equivalent to the NFPA standard listed in
this Code.
      D.   Delete Sections 903.2.1, 903.2.1.1, 903.2.1.2, 903.2.1.3, 903.2.1.4,
903.2.1.5, 903.2.2, 903.2.3, 903.2.4, 903.2.4.1, 903.2.5, 903.2.5.1, 903.2.5.2,
903.2.5.3, 903.2.6, 903.2.7, 903.2.9, 903.2.9.1, 903.2.9.2, 903.2.10,
903.2.10.1, 903.2.11.
SUPPRESSION TYPE
Add section 903.2.1 Group A to read as follows:
Group A:
SUPPRESSION TYPE
Add section 903.2.1 Group A to read as follows:
Group A:
        A-1. Building or structures or portions thereof, having an
        assembly use, usually with fixed seating, intended for the
NFPA 13 production and viewing of the performing arts or motion      
        pictures including, but not limited to: See IFC Occupancy
        Classification definition A-1
NFPA 13 1. Occupant load of 299 or less                             6,000 sq/ft
NFPA 13 2. Occupant load of 300 or more                             0
        A-2. Building or structures or portions thereof, having an
       assembly use intended for food or drink consumption,         
        including, but not limited to: See IFC Occupancy
        Classification definition A-2
NFPA 13 1. Occupant load of 49 or less                              1,500 sq/ft
NFPA 13 2. Occupant load of 50 or more                              0 sq/ft
        A-3. Building or structures or portions thereof, having an
        assembly use intended for worship, recreation, or amusement
       and other assembly uses not classified elsewhere in group    
        A, including, but not limited to: See IFC Occupancy
        Classification definition A-3
NFPA 13 1. Occupant load of 299 or less                             6,000 sq/ft
NFPA 13 2. Occupant load of 300 or more                             6,000 sq/ft
        A-4. Building or structures or portions thereof, having an
        assembly 13 use intended for viewing of indoor sporting
       events and activities with spectator seating, including,     
        but not limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification
        definition A-4
NFPA 13 1. Occupant load of 299 or less                             6,000 sq/ft
NFPA 13 2. Occupant load of 300 or more                             4,500 sq/ft
        A-5. Building or structures or portions thereof, having an
        assembly use intended for participation in or viewing
NFPA 13 outdoor activities including, but not limited to: See IFC   1,000 sq/ft
        Occupancy Classification Definition A-5 and IFC Section
        903.2.1.5 for areas to be provided with protection.
 
 
SUPPRESSION TYPE
Add section 903.2.2 Group B to read as follows:
Group B:
        B. Building or structures or portions thereof, used for
        office, professional, or service type transactions,
NFPA 13 including storage of records and accounts. Business       6,000 sq/ft
        occupancies shall include, but not be limited to: See IFC
        Occupancy Classification definition B.
 
SUPPRESSION TYPE
Add section 903.2.3 Group E to read as follows:
Group E:
NFPA 13 Building or structures or portions thereof, used by six or more 0 sq/ft
        persons at any one time for educational purposes.
        A licensed daycare is any buildings or structures, or portions
NFPA 13 thereof, used for educational, supervision, or personal care    0 sq/ft
        services for more than five children older than 21/2 years of
        age shall be classified as an E occupancy.
 
 
SUPPRESSION TYPE
Add section 903.2.4 Group F to read as follows:
Group F:
        F-1. Moderate-hazard factory and industrial occupancies
        including factory and industrial uses not classified as
NFPA 13 group F, division 2 occupancies shall include, but not be  2,500 sq/ft
        limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification definition F-
        1.
        F-1.1. Woodworking operations which generate finely
NFPA 13 divided combustible waste or uses finely divided           2,500 sq/ft
        combustible materials.
        F-2. Low-hazard factory and industrial occupancy uses that
        involve the fabrication or manufacturing of noncombustible
NFPA 13 materials which during finishing, packing, or processing   15,000 sq/ft
        do not involve a significant fire hazard shall include,
        but not be limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification
        definition F-1.
 
 
SUPPRESSION TYPE
Add section 903.2.5 Group H to read as follows:
Group H:
     H-1. Building or structures or portions thereof, that pose a detonation  0
NFPA hazard in excess of those listed in Table 5003.1.1 (See 2015 IBC) shall  sq/
13   include, but not be limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification         ft
     definition H-1.
     H-3. Building or structures or portions thereof, which contain materials 0
NFPA that readily support combustion or pose physical hazard in excess of     sq/
13   those listed in Table 5003.1.1 (See 2015 IBC) shall include, but not be  ft
     limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification definition H-3.
     H-4. Building or structures or portions thereof, which contain materials 0
NFPA that are health hazards in excess of those listed in Table 5003.1.1 (See sq/
13   2015 IBC) shall include, but not be limited to: See IFC Occupancy        ft
     Classification definition H-4.
     H-5. Semiconductors fabrication facilities and comparable research and
     development areas in which production materials are used, and s.f. the   0
NFPA aggregate quantity of material is in excess of those listed in Tables    sq/
13   5003.1.1(See 2015 IBC) Such facilities and areas shall be designed and   ft
     constructed in accordance with Section 415.10 of IBC.   Design of the
     sprinkler system shall not be less than Table 903.2.5.2.
NFPA FPA Pyroxylin plastics. Buildings or structures where cellulose nitrate  0
13   film or pyroxylin plastics are manufactured, stored, or handled in       sq/
     quantities s.f. exceeding 100 pounds.                                    ft
 
 
SUPPRESSION TYPE
Add section 903.2.6 Group I to read as follows:
Group I:
                     I-1. Building or structures or portions thereof,
                     housing more than 16 persons, on a 24-hour basis,
                     who, because of age, mental disability, or other
                     reasons, live in a supervised residential
                     environment but which provides personal care
NFPA 13D or NFPA 13R services. The occupants are capable of responding  0 sq/ft
                     to an emergency situation without physical
                     assistance from staff. A facility such as the
                     above with five or fewer persons shall be
                     classified as Group R-3. A facility such as the
                     above with at least six and not more than 16
                     persons shall be classified as Group R-4.
                     I-2. Building or structures or portions thereof,
                     used for medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing,
                     or custodial care on a 24-hour basis of more than
                     five persons who are not capable of self-
                     preservation. A facility such as the above with
NFPA 13              five or fewer persons shall be classified as Group 0 sq/ft
                     R-3. Childcare facility is any buildings or
                     structures, or a portion thereof, which provides
                     care on a 24-hour basis to more than five
                     children, 21/2 years of age or less, shall be
                     classified as Group I-2.
                     I-3. Building or structures or portions thereof,
                     which are inhabited by more than five persons who
NFPA 13              are under restraint or security. See IFC Occupancy 0 sq/ft
                     Classification definition I-3 for type of
                     condition.
                     I-4. Building or structures or portions thereof,
                     which are occupied by persons of any age who
                     receive custodial care for less than 24 hours by
                     individuals other than parents or guardians,
NFPA 13              relatives by blood, marriage, or adoption and in a 0 sq/ft
                     place other than the home of the person cared for.
                     A facility such as the above with five or fewer
                     persons shall be classified as Group R-3. Places
                     of worship during religious functions are not
                     included.
                     Adult care facilities provide accommodations for
                     less than 24 hours for more than five unrelated
NFPA 13              adults and provides supervision and personal care  0 sq/ft
                     services. Childcare facilities provide supervision
                     and personal care on less than a 24-hour basis for
                     more than five children 21/2 years of age or less.
 
 
SUPPRESSION TYPE
Add section 903.2.7 Group M to read as follows:
Group M:
        Building or structures or portions thereof, for the display
        and sale of merchandise, and involving stocks of goods,
NFPA 13 wares, or merchandise, incidental to such purposes and      6,000 sq/ft
        accessible to the public shall include, but not be limited
        to: See IFC Occupancy Classification definition Group M.
        (High-piled storage to refer to Chapter 32 IFC)
 
SUPPRESSION TYPE
SUPPRESSION TYPE
Add section 903.2.8 Group R to read as follows:
Group R:
NFPA 13R in 4 stories or less, R-1. Hotels, motels, boarding
NFPA 13 in more than 4         houses (transient). (Occupy    0 sq/ft
stories, both systems to       less than 30 days)
include attic space as NFPA 13
NFPA 13R in 4 stories or less, R-2. Apartment houses,
NFPA 13 in more than 4         condominiums, boarding houses
stories, both systems to       (non-transient), convents,     0 sq/ft
include attic space as NFPA 13 dormitories, fraternities and
                               sororities, monasteries.
NFPA 13R to include attic      Convents, dormitories,
space as NFPA 13               fraternities and sororities,   0 sq/ft
                               monasteries.
NFPA 13D                       R-3. Dwellings.                8,000/ sq. ft.
NFPA 13D                       R-3. Townhouse.                Refer to IFC 2015
Townhouses that are not open on at least two sides are required to install fire
sprinkler systems as set forth in the IFC, 2018 edition.
                               R-4. Residential care/assisted
NFPA 13D or NFPA 13R           living facilities for more     0 sq/ft
                               than five, but not more than
                               16 occupants, excluding staff.
 
 
SUPPRESSION TYPE
Add section 903.2.9 Group S to read as follows:
Group S:
        S-1. Moderate hazard storage occupancies including
        building or portions of buildings used for storage of
NFPA 13 combustible materials not classified as Group S, Division 6,000 sq/ft
        2 or Group H occupancies but not be limited to: See IFC
        Occupancy Classification definition Group S-
        1.
NFPA 13 NFPA Repair garages/service stations                      3,500 sq/ft
NFPA 13 Bulk storage of tires                                     20,000 cu.f
        S-2. Low-hazard storage occupancies, including buildings
NFPA 13 or portions of buildings, used for storage of             15,000 sq/ft
        noncombustible materials, but not be limited to: See IFC
        Occupancy Classification definition Group S-2
 
SUPPRESSION TYPE
Add section 903.2.10.2 Group U to read as follows:
Group U:
NFPA 13 Private garages, carports, sheds, and agricultural buildings N/A
 
      E.   Add Section 903.3.7.1 Fire Department Connection Identification. A
minimum of 110 candela weatherproof strobe light suitable for cold weather use
with a minimum of 75 candela at minus 30 degrees shall be tied into the
building fire alarm system and mounted directly above the Fire Department
connection between seven feet and 10 feet in height from the ground or as
approved by the Code Official.
      F.   Add Section 903.3.1.4 Fire Sprinklers for Canopies. A canopy
covering a door that is required to be marked as an exit shall be required to
have fire sprinklers installed outside that door if the canopy extends more
than four feet out from the door and is 12 feet or less in height from the
ground regardless if the canopy is combustible or noncombustible. All canopies,
regardless of height or construction type, that have vehicle access under them
with door openings shall be required to have fire sprinklers installed under
the entire canopy.
         (1)   Exception. If a building is not required by Code to have a fire
sprinkler system, Section 903.3.1.4 does not apply.
      G.   Add Section 903.7 Fire Sprinkler Riser Room. A fire sprinkler riser
room shall be separated from the electrical room. The riser room shall have no
electrical panels, devices, or apparatus inside the room other than the outlets
or support equipment (lighting) air compressor and heater required for the use
by the fire sprinkler system or the fire alarm panel. Access to the fire
sprinkler riser room shall not be accessed from the electrical room, but the
electrical room may be accessed from the fire sprinkler riser room.
      H.   Add Section 903.7.1 Fire Sprinkler Riser Signage. Signage as
determined by the Code Official shall be placed on the main sprinkler riser
denoting a shunt trip has been installed.
   16.   Standpipe Systems.
      A.   Add Section 905.3.9 Additional Standpipe Systems. Additional
standpipe systems may be added to new buildings or structures as deemed
necessary by the Code Official.
   17.   Portable Fire Extinguishers.
      A.   Amend Table 906.3 (1) Fire Extinguishers for Class A Fire Hazards to
read as follows:
         (1)   Portable fire extinguishers for fire protection in low and
moderate hazard occupancies shall be five pounds ABC in buildings that are
covered throughout with a fire sprinkler system. If there is no fire sprinkler
system in low or moderate hazard occupancy, a 10-pound ABC fire extinguisher
shall be installed. Spacing is based on a 75-foot travel distance to the fire
extinguisher. Portable fire extinguishers for fire protection in high hazard
occupancies shall be 10-pound ABC in buildings that are covered throughout with
a fire sprinkler system. If there is no fire sprinkler system in a high hazard
occupancy, a 20-pound ABC fire extinguisher shall be installed. Spacing is
based on a 50-foot travel distance to the fire extinguisher.
      B.   Amend Table 906.3(2) Fire Extinguishers for Flammable and
Combustible Liquids with Depths of Less Than or Equal to 0.25 in. to read as
follows:
         (1)   Portable fire extinguishers for fire protection in low hazard
occupancies shall be five-pound ABC in buildings that are covered throughout
with a fire sprinkler system. If there is no fire sprinkler system in a low
hazard occupancy, a 10-pound ABC fire extinguisher shall be installed. Spacing
is based on a 50-foot travel distance to the fire extinguisher. Portable fire
extinguishers for fire protection in moderate hazard occupancies shall be 10-
pound ABC in buildings that are covered throughout with a fire sprinkler
system. If there is no fire sprinkler system in a moderate hazard occupancy, a
20-pound ABC fire extinguisher shall be installed. Spacing is based on a 50-
foot travel distance to the fire extinguisher. Portable fire extinguishers for
fire protection in high hazard occupancies shall be 20-pound. ABC in buildings
that are covered throughout with a fire sprinkler system. If there is no fire
sprinkler system in a high hazard occupancy, a 20-pound. ABC fire extinguisher
shall be installed. Spacing is based on a 50-foot travel distance to the fire
extinguisher with a fire sprinkler system, 30-foot travel distance with no fire
sprinkler system. Other hazardous occupancies will refer to NFPA 10.
   18.   Fire Alarm and Detection Systems.
      A.   Add Section 907.1.4. Fire Alarm Control Panels.
      B.   Each building shall have no more than one Fire Alarm Control Panel
(FACP).
      C.   Panel Height. Installation of the fire alarm panels shall not exceed
six feet in height measured from the floor to the top of the panel.
         (1)   Exception 1. Panel height may be altered by the Code Official.
         (2)   Exception 2. Suppression system releasing panels are not
required to meet limitation in the number of panels.
      D.   Amend section 907.2 Where Required General to read as follows: An
approved addressable fire alarm system meeting provisions of this Code and NFPA
72 shall be installed when the gross square footage of a building is equal to
or greater than the area as specified in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.11
inclusive, subject to the authority having jurisdiction or by Section 907.2,
which ever shall be more restrictive. Exceptions:
         (1)   Buildings with eight or less initiating devices may use zoned
systems provided only one device is used per zone. Each device shall have a
plain English LCD (liquid crystal display). This alpha/numeric descriptor
location is required to be reported to the WestCom Dispatch Center upon
activation of the fire alarm system.
         (2)   R-3 dwellings are not required to meet Section 907.2 of this
Code.
         (3)   Townhouses are required to be monitored only if a single fire
sprinkler system is used for multiple units.
      E.   Add Section 907.2(a) Manual Fire Alarm Pull Boxes. Manual fire alarm
pull boxes, “pull stations,” shall be required where deemed necessary by the
Code Official.
      F.   Add Section 907.2(b) Monitoring. All fire alarm systems shall be
monitored by a UL listed monitoring station.
      G.   Add section 907.2(c) Location. Each address point ID shall have an
alpha/numeric descriptor location for the fire alarm system. This alpha/numeric
descriptor location is required to be reported to the City Fire Department
dispatch center upon activation of the fire alarm system.
      H.   Add Section 907.2(d) Where Required. Where corridors or hallways are
protected by fire sprinkler systems, they shall also be protected by smoke
detection. Smoke detection shall be of the photoelectric type or as approved by
the Code Official.
      I.   Amend Section 907.2.3 General to read as follows: Educational
occupancies shall have a monitored fire alarm system. Upon notification,
existing educational occupancies having existing fire alarm systems shall
comply within two years to meet the monitoring of the fire alarm system.
      J.   Delete Sections 907.2.8 and 907.2.9.
      K.   Add Section 907.2.8 Group R General. Group R-1 and Group R-
2 apartment houses, condominiums, and boarding houses (non-transient) convents,
dormitories, fraternities, sororities, and monasteries; and Group R-4 shall
have a monitored addressable fire alarm system. Upon adoption of this Fire
Code, Group R-1; Group R-2 apartment houses, condominiums, and boarding houses
(non-transient) convents, dormitories, fraternities, sororities, and
monasteries that have existing automatic fire alarm systems shall comply within
five years to have that fire alarm system monitored.
      L.   Amend Section 907.2.11 Single and Multi-Station Smoke Alarms to read
as follows: Listed single- and multiple-station smoke alarms complying with UL
217 shall be installed in accordance with provisions of this Code and the
household fire warning equipment provision of NFPA 72. Smoke alarms shall be
addressable with sounder bases and tied into the building fire alarm system as
a supervisory signal only. Mini horns are not required if notification from a
building fire alarm system is through the smoke alarms with sounder bases.
         (1)   Note: Section 907.2.11 only applies to R-1, R-2, R-4, and I-
1 occupancies.
      M.   Add Section 907.6.4.3 Zone and Address Location Labeling. Fire alarm
panels shall have all zones and address points plainly and permanently labeled
as to their location on the outside of the panel or on an easily readable map
of the building, if no display screen is present.
      N.   Amend Section 907.6.6 Monitoring General to read as follows: When
required by this chapter, or the Code Official, an approved UL listed remote
station in accordance with NFPA 72 shall monitor fire alarm systems to provide
for the immediate and automatic notification of the Fire Department.
         (1)   Exception. Supervisory service is not required in one- and two-
family dwellings.
      O.   Add Section 910.1 Exception 1. The Code Official may require smoke
removal equipment be installed if it is deemed necessary by the Code Official
for the protection of life and property.
      P.   Add Section 912.1.1 Fire Department Connection Height. The Fire
Department connection shall be located not less than 18 inches from the bottom
of the cap(s) and not more than three feet from the top of the cap(s) above the
level of the adjacent grade or access level. The Code Official, for just cause,
may grant deviation to this height.
      Q.   Amend Section 912.4 Access around Fire Department Connections to
read as follows: Immediate access to Fire Department connections shall be
maintained at all times and without obstruction by fences, bushes, trees,
walls, or any other objects for a minimum of a five-foot clear space on each
side of the connection to include in front of and above the connection.
   19.   Section 1009 Accessible Means of Egress.
      A.   Add to Section 1009.2 Continuity and Components Item #11.
         (1)   11. Components of exterior walking surfaces shall be concrete,
asphalt, or other approved hard surface.
   20.   Section 1010 Doors, Gates, and Turnstiles.
   21.   Section 1013 Exit Signs.
      A.   Add Section 1013.1.1 Additional Exit Signs. Exit signs may be
required at the discretion of the Code Official to clarify an exit or exit
access.
   22.   Chapter 33 Fire Safety During Construction and Demolition.
      A.   Add Section 3311.1.1 Construction Site Access. Construction sites
shall have approved access roads as noted on the approved site plan to all
areas of building or structure being constructed prior to actual construction
taking place. Access roads to buildings or structures shall be constructed to
provide vehicular access to within 50 feet of the building or structure with
the middle of the building or structure no further than 150 feet from the
access road. If the middle of the building or structure is more than 150 feet
from the access road, temporary access roads shall be constructed around the
building or structure where topography allows. It is highly recommended to
install parking lots if planned for, prior to the beginning of construction,
for storage of construction material and easier access to the site. Access road
surface material shall be of aggregate or a base layer of asphalt capable of
meeting load limits as outlined in Appendix D § D 102 of this Code for fire
apparatus imposed loads unless otherwise approved by the Code Official.
      B.   Add Section 3315.3 Temporary Fire Department Connections. Where an
automatic sprinkler system is being installed in a building under construction,
temporary dry connections shall be made to a Fire Department connection as
areas of the system are completed when combustible materials are being used for
construction.
      C.   Add Section 3315.3.1 Temporary Fire Department Connection
Identification. Where a temporary Fire Department connection is provided,
temporary weatherproof signage shall also be provided to indicate what areas of
the building under construction are served by the Fire Department connection.
   23.   Chapter 50 Hazardous Materials – General Provisions.
      A.   Add Section 5003.13 Hazardous Substances, Notification and Cleanup.
      B.   Scope. This section shall apply to the release of hazardous
substances and the notification, cleanup, and recovery of costs associated with
the mitigation of hazardous conditions.
      C.   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, these words have the
following Meaning:
         (1)   “Cleanup” means the removal of the hazardous substances to a
place where the waste will not cause any danger to persons or the environment,
in accordance with the State statutes, rules, and regulations therefore, or the
treatment of the material, as defined herein, to eliminate the hazardous
condition, including the restoration of the area to a general good appearance
without noticeable odor as far as practicable. “Cleanup” includes all actions
necessary to contain, collect, identify, analyze, treat, disperse, remove, or
dispose of a hazardous substance and to restore the sites from which the
hazardous substance was cleaned up.
         (2)   “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual,
imminent, or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance:
            a.   Within the City or onto City property located outside the City
which, because of the quantity, strength, and toxicity of the hazardous
substance, its mobility in the environment and its persistence, creates an
immediate potential danger to the public health or safety; or
            b.   Onto land, into the waters within the State, or into the
atmosphere, but outside the City, which, because of the quantity, strength, and
toxicity of the hazardous substance, its mobility in the environment and its
persistence, creates an immediate potential danger to the public health or
safety of persons or property within the City.
         Hazardous conditions include any accident involving hazardous
materials required to be reported under Section 321.266 (4) of the Code of
Iowa.
         (3)   “Hazardous Substance” means any substance or mixture of
substance that presents a danger to the public health or safety or environment
and includes, but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or
flammable, or that is an irritant or that, in confinement, generates pressure
through decomposition, heat, or other means. The following are examples of
substances which, in sufficient quantity, may be hazardous: acids; alkalis;
explosives; fertilizers; heavy metals such as chromium, arsenic, mercury, lead
and cadmium; industrial chemicals; paint thinners; paints; pesticides;
petroleum products; poisons; radioactive materials; sludges; and organic
solvents. “Hazardous substance” includes any hazardous waste identified or
listed by the Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under §307
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1976, as amended to January 1,
1977, or any hazardous material designated under §311 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous
materials designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act, or any hazardous substance listed under the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980.
         (4)   “Person” is a natural person, his or her heirs, executors,
administrators, or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership, or
corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or any other similar legal
entity or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
         (5)   “Responsible Person” means the person, whether the owner, agent,
lessor, or tenant, in charge of the hazardous substance being stored,
processed, or handled, or the owner or bailee transporting hazardous wastes or
substances whether on public ways or grounds or on private property where the
spill would cause danger to the public or to any persons or to the environment.
         (6)   “Treatment” means a method, technique, or process, including
neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical, or biological
character or composition of a hazardous substance so as to neutralize it or to
render the substance non-hazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery,
amenable for storage, or to reduce it in volume.
   Treatment includes any activity or processing designed to change the
physical form or chemical composition of hazardous substance to render it
nonhazardous.
      D.   Notifications. When a hazardous condition is created, the
responsible person shall notify WestCom 911 Dispatch Center and the Fire
Department immediately upon discovery of the condition, but in no instance
later than 30 minutes after the discovery of the hazardous condition.
      E.   Cleanup Required. Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the
deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of a hazardous
substance, so that the hazardous substance, or a constituent of the hazardous
substance, may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged
into any waters, including ground waters, the Fire Chief, or the Chief’s
designee, may remove or provide for removal and the disposal of the hazardous
substance at any time, unless the Fire Chief, or the Chief’s designee,
determines the removal will be properly and promptly accomplished by the
responsible person. If the responsible party does not initiate and complete
cleanup within the time designated by the Fire Department, the City may proceed
to remedy the hazardous condition by performing the necessary cleanup services.
      F.   Loss, Burden, or Costs. A responsible person shall be liable to the
City for all mitigation costs incurred by the City or other contract agencies,
including, but not limited to, chemical damage, contamination of equipment, and
the use of consumable materials. If charges for cleanup costs are not paid
within 30 days after invoice, the City shall proceed to obtain payment by all
legal means.
   24.   Chapter 56 Explosives And Fireworks.
      A.   Amend Section 5601.1 Scope to read as follows:
         (1)   Add (a) the City deems the use of first-class and second-class
consumer fireworks as a threat to public safety or a nuisance to landowners or
persons with certain health conditions and therefore prohibits the use of
first-class and second-class consumer fireworks in the City, except for on
July3, July 4, and December 31 in accordance with Iowa Code Section 727.2(4).
It shall otherwise be unlawful, without a permit, for any person to offer for
sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any explosives,
explosive materials, first-class and second-class consumer fireworks within the
corporate limits of the City of Clive.
(Subparagraph (1) – Ord. 1163 – Jun. 25 Supp.)
         (2)   Add (b) The sale of consumer fireworks shall be regulated by the
State Fire Marshal (SFM), who shall establish dates of permitted sales, the
minimum requirements for obtaining a consumer fireworks seller license and
registration by wholesalers, and shall issue such licenses and as otherwise
provided by State law and the SFM rules.
         (3)   Add (c) Exceptions:
            a.   1. The Armed Forces of the United States, Coast Guard, or
National Guard.
            b.   2. Explosives in forms prescribed by the official United
States Pharmacopoeia.
            c.   3. The possession, storage, and use of small ammunition when
packaged in accordance with DOT packaging requirements.
            d.   4. The possession, storage, and use of not more than one pound
(0.454 kg.) of commercially manufactured sporting black powder, 20 pounds (nine
kg.) of smokeless powder and 10,000 small arms primers for hand loading of
small arms ammunition for personal consumption.
            e.   5. The use of explosive materials by federal, State, and local
regulatory, law enforcement, and fire agencies in their official capacities.
            f.   6. Special industrial explosive devices which in the aggregate
contain less than 50 pounds (23 kg.) of explosive materials.
            g.   7. The possession, storage, and use of blank industrial power
load cartridges when packaged in accordance with DOT packaging regulations.
            h.   8. Transportation in accordance with DOT 49 C.F.R. parts100
through 178.
            i.   9. Items preempted by federal regulations.
      B.   Add 10. Items considered as “Novelties” under State law.
      C.   Amend Section 5601.2.4 Financial Responsibility to read as follows:
The applicant shall, at the time they makes their application for a permit,
attach thereto a bond or certificate of insurance naming the applicant and the
City as insured, in the sum of not less than $1,000,000.00, provided that the
Code Official or the Council may, at their discretion, require a greater
amount. The bond and insurance shall insure to the use and benefit of the City
or any person who suffers damage either to person or property by reason of the
display of fireworks.
      D.   Amend Section 5601.4 Qualifications to read as follows: Persons in
charge of magazines, blasting, fireworks display, or pyrotechnic special effect
operations shall not be under the influence of alcohol or drugs which impair
sensory or motor skills, shall be at least 21 years of age, and shall
demonstrate knowledge of all safety precautions related to the storage,
handling, or use of explosives, explosive materials, or fireworks. Exception:
Persons in charge of fireworks display or pyrotechnic special effect operations
shall possess a valid PGI display fireworks operator certification or
equivalent certification approved by the Code Official.
      E.   Amend Section 5601.7 Seizure. Replace with: The Code Official is
authorized to seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed or disposed of in an
approved manner, at the expense of the owner, explosives, explosive materials,
and all stocks of illegal fireworks (not State-approved), offered or exposed
for sale, possessed, stored, and held to be in violation of this section.
      F.   Amend Section 5605.1 Manufacture, Assembly, and Testing of
Explosives, Explosive Materials, and Fireworks to read as follows:
         (1)   General: It shall be unlawful to manufacture, assemble and test
explosives, explosive materials, and fireworks within the corporate limits of
the City of Clive.
         (2)   Exceptions.
            a.   The hand loading of small arms ammunition prepared for
personal use and not offered for sale;
            b.   The mixing and loading of blasting agents at blasting sites in
accordance with NFPA 495.
            c.   The use of binary explosives or plosophoric materials in
blasting or pyrotechnic special effects applications in accordance with NFPA
495 or NFPA 1126.
   25.   Chapter 57 Flammable and Combustible Liquids.
      A.   Add Section 5704.2.9.7.10 Alternative Containment and Protection.
All tanks that have a secondary tank of steel, concrete, or approved materials
shall be capable of holding 110 percent of the product stored. A non-
combustible roof and roof framework shall cover all open top secondary tanks
exposed to weather.
   26.   Chapter 61 Liquified Petroleum Gases.
      A.   Amend Section 6104.2 Maximum Capacity within Established Limits to
read as follows: Within the limits established by law in the adopting ordinance
restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of
heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one
installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 1,000 gallons. Within the
limits established by law in the adopting ordinance restricting the storage of
liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of M-1 Light Industrial Districts or
M-2 Heavy Industrial District, the aggregate capacity of any one installation
shall not exceed a water capacity of 5,000 gallons.
Referenced Standards
Referenced Standards
NFPA 10   2018 Edition
NFPA 13   2019 Edition
NFPA 13D  2019 Edition
NFPA 13R  2019 Edition
NFPA 20   2019 Edition
NFPA 30   2021 Edition
NFPA 30A  2021 Edition
NFPA 58   2020 Edition
NFPA 70   2020 Edition
NFPA 72   2019 Edition
NFPA 96   2021 Edition
NFPA 101  2021 Edition
NFPA 1123 2018 Edition
NFPA 1124 2006 Edition
NFPA 2001 2018 Edition
 
   27.   Appendix D. Fire Apparatus Access Roads.
      A.   Amend Section D101.1 Scope to read as follows: Fire apparatus access
roads shall be in accordance with this appendix and all other applicable
requirements of the International Fire Code.
      B.   Public streets are regulated using the Statewide Urban Design and
Specifications for public improvements as amended by the City. Private streets
are regulated using the Statewide Urban Design and Specifications for public
improvements as amended by the City.
   28.   Section D103 Minimum Specifications.
      A.   Amend D103.2 Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed
Statewide Urban Design and Specifications for public improvements as amended by
the City.
      B.   Amend D103.3 Turning Radius. The minimum turning radii shall be
determined by the Code Official.
      C.   Amend D103.4 Dead-Ends. Replace with: Dead-end fire apparatus access
roads shall not exceed Statewide Urban Design and Specifications for public
improvements or as approved by City Engineer.
      D.   Amend D103.5 Fire Apparatus Access Road Gates. Replace with: Gates
securing fire apparatus access roads shall comply with all of the following
criteria:
         (1)   The minimum gate width shall accommodate a 14-foot clear drive
lane width.
         (2)   Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type;
         (3)   Construction of the gate shall be of materials that allow for
manual operation by one person;
         (4)   Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition at
all times and replaced or repaired when defective;
         (5)   Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the
gate by Fire Department personnel for emergency access. Emergency opening
devices shall be approved by the Code Official;
         (6)   Manual opening gates shall not be locked with a padlock or chain
unless they are capable of being opened by means of forcible entry tools; and
         (7)   Locking device specifications shall be submitted for approval by
the Code Official.
      E.   Amend D103.6 Signs. Replace with: Where required by the Code
Official, fire apparatus access roads shall conform to Section 511.4. Signs
shall be posted on one or both sides of the fire apparatus road as required by
§D103.6.1 or D103.6.2.
      F.   Amend D103.6.1 Roads 20 to 26 Feet in Width to read as follows: Fire
apparatus access roads 20 to 26 feet wide shall be posted on both sides as a
fire lane when required by the Code Official.
      G.   Amend D103.6.2 Roads more than 26 Feet in Width to read as follows:
Fire apparatus access roads more than 26 feet wide shall be posted on one side
of the road as a fire lane when required by the Code Official.
   29.   Amend Section D104 Commercial and Industrial Developments.
      A.   Amend D104.1 Access. All buildings shall have, at a minimum, two
fire apparatus accesses as approved by the Code Official. Based on the building
occupancy hazard, the Code Official may require more than two fire apparatus
accesses. The Code Official may reduce this requirement for just cause as long
as safety to the buildings/occupants is not jeopardized.
      B.   Amend D104.3 Remoteness. Where two access roads are required, they
shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one-half the length of
the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served,
measured in a straight line between accesses. The Code Official may reduce the
separation distance between accesses for just cause as long as safety to the
buildings/occupants is not jeopardized.
10-8-5 APPEALS.
   Whenever the Chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit
applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the International
Fire Code do not apply, or that the true intent and meaning of said Code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the Chief to the Building Code Appeals Board within 30 days from
the date of the decision appealed.
10-8-6 NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES, OR OCCUPANCIES; PERMITS.
   The Building Official and the Code Official of the Fire Department shall act
as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an
opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes, or occupancies for which
permits are required in addition to those now enumerated in the Code. The Code
Official shall post the list in a conspicuous place at the administrative
offices of the Fire Department and distribute copies thereof to interested
persons.
10-8-7 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
   1.   This Code is enacted only for the purpose of securing to individuals
the enjoyment of rights and privileges to which they are entitled as members of
the public, rather than for the purpose of protecting any individual from harm.
   2.   The City, its officers, employees, or agents make no representations or
warranties of any kind whatsoever, expressed or implied, with respect to the
completeness or thoroughness of the inspections and examinations performed
under this Code, but the inspections are made solely to assist the owner of the
building, structure, equipment, and premises to meet certain minimum
requirements of this Code and to compel, if necessary, the owner to meet the
minimum requirements for the protection of the health, welfare, and safety of
persons and property. Nothing herein contained in this Code shall alleviate the
owner of any building, structure, equipment, and premises to make an
independent inspection in order to fulfill the requirements of this Code nor
shall this Code be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any
person owning, operating, or controlling any building, structure, equipment, or
premises regulated herein from any damages to any person or property caused by
defects or Code violations. The City, its officers, employees, or agents shall
not be held as assuming any liability for damages to any person or property by
reason of any inspections authorized by this Code or investigations, or any
approvals issued herein, or for any act or failure to act in the enforcement of
this Code.
10-8-8 OUTSTANDING PERMITS.
   If a building permit is outstanding on the effective date of this chapter
and the Fire Code adopted hereby, the provisions of this chapter, and the Fire
Code adopted hereby, shall apply to the work authorized by such permit, except
to the extent that the Fire Chief and Building Official shall determine that
the application of such provisions to such work would be unreasonable. The
burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to show the unreasonableness of
such provisions.
10-8-9 INDEMNITY.
   The applicant for any permit under the Fire Code, by making application,
assumes and agrees to pay all loss or damage to property whatsoever, and injury
to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and
expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in connection with or
related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything thereunder, or
the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such
applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Fire Code
or any other ordinance of the City; and such applicant by making such
application, forever indemnifies the City, its officers, and employees, and
agrees to save it and them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits,
or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury, or death, costs and
expenses, by reason of the foregoing even though acts or omissions of the City,
its officers, or employees, may have caused or contributed thereto. The
foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be a part of the permit issued under
the Fire Code whether or not expressly recited therein.
10-8-10 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING STANDARDS.
   In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the Fire Code adopted
hereby, are found to be in conflict with any provision of Code of Iowa or
regulations of the State Fire Marshal, or any provision of any zoning,
building, fire, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, safety, or health ordinance
or Code of the City, the provision which establishes the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of the safety of persons and property shall
prevail.
10-8-11 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   Unless otherwise provided by law, violations of this chapter are simple
misdemeanors and are punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Pursuant to Section 100.41 of the Code of
Iowa, the officials of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall have the authority to
issue citations for violations of this chapter or report the violation to the
Police Department for citation. Violations of this chapter are also declared to
be municipal infractions and may be punished as provided in Title 1, Chapter 4A
of this Code. Officials of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall have the discretion
to enforce this chapter either as a municipal infraction or a simple
misdemeanor.
10-8-12 FIREWORKS.
   1.   1.   Definitions. The sale, use, or exploding of consumer fireworks
within the City is subject to the definitions and limitations enumerated in
Sections 100.19, 331.301(17), 727.2 of the Code of Iowa, which definitions are
incorporated herein by reference.
(Subsection 1 – Ord. 1163 – Jun. 25 Supp.)
   2.   Sales - General Requirements.
      A.   Prior to any person engaging in the sale of first-class or second-
class consumer fireworks, a Fireworks Sales Permit must be issued by the Clerk,
or their designee, of the City. The following shall be provided to the Clerk
for consideration in the issuance of a Fireworks Sales Permit:
         (1)   Fireworks Sales Permit Application. A completed application must
be submitted to the Clerk at least 30 days prior to the first date that sales
are anticipated to commence. Exception: An exception shall be granted for the
first sales period of 2017, running from June 1 to July 8, which shall allow
applications to be turned in at least 14 days prior to the first sale period.
This one-time exception shall be granted due to the newly implemented State
law.
            a.   A separate application must be submitted for the June 1 to
July 8 sales period and for the December 10 to January 3 sales period, as set
forth below.
            b.   The application form shall be prescribed by the Fire Chief.
         (2)   License. State License issued by the Iowa State Fire Marshal. At
the time the Fireworks Sales Permit Application is submitted to the Clerk, it
is recognized that the license from the State Fire Marshal may not have been
issued. If the license has not been issued, the applicant must provide proof
that an application for the State license has been submitted to the State Fire
Marshal. Proof of valid license issued from the State Fire Marshal must be
provided to the Clerk upon receipt by the applicant. Failure to provide proof
of a valid license will preclude the issuance of a Fireworks Sales Permit.
         (3)   Fireworks Sales Permit Fee. A permit fee, as set by the Council,
shall be due when the Fireworks Sales Permit Application is submitted to Clerk.
         (4)   Liability Insurance. Proof of liability insurance separate from
the building property insurance in amounts required under State law and
administrative rules.
         (5)   Site Plan. A site plan of the location where sales are requested
must accompany the Fireworks Sales Permit Application. Two paper copies and one
electronic copy shall be provided.
         (6)   Building or Structure Floor Plan. A building or structure floor
plan of the location where sales are requested must accompany the Fireworks
Sales Permit Application. Two paper copies and one electronic copy shall be
provided.
         (7)   Approval of Property Owner. A copy of a lease agreement or
letter of approval from the property owner of the location where sales are
requested must accompany the Fireworks Sales Permit Application.
         (8)   Fire Inspection. Any property, building, or premise, whether it
be permanent or temporary, intended for the sale of first-class or second-class
consumer fireworks shall have an inspection completed by the Fire Chief, or
their designee, prior to engaging in the sale of first-class or second-class
consumer fireworks for each sales period set forth in Section 727.2 of the Code
of Iowa. The Fire Chief, or their designee, shall cause an inspection to occur
meeting the requirements of the current Fire Code adopted by the City, State
law and regulations, and NFPA 1124. A Fireworks Sales Permit shall only be
issued upon completion of a satisfactory inspection.
      B.   Dates of Sale. First-class and second-class consumer fireworks sales
shall only be conducted in accordance with dates and times designated by
Section 727.2 of the Code of Iowa. It shall be unlawful to sell consumer
fireworks without meeting the requirements specified in this Code, or to sell
consumer fireworks outside of the dates specified.
         (1)   Approved consumer fireworks sales meeting the requirements of
this chapter shall be allowed from an approved permanent structure or building
between June 1 and July 8 and from December 10 until January 3.
         (2)   Approved consumer fireworks sales meeting the requirements of
this chapter shall be allowed from an approved temporary structure between June
13 and July 8.
      C.   Safety Requirements. The following safety requirements shall be
adopted for all locations where consumer fireworks are sold:
         (1)   All retailers and community groups shall remain compliant with
all applicable laws and rules throughout the duration of their selling period.
         (2)   Consumer fireworks sales shall only be allowed in areas properly
zoned for such use.
         (3)   No person shall sell consumer fireworks to a person under the
age of 18.
         (4)   Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to an intoxicated person or
to any person whom a reasonable person would believe may be impaired by other
substances.
   3.   Declaration of Emergency and Suspension of the Discharge of Fireworks.
      A.   Whenever drought, high winds, or other natural phenomena create, or
are likely to create, hazardous conditions and increased chance of fire danger
and the Fire Chief determines that adverse conditions exist for the use and
exploding of consumer fireworks, the Fire Chief, or their designee, may issue a
temporary ban on the use of consumer fireworks within the City. The Fire Chief,
or their designee, shall have the authority to declare an emergency and
temporarily halt the use of all fireworks.
      B.   The Fire Chief, or their designee, shall inform the area radio and
television stations and the local press of the emergency declaration and when
the emergency will be in effect and ask that public service announcements be
made. The City Manager, or their designee, shall post information concerning
the emergency declaration and summarizing the regulations on the City website.
   4.   Manufacture of Fireworks. It shall be unlawful for a person to
manufacture consumer fireworks within the City limits without a permit as may
be required by local, State, or federal laws and regulations.
   5.   Revocation of Fireworks Sales Permit. The Fire Chief may, for cause,
revoke the permit of any fireworks sales permit holder. An appeal of the
decision may be taken to the City Manager by filing a written notice with the
Clerk. The appeal must be filed within 10 days from the date of the decision.
The City Manager shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within seven days from
the receipt of the notice. The appeal shall stay the decision of the Fire Chief
unless the City Manager directs otherwise. A hearing on the appeal shall be
scheduled before the City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, within 14
days. At the public hearing, the applicant shall have the opportunity to
present evidence or arguments the applicant may have as to why the action of
Fire Chief appealed from should not be approved by the City Manager. The City
Manager shall render a written decision on the appeal within seven days after
the hearing. The decision of the City Manager shall be final. The parties may
extend the time limits set forth herein by mutual agreement.
   6.   Violations. Unless otherwise provided by law or this Code, violations
of any provisions of this section are hereby declared simple misdemeanors.
Anyone violating the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be
fined a minimum amount of not less than $500.00 and punished as further
provided in Section 1-4A-2 and pursuant to Section 727.2 of the Code of Iowa.
Violations of this chapter shall be reported to the State Fire Marshal.
   7.   Exceptions. This section does not prohibit the sale by a resident,
dealer, manufacturer, or jobber of such consumer fireworks as are not
prohibited; or the sale of any kind of fireworks, if they are to be shipped out
of State; or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for
signal purposes in athletic sports, or by railroads or trucks for signal
purposes, or by a recognized military organization. This section does not apply
to any substance or composition prepared and sold for medicinal or fumigation
purposes.
CHAPTER 9
BUILDING NUMBERING
 
10-9-1 Building Numbering Map      10-9-3 Violations
10-9-2 Property Owner Requirements  
10-9-1 BUILDING NUMBERING MAP.
   The Community Development Director shall be responsible for preparing a
building numbering map. A unique building address shall be assigned for every
principal residential building and every occupiable commercial building.
10-9-2 PROPERTY OWNER REQUIREMENTS.
   Every owner shall comply with the following requirements:
   1.   Display Number. The property owner shall place or cause to be
installed, prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, and maintained
on the principal residential building or occupiable commercial building, the
assigned number in a conspicuous place visible to the street in figures not
less than four inches in height and of a contrasting color with their
background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
   2.   Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to install or maintain the
building number as herein provided, or fails to do so for a period of 30 days
following written notice, the City may proceed to install the assigned building
number on the principal residential building or occupiable commercial building
and assess the costs against the property for collection in the same manner as
a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
10-9-3 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any
of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in
Title 1 Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks court
intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may
seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions
as necessary to prevent or remedy violations.
CHAPTER 10
SWIMMING POOLS
10-10-1 Definitions                      10-10-11 Water Supply and Wastewater
                                         Disposal
10-10-2 Purpose                          10-10-12 Standards for Pool Design,
                                         Equipment, Operation, and Installation
10-10-3 Warning                          10-10-13 Barrier Requirements
10-10-4 Interpretation                   10-10-14 Conflicting Provisions
10-10-5 Scope                            10-10-15 Site Maintenance
10-10-6 Indemnification                  10-10-16 Street Protection
10-10-7 Permit Requirements, Conditions, 10-10-17 Violations
Fees
10-10-8 Building Official                10-10-18 Appeals
10-10-9 Inspections                       
10-10-10 Maintenance                      
 
10-10-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Backwash” means the process of cleansing the filter medium or elements
by the reverse flow of water through the filter.
   2.   “Barrier” means a permanent fence, wall, building wall, or combination
thereof that completely surrounds the swimming pool and restricts access to the
swimming pool from the outside of the barrier. For the purpose of this
definition, permanent shall mean not being able to be removed, lifted, or
relocated without the use of a tool.
   3.   “Immediate vicinity” means within 10 feet in any direction of an object
while still being able to make eye contact with that same object.
   4.   “Permanent swimming pool” means a swimming pool in which the sides and
bottom are primarily located in the ground and that by its construction cannot
be removed or disassembled on a seasonal basis.
   5.   “Potable water” means water that is satisfactory for drinking,
culinary, and domestic purposes and that meets the requirements of the health
authority having jurisdiction.
   6.   “Public swimming pool” means a swimming pool or spa owned or operated
by a local or State government, or commercial interests or private entities
including, but not limited to, public or private schools corporations, hotels,
motels, camps, apartments, condominiums, health clubs, and country clubs.
   7.   “Residential swimming pool” means any swimming pool that is used, or
intended for use, which is accessory to a one- or two-family residential
dwelling and is available only to the household and its private guests. A
residential swimming pool used for any commercial purpose, including, but not
limited to, swimming lessons or exercise classes, shall comply with the
requirements set forth by the State Department of Public Health Swimming Pool
Rules.
   8.   “Spas” means a product with a water surface area that is less than 100
square feet intended for the immersion of persons in a temperature-controlled
environment where water is circulated in a closed system such as a hot tub or
whirlpool, and not intended to be drained and filled with each use. A spa/hot
tub usually includes a filter, a heater, a pump or pumps, and a control, and
may also include other equipment, such as lights, blowers, and water sanitizing
equipment.
   9.   “Storable swimming pool” means a swimming pool in which the sides and
bottom are primarily located above ground and that may be removed or
disassembled on a seasonal basis.
   10.   “Swimming pool” means a structure, chamber, tank, or area constructed
of man-made material, whether permanent, storable, private or public, that is
intended for swimming, bathing, or wading. For the purpose of this definition,
the following shall not be considered swimming pools:
      A.   Storable swimming pools with a designed water depth of 12 inches or
less and which are drained and filled daily.
      B.   Landscape features such as fountains, fishponds, and garden ponds
provided that the water surface area is less than or equal to 100 square feet
and has a maximum water depth of 12 inches deep, extending a minimum of 30
inches into the water feature. This edge shall be known as a safety edge. In
lieu of the safety edge, a structural pond cover may be used if the cover is
anchored in place and capable of supporting a weight of 60 pounds, without the
cover submerging into the water more than 12 inches. The pond cover shall not
have openings that allow passage of a sphere six inches in diameter.
      C.   Ponds, lakes, and detention/retention facilities shall not be
considered a swimming pool.
10-10-2 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders,
contractors, pool suppliers, property owners, their agents, and others, to meet
their responsibilities with respect to proper construction, construction
techniques, and premises safety, and to provide for inspection as a means of
compelling compliance therewith. It is not the purpose of this chapter to
create any duty on the part of the City, its officers, agents, or employees,
owing to any individual member of the public or to protect any particular or
circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is not the intent of this
chapter to create any duty or liability by the City, its officers, agents, or
employees, to premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any other person.
10-10-3 WARNING.
   No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed,
or Certificates of Occupancy issued pursuant to this chapter, as indicating the
safety of or quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this
chapter, nor inspections made pursuant thereto, nor certificates issued, are
intended to assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain
a premises or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in
the risk associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification
that a premise has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not, in any
way, constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that
premises.
10-10-4 INTERPRETATION.
   The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take
precedence over any other language contained in this chapter.
10-10-5 SCOPE.
   1.   New Construction. The general design, placement, construction, and
barrier requirements for swimming pools and spas.
   2.   Existing Facilities. Additions to, alterations of, or repairs to any
existing swimming pools and spas. The Construction Services Administrator may,
when such additions, alterations, or repairs are made, order other reasonable
additions or alterations within the facilities or barriers not currently in
compliance with this Code.
   3.   All public swimming pools shall follow the rules set forth by the Iowa
Department of Public Health.
10-10-6 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The applicant for a permit for any swimming pool, by making such
application, assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property
whatsoever, an injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in
connection with or related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of
anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents,
employees, or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the City; and such
applicant, by making such application, forever indemnifies the City, its
officers, and employees, and agrees to save it and hold them harmless from any
and all claims, demands, lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss,
damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even
though acts or omissions of the City, its officers, or employees, may have
caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be
part of any permit issued under this chapter whether expressly recited therein
or not.
10-10-7 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, FEES.
   1.   Required. Any owner, or authorized agent, who desires to construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, or demolish any swimming pool or spa or to erect,
install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical,
mechanical, or plumbing component of any swimming pool or spa which is
regulated by this chapter, or to cause any such work to be done, shall not do
so without first securing a permit from the City Community Development
Department. In the case of a public swimming pool, the owner or authorized
agent must also obtain a permit from the Iowa Department of Public Health.
   2.   Issuance. After proper application on forms provided by the City
Community Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of the
property owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the State Division
of Labor Services, according to their rules and regulations. The property owner
or authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the
registration shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not
transferable. No permits shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation
who has fees outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any ordinance of
the City.
   3.   Fees. There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit
fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved, from time to time by the Council. Fees on all
buildings or structures constructed by any unit of government or nonprofit
organization may be waived by the Council. No fees shall be collected on
necessary permits for any City project.
   4.   Expiration.
      A.   Every permit issued under the provisions of this Building Code shall
expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such
permit is not commenced within 90 days from the date of issuance of such
permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at
any time after the work is commenced for a period of 60 days. Before such work
can be commenced, a new permit shall be first obtained, and a fee therefore
shall be one-half of the amount required for a new permit for such work,
provided, that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded 120 days.
      B.   All building permits shall expire after 365 days unless an extension
is requested in writing to the Construction Services Administrator 14 days
prior to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may
refuse any extension, but shall do so in writing within seven days of receipt
of the extension request.
      C.   In addition, any time work is suspended or abandoned for more than
60 days, the permit shall expire due to neglect, if the site is not properly
secured, including:
         (1)   Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that
makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
         (2)   A fence to protect any excavation, including partially
constructed swimming pools, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive
nuisance in the neighborhood.
         (3)   Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help
prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be
given to proximity of the construction site, as described in Chapter 11 of this
title.
   5.   Revocation. Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be
summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the violation
of any provision of this Building Code.
   6.   Outstanding Permits. If a permit is outstanding on the effective date
hereof, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the work authorized by
such permit, except to the extent that the Construction Services Administrator
shall determine that the application of such provisions to said work would be
unreasonable. The burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to show the
unreasonableness of such provisions.
   7.   Work without a Permit. If any repairs, additions, alterations, or
demolitions to any swimming pool, swimming pool barrier, portions of any
swimming pool, or any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, where
regulated by this Building Code, without first obtaining a permit, the owner
shall have the responsibility to certify that the work has been completed in
accordance with the applicable codes. The Construction Services Administrator
shall determine the appropriate level of special inspection necessary to ensure
that the work was completed in accordance with the applicable codes. Special
inspections shall be performed by an approved inspector that is qualified or
licensed to work similar to that which is being performed. Any person who
commences any work before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a
fee.
10-10-8 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   For the purposes of this Building Code, the Construction Services
Administrator may also be referred to as the Building Official. It shall be the
duty of the Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of
the Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons
may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction Services
Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise discharging their
official duties, the Construction Services Administrator, or an appointed
assistant or agent, shall have the right to enter, at any time, any building,
area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having
charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of the Construction
Services Administrator, any structure is suspected of being or found to be
defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the premises shall be in
such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers or
the general public, the Construction Services Administrator shall at once order
the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition.
10-10-9 INSPECTIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal,
or cause to be covered or concealed, any new construction, electrical,
plumbing, or mechanical systems or apparatus for which a permit has been
issued, until such new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
systems or apparatus have been inspected and approved as required by this Code.
The Construction Services Administrator shall have the authority to remove or
cause the removal of any obstructions, which may prevent the proper inspection
of new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical systems or apparatus.
Upon the completion of the new construction, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical systems or apparatus, it shall be the duty of the company, firm, or
individual doing the same to notify the Construction Services Administrator,
who shall inspect the same on receipt of such notice for conformance to the
provisions of this Code. Certificates of Occupancy shall not be issued unless
the new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical systems or apparatus
are in conformity with the rules and regulations set forth in this Code. All
public swimming pools shall also be inspected by the Iowa Department of Public
Health. It shall be responsibility of the company, firm, or individual doing
the work to coordinate with the Iowa Department of Public Health regarding
their specific inspection process.
10-10-10 MAINTENANCE.
   1.   It shall be the property owner’s duty to ensure that the swimming pool
or spa are safely operated and maintained, including compliance with the
provisions for constructed barriers. Any swimming pool or spa not safely
operated and not properly maintained, may be deemed a nuisance, and abated as
described in Title 5, Chapter 6 of this Code.
   2.   The property owner of any swimming pool or spa shall be deemed to
consent to periodic inspections of the swimming pool or spa and its components
for compliance with this chapter. All inspections shall be scheduled at
reasonable times by the Construction Services Administrator.
10-10-11 WATER SUPPLY AND WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   1.   The water supply to all swimming pools shall be from a water supply
source meeting the requirements for potable water. Cross connection between any
swimming pool and the potable water source shall not be permitted. Cross
connection, backflow prevention assemblies, and backflow testing shall be in
conformance with Title 8, Chapter 1C Cross Connection Control and Containment
of this Code.
   2.   Wastewater disposal shall include all draining and backwashing
activities associated with swimming pools. All draining and backwashing
activities shall be done in accordance with City policy.
10-10-12 STANDARDS FOR POOL DESIGN, EQUIPMENT, OPERATION, AND INSTALLATION.
   1.   Permanent Swimming Pools. Permanent swimming pools shall be designed
and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-5 (Standard for Residential In-
ground Swimming Pools).
   2.   Spas. Spas shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/
NSPI-6 (Standard for Portable Spas).
   3.   Storable Swimming Pools. Above-ground swimming pools shall be designed
and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-4 (Standard for Above-ground/On-
ground Swimming Pools).
   4.   Public Swimming Pools. All public swimming pools shall be designed and
constructed in compliance with the Iowa Department of Public Health Swimming
Pool Rules.
   5.   Compliance with the City’s adopted Electrical, Plumbing, Mechanical,
Fuel Gas, and Energy Codes shall be required.
10-10-13 BARRIER REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   Spas. Compliance with this section may be accomplished with a lockable
safety cover in accordance with ASTM F 1346, or by the construction of a
barrier as described in this section.
   2.   Swimming Pools. The provisions of this section shall apply to the
required barriers for all swimming pools.
      A.   Barrier Height. The top of the barrier shall be not less than 48
inches above grade where measured on the side of the barrier that faces away
from the swimming pool. Such height shall exist around the entire perimeter of
the swimming pool and for a distance of three feet where measured horizontally
from the required barrier.
      B.   Clearances.
         (1)   The vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the
barrier shall not exceed two inches for grade surfaces that are not solid, such
as grass or gravel, where measured on the side of the required barrier that
faces away from the swimming pool.
         (2)   The vertical clearance between a surface below the barrier to a
solid surface, such as concrete, and the bottom of the required barrier shall
not exceed four inches where measured on the side of the required barrier that
faces away from the swimming pool.
         (3)   There shall be a clear zone of not less than 36 inches around
the exterior of the barrier and around any permanent or temporary structures or
equipment such as pumps, filters, heaters, landscape features, etc. that can be
used to climb the barrier. All trees, bushes, or other landscaping installed
within this 36-inch clear zone shall be trimmed or manicured as to not allow
these items as an aid to climb the barrier. See
Figure 10-10-13B.2d.
Figure 10-10-13B.2d
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3003.png]
         (4)   The swimming pool side of the required barrier shall be not less
than 24 inches from the water’s edge. Required setbacks from property lines
shall be in accordance with Title 11, Chapter 4 of the Code.
         (5)   In the case where the swimming pool area abuts the edge of a
private pond or lake located on the property, a barrier along the edge of the
pond or lake shall not be required provided that the barrier running
perpendicular or angling away from the shoreline shall extend beyond the
water’s edge 24 inches.
      C.   Barrier Design.
         (1)   Barriers Constructed with Horizontal and Vertical Members. Where
the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance
between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches, the
horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence.
Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed one and three-quarters inches
in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing
within the cutouts shall not exceed one and three-quarters inches in width. See
Figure 10-10-13B.3.a1
Figure 10-10-13B.3.a1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3005.png]
         (2)   Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members
and the distance between the tops of the horizontal member is 45 inches or
more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed four inches. Where
there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the
cutouts shall not exceed one and three-quarters inches in width. See
Figure 10-10-13b.3.a2
Figure 10-10-13b.3.a2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3007.png]
         (3)   Solid Barriers. Solid barriers that do not have openings shall
not contain indentations or protrusions that form handholds and footholds,
except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
         (4)   Chain Link, Wire, and Wire Mesh Barriers. Chain link is allowed
with a maximum opening of one and three-quarters inches. Slats may be used if
fastened high and low to create a max opening of one and three-quarters inches.
         (5)   Dwelling Wall as a Barrier. Where a wall of a dwelling or
structure serves as part of the barrier, all doors and operable windows with a
sill height of less than 48 inches that provide direct access to the swimming
pool, through the wall, shall be equipped with one or more of the following:
            a.   A swimming pool with a safety cover that is listed and labeled
in accordance with ASTM F 1346.
            b.   An alarm that produces an audible warning when the door or
window is opened. The alarm shall be listed and labeled as a water hazard
entrance alarm in accordance with UL 2017. The deactivation switch shall be
located 54 inches or more above the threshold of the door.
            c.   A means, approved by the Construction Services Administrator,
of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices.
         (6)   Temporary barrier. During the installation or construction of a
swimming pool, the swimming pool shall be enclosed by a barrier, whether
temporary or permanent.
   If a temporary barrier is utilized during construction, it shall be at least
48 inches high and all of its components shall be sufficient to prevent access
to the swimming pool by any persons not engaged in the installation or
construction process.
      D.   Gates. All pedestrian gates and utility or service gates shall
comply with the following:
         (1)   Pedestrian Gates. All pedestrian access gates shall open outward
away from the swimming pool and shall be self-closing, self-latching, and
equipped to accommodate a locking device. Additionally, all pedestrian access
gates shall comply with the following:
            a.   The self-latching and release mechanism shall be located at
least 54 inches above grade, if it is located on the side of the gate away from
the swimming pool. See
Figure 10-10-13.4a
Figure 10-10-13.4a
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3001.png]
            b.   The self-latching and release mechanism may be located below
54 inches, if it is located on the swimming pool side of the gate and the gate
and barrier has no openings greater than three-eighths inch within 18 inches of
the self-latching and release mechanism.
         (2)   Utility or Service Gates. All utility and service gates shall be
equipped to accommodate a locking device. Utility and service gates shall
remain locked when not in use or when an adult is not within the immediate
vicinity of the gate.
10-10-14 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   In any case where the provisions of this chapter are found to be in conflict
with a provision of the Code of Iowa, or a provision of any zoning, building,
fire, safety or health ordinance or Code of the City, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health
and safety of the people shall prevail.
10-10-15 SITE MAINTENANCE.
   1.   It shall be the permit holder’s responsibility to inspect the
construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of
excess debris. In no case shall debris, refuse, or junk be permitted to blow,
drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
   2.   Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for
controlling erosion on site throughout the duration of the construction
project. Erosion control shall be managed in accordance with
Chapter 11 of this title.
10-10-16 STREET PROTECTION.
   No person performing construction of any nature, or furnishing materials, or
performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street
curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
10-10-17 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any
of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in
Title 1 Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks court
intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may
seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions
as necessary to prevent or remedy violations.
10-10-18 APPEALS.
   Any person affected by a decision of the construction services administrator
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as described in
Title 2 Chapter 2 of this Code.
CHAPTER 11
EROSION CONTROL
 
10-11-1 Title                            10-11-7 Inspection and Enforcement
10-11-2 Purpose                          10-11-8 Abatement of Soil Accumulation
10-11-3 Definitions                      10-11-9 Cleanup by City; Assessment of
                                         Costs
10-11-4 Warning                          10-11-10 Responsibility of Property
                                         Owners or Permittees
10-11-5 Interpretation                   10-11-11 Violation; Penalty
10-11-6 Grading Permit Requirements; Fee  
 
10-11-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Clive Erosion Control Ordinance, may be
cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this chapter.”
10-11-2 PURPOSE.
   1.   The U.S. EPA’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(“NPDES”) Permit Program (“program”) administered by the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources (“IDNR”) requires that cities meeting certain demographic and
environmental impact criteria obtain from the IDNR an NPDES permit for the
discharge of stormwater from a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) (MS4
permit). The City of Clive (“City”) is subject to the program and is required
to obtain, and has obtained, an MS4 permit. The City’s MS4 permit is on file at
the office of the Clerk and is available for public inspection during regular
office hours. As a condition of the City’s MS4 permit, the City is obligated to
undertake primary responsibility for administration and enforcement of the
program by adopting regulations to effectively manage construction site erosion
and sediment controls and to require compliance with the IDNR NPDES General
Permit No. 2.
   2.   The purpose of this chapter is to comply with the MS4 permit
requirements and care for and control the City streets, sidewalks, and sewers
to prevent the despoliation of the environment and to promote and preserve the
rights, privileges, property, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience
of the residents of, and visitors to, the City by regulating and controlling
the design, construction, quality of material, and use and maintenance of any
development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise
results in the movement of soil in the City, and by requiring property owners
to abate certain accumulations of soil.
10-11-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Approval” means formal, written consent by the Council, or authorized
representative of the City.
   2.   “Best Management Practices” (BMPs) means schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practice, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce pollution of waters of the United States. Common
BMPs are described in the “Clive Stormwater Manual,” “Iowa Stormwater
Management Manual,” and the “Statewide Urban Design And Specifications Manual”
(“SUDAS.”) Those BMPs covered within those manuals are not meant to be a
comprehensive list of acceptable BMPs.
   3.   “Construction activity” means any clearing, excavation, filling, or
grading activity affecting more than 500 square feet of land.
   4.   “Erosion” means the wearing away of ground surface as a result of the
movement of wind, water, or ice.
   5.   “Excavate” means the mechanical removal of soil or ground cover, by
which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, trees, vegetation, or other
ground cover is cleared, graded, cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated, or moved, and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
   6.   “Fill” means the depositing of soil by artificial means.
   7.   “Final stabilization” means all construction activity at the site has
been completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of at
least 70 percent has been established.
   8.   “Horticultural activity” means the cultivation of a garden, orchard, or
nursery.
   9.   “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System” (NPDES) means the
program for issuing, modifying, revoking, terminating, monitoring, and
enforcing permits under the Clean Water Act Sections 301, 318, 402, and 405 and
United States Code of Federal Regulations Title 33, Sections 1317, 1328, 1342,
and 1345.
   10.   “Permit holder” means a person holding a grading permit which has
neither expired nor been revoked.
   11.   “Property” means land located in the City, whether or not improved,
with buildings or other structures.
   12.   “Property owner” means a person who, alone or with another person or
other persons, holds the legal title to property; except, however, where
property has been sold on contract to a person who has the present right to
possess the property and the contract has been filed for record in the office
of the County Recorder, the person so purchasing the property, whether alone or
with another person or other persons, is the “property owner” and the person
retaining bare legal title to the property as security for the balance of the
purchase price.
   13.   “Sediment control” means methods employed to prevent sediment from
leaving the site. Sediment control practices include, but are not limited to:
silt fences, sediment traps, earth dikes, drainage swales, check dams,
subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, storm drain inlet protection and
temporary/permanent sediment basins.
   14.   “Sewer” or “city sewer” means all pipes, culverts, channels, manholes,
curb gutters, ditches, and other structures or courses, manmade or natural,
forming a part of the storm sewer system of the City.
   15.   “Sidewalk” or “City sidewalk” means that portion of a public street or
thoroughfare in the City intended for the use of pedestrians.
   16.   “Soil” means dirt, sand, loam, gravel, rock, and other naturally
occurring surficial deposits overlying bedrock.
   17.   “Stormwater” means stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface
runoff and drainage.
   18.   “Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan” (SWPPP) means a plan as defined
in the State NPDES stormwater general permit.
   19.   “Street” or “City street” means all of a public street or thoroughfare
in the City, including the unpaved portions of a public right-of-way generally
referred to as “public parking” but exclusive of sidewalks.
10-11-4 WARNING.
   No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed,
or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter, as indicating the safety of or
quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter, nor
inspections made pursuant thereto, nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises
or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in the risk
associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a
premises has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in any way
constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises.
10-11-5 INTERPRETATION.
   The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take
precedence over any other language contained in this chapter.
10-11-6 GRADING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEE.
   1.   Permit Required. Unless permitted by Subsection 2 of this section, it
is unlawful for any person to undertake any construction activity within any
property in the City unless the owner of such property, or general contractor,
if any, responsible for the work, holds for the property a current grading
permit issued by the Community Development Department permitting such work to
be done. If the construction activity requires an NPDES General Permit No. 2,
the Community Development Department shall not issue the grading permit until
such time as the NPDES General Permit No. 2 has been issued by the IDNR.
   2.   Exceptions. Any language in this chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding, a grading permit is not necessary when excavating or filling
is done:
      A.   To further a farming or horticultural activity;
      B.   By a public utility company for the purpose of installing
underground utilities;
      C.   By City employees on City business or contractors under City’s hire;
      D.   By or under the direction of a soil engineer or engineering
geologist to investigate, test, or evaluate earth materials in conjunction with
the designing and engineering of buildings or other improvements; and
      E.   On property then occupied as the residence of the property owner and
no more than 500 square feet of existing ground cover will be disturbed.
   3.   Permit Review. An SWPPP, prepared in accordance with all current NPDES
General Permit No. 2 minimum requirements, shall be submitted for review prior
to the issuance of a grading permit. The SWPPP shall be site specific and
identify all construction site sources, including building materials, concrete
washout, chemicals, solid waste, and sanitary waste, that may impact water
quality. Additionally, the SWPPP shall identify all BMPs intended to be
utilized to mitigate the potential adverse impacts to water quality from all
construction site sources.
   4.   Issuance. After proper application on forms provided by the City
Community Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of a
registered contractor or property owner. Permits are not transferable. No
permits shall be issued to any person or company who has fees outstanding or
who has outstanding violations of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of
this City.
   5.   Fee. There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit fees
shall be set forth in a fee schedule established and approved, from time to
time, by the Council. Fees on all buildings or structures constructed by any
unit of the government or nonprofit organization may be waived by the Council.
No fees shall be collected on buildings or structures constructed by or for the
City.
   6.   Expiration. Every permit issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by
such permit is not commenced within 90 days from the date of issuance of such
permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at
any time after the work is commenced for a period of 60 days. Before such work
can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained, and the fee therefor
shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided
that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded 120 days.
   7.   Revocation. Any permit required by the provisions of this chapter may
be summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator or Engineering
Services Administrator upon the violation of any provision of this chapter.
10-11-7 INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   1.   Monitor Site for Compliance. It shall be the property owner or permit
holder’s duty to monitor the site daily to assure compliance with the grading
permit.
   2.   City Inspection. With the issuance of a grading permit, the permit
holder acknowledges that the City may conduct site visits at any time to
determine compliance with the grading permit. In the event that a site is found
not to be in compliance with the grading permit, the City will communicate,
verbally or in writing, with the property owner or permit holder as outlined in
the City Erosion and Sediment Control Enforcement Response Plan chapter of the
City Stormwater Management Manual.
   3.   Enforcement. Following notice from the City that the site is not in
compliance with the grading permit, the property owner or permit holder shall
immediately commence corrective action and shall complete corrective action
within the timeframe identified by the City.
10-11-8 ABATEMENT OF SOIL ACCUMULATION.
   1.   Cleanup Required. If, by erosion, vehicle tire, or otherwise, soil
shall be carried from private property in the City and shall accumulate on the
City streets or sidewalks or in the City sewers or established streams and
drainage ditches located in the City, and if such accumulation of soil is by
its presence dangerous to the persons or properties of others or interferes
with the safe use or efficient operation or maintenance of said streets,
sidewalks, sewers, streams, and drainage ditches, the owner of such property,
and the permit holder for such property, if there be one, shall cause such
accumulation of soil to be cleaned from said streets, sidewalks, sewers,
streams and drainage ditches as directed by the City. Failure to take
corrective action shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Anytime the
Construction Services Administrator, Code Enforcement Officer, or Engineering
Services Administrator determines that the presence of such accumulation of
soil is hazardous to life and limb or materially disruptive of the normal use
of such streets, sidewalks, sewers, streams, or drainage ditches, they may
authorize the immediate cleanup by the City as outlined in Section
10-11-9 of this chapter.
   2.    Serving of Cleanup Orders. Cleanup orders issued pursuant to this
section shall be in writing and shall be served in a manner prescribed for the
service of civil process by the Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure; except, however,
such an order to a permit holder for the property may also be given verbally by
the Construction Services Administrator, Code Enforcement Officer, or
Engineering Services Administrator, either in person or by telephone call, to
the permit holder or to a person designated by the permit holder to receive
such notices from the Building Official, or to a family member, employee, or
associate of such permit holder or designee as is found at the addresses or
phone numbers of the permit holder or designee listed on the excavation permit.
   3.   Each Day a Separate Offense. Each day a property owner or permit holder
remains in violation of a cleanup order given pursuant to this section shall
constitute a new and separate violation of this chapter.
10-11-9 CLEANUP BY CITY; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   If the property owner or permit holder fails to clean accumulations of soil
from the City streets and sidewalks, City sewers or established streams and
drainage ditches in the City within the time period described by the
Construction Services Administrator, Code Enforcement Officer, or Engineering
Services Administrator in the order given pursuant to the Clive Erosion and
Sediment Control Enforcement Response Plan chapter of the City Stormwater
Management Manual, the City may do so by its own crews or by persons under its
hire, and assess against the property owner and permit holder the City’s costs
therefor. Said costs shall include the salaries earned by City employees during
such cleanup operations, a charge for City machinery used, and such other costs
and expenses as the City actually incurred. To the extent allowed by State law,
such costs and expenses may be assessed against the property and collected in
the same manner as a Property Tax.
10-11-10 RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS OR PERMITTEES.
   The failure of City officials to observe or foresee hazardous or unsightly
conditions, or to impose other or additional conditions or requirements on
permit holders, or to deny or revoke a grading permit, or to stop work in
violation of this chapter shall not relieve the property owners or permit
holders of the consequences of their actions or inactions or result in the
City, its officers, or agents being liable therefor or on account thereof.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, every applicant bears final and
complete responsibility for compliance with a State NPDES General Permit No. 2
and any other requirements of State or federal law or administrative rule.
10-11-11 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject
to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in Title 1
Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs or is
permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
CHAPTER 12
RENTAL HOUSING CODE
10-12-1 Short Title                      10-12-9 Building Official
10-12-2 Purpose                          10-12-10 Audit Inspection
10-12-3 Warning                          10-12-11 Complaint by Tenant
10-12-4 Interpretation                   10-12-12 Deletions
10-12-5 Adoption                         10-12-13 Amendments
10-12-6 Scope and Occupancy Requirements 10-12-14 Violations of Enforcement
                                         Strategies
10-12-7 Indemnification                  10-12-15 Collection of Fees, Fines,
                                         Penalties and Costs
10-12-8 Rental Registration, Certificate 10-12-16 Appeals
Requirements, Conditions and Fees
 
10-12-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Clive Rental Housing Code, and may be
cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “Rental Housing Code.”
10-12-2 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to ensure that property owners, their
operators and others, to meet their responsibilities with respect to proper
operation and maintenance of rental housing facilities and to provide for
inspection as a means of compelling compliance therewith. It is not the purpose
of this chapter to create any duty on the part of the City, its officers,
agents, or employees, owing to any individual member of the public or to
protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is
not the intent of this chapter to create any duty or liability by the City, its
officers, agents, or employees, to premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any
other person.
10-12-3 WARNING.
   No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed
or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter, as indicating the safety of or
quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter, nor
inspections made pursuant thereto, nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises
or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in the risk
associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a
premises has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in any way
constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises.
10-12-4 INTERPRETATION.
   1.   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, such
provisions shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and welfare. These regulations shall be construed
broadly to promote the purposes for which they are adopted.
   2.   These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or
annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, private covenants or
other provision of law except as provided in these regulations. If a conflict
between requirements appears within this chapter; the most restrictive
requirement shall prevail.
   3.   Information erroneously presented by any official or employee of the
City does not negate or diminish the provisions of this chapter pertaining
thereto.
   4.   Whenever a number of days is specified in this chapter, or in any
permit, condition of approval or notice issued or given as set forth in this
chapter, such number of days shall be deemed to be consecutive calendar days,
unless otherwise specified.
   5.   Whenever application of this chapter results in standards being
expressed in fractions of whole numbers, such fractions are to be rounded to
the next higher whole number.
   6.   No action of the City, its City Council, Community Development
Department staff or the Building Code Appeals Board shall be deemed invalid by
reason of failure to comply with or conform to the provisions of this chapter,
provided that the procedural requirements of the Code of Iowa have been met.
   7.   It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of interpretation
and enforcement shall be first presented to the Construction Services
Administrator, and that such questions shall be presented to the Building Codes
Appeal Board only on appeal from the decision of the Construction Services
Administrator and that recourse from the decision of the Building Codes Appeal
Board shall be as provided by law.
10-12-5 ADOPTION.
   Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2024 edition, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is adopted in full except for such portions
as may be hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, and shall constitute the
“Rental Housing Code” of the City. An official copy of the International
Property Maintenance Code, 2024 edition, as adopted, and a certified copy of
this chapter can be viewed in the Community Development Department.
10-12-6 SCOPE AND OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the maintenance, repair,
equipment, use and occupancy of all rental housing units, accessory buildings
and accessory structures now in existence or hereafter constructed,
habilitated, renovated or converted to residential use within the corporate
limits, including but not limited to one and two family dwellings, multiple-
family dwellings, accessory dwelling units, lodging houses, boarding houses,
short-term rental properties and long-term rental properties.
   1.   Exceptions:
      A.   Single-family dwellings occupied by the owner, or members of that
owner’s immediate family.
      B.   A duplex, at least one of the units of which is occupied by the
owner, and the other unit is occupied by a member of that owner’s immediate
family.
      C.   Single family dwellings occupied by the owner who desire to have not
more than one non-family enrolled student living with them for the duration of
the student’s educational opportunity.
      D.   Transient shelters and group homes subject to State licensing.
      E.   Hotels, motels, extended stay hotels, and other similar uses subject
to State-licensing.
   2.   The occupancy designations listed below, along with their code
designations shall be used to regulate the various groups of rental housing.
The following occupancies are defined in Section
10-12-13.
      A.   Boarding House.
         (1)   All boarding house fire protection, life safety and existing
requirements shall be regulated by the currently adopted Fire Code, Building
Code, International Property Maintenance Code and this Rental Housing Code.
Boarding houses shall only be allowed in R-3 Zoning Districts or as referenced
by the Zoning Code and adopted by Council. The zoning use regulations in effect
shall take precedence over this rental code.
      B.   Lodging House.
         (1)   If occupant load space per Table 404.5 is available, owner-
occupied lodging houses are allowed 4 separate leases or subleases allowing 5
total bedrooms to be utilized per dwelling unit.
         (2)   Duplexes and ADUs are considered two dwelling units.
         (3)   All lodging house life safety requirements shall be regulated by
the currently adopted International Residential Code, International Property
Maintenance Code and this Rental Housing Code. Lodging houses shall only be
allowed through a Special Use Permit or as referenced by the Zoning Code and
adopted by Council. The zoning use regulations in effect shall take precedence
over this rental code.
      C.   Single-Family Rental Home.
         (1)   All single-family rental homes shall be bound by a single lease.
No subleases shall be obtained.
         (2)   The single tenant who obtains the single lease with the owner,
shall be designated as the operator and shall reside at the property.
         (3)   A copy of the single lease listing all occupants shall be made
available to the City upon request. The owner and operator are required to keep
the single lease current and shall provide a copy of the lease to the City
within 48 hours of the request.
         (4)   If an accessory dwelling unit (ADU) exists on the same parcel as
the single-family dwelling and the owner desires to rent out both dwellings, a
maximum of 2 separate leases will be allowed.
         (5)   All single-family rental home life safety requirements shall be
regulated by the currently adopted International Residential Code,
International Property Maintenance Code and this Rental Housing Code.
      D.   Short Term Rental Property.
         (1)   It shall be a violation of this Code for any person to let to
another a short-term rental property unless the owner holds a valid Rental
Certificate issued by the City.
         (2)   All provisions of the Rental Housing Code shall apply to short-
term rental properties except no application fee, initial inspection and
reinspection fees or certificate fees may be charged. If any reinspections past
the initial free reinspection, are required, the owner will be charged for this
additional inspection.
      E.   Long Term Rental Property.
         (1)   All rentals considered long term shall be subject to all the
requirements of this rental code, including the required fees. Exception #3
under
10-12-6 Scope and Occupancy Requirements will be honored for owners in good
standing with the City.
10-12-7 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The applicant for any Rental Certificate under this chapter, by making such
application, assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property
whatsoever, and injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in
connection with or related to the issuance of such Rental Certificate or the
doing of anything there under, or the failure of such applicant, or the
operators, employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the City; and
such applicant, by making such application, forever indemnifies the City, its
officers and employees and agrees to save it and them harmless from any and all
claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury
or death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even though acts or
omissions of the City, its officers or employees may have caused or contributed
thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be a part of any
certificate issued under this chapter whether expressly recited therein or not.
10-12-8 RENTAL REGISTRATION, CERTIFICATE REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS AND FEES.
   1.   Required Registration. After the effective date of this ordinance, no
person shall rent, lease, let, operate or otherwise allow the occupancy of any
dwelling unit or any portion of any dwelling unit (including sleeping rooms)
unless they hold a valid Rental Certificate issued by the Community Development
Department or meet one of the exceptions as provided for in
10-12-6.
   2.   Certificate Issuance. Following submission and review of a proper
registration application on forms provided by the Community Development
Department, payment of associated rental fees, verification of a single lease
arrangement as requested, determination of occupancy by the department,
performance of a self-inspection of the unit being registered and signing a
rental owner acknowledgement form, the Community Development Department shall
issue a Rental Certificate to the owner. No Rental Certificates shall be
renewed or issued to any person, firm, or corporation who has fees outstanding
or who has outstanding violations of any ordinance of the City.
   3.   Rental Certificate. The owner or operator of a rental unit must be able
to show a copy of a valid Rental Certificate upon request. Apartment buildings
will only be issued one certificate that lists all the individual units within
said building. Failure to maintain all units within an apartment may jeopardize
the Rental Certificate for the entire said building.
   4.   Expiration. Rental Certificates shall be valid through the expiration
date contained, thereon. Prior to the expiration date of the Rental
Certificate, the Community Development Department shall provide a renewal
notice to the owner advising of the requirements for renewal of the Rental
Certificate. Failure of the owner to complete the requirements for renewal will
result in a late payment penalty being applied to the balance owed. A rent
abatement order will be placed 31 days after expiration of the Rental
Certificate, if a renewal is not completed prior. If the renewal is not
completed within 45 days following expiration, an additional notice of
violation will be issued to the property owner.
   5.   Reduced Term Rental Certificate, Suspension, or Revocation. Any Rental
Certificate may be reduced, suspended or revoked as provided in Section
10-12-16(D) Sanctions.
   If, at the discretion of the Construction Service Administrator, an
emergency exists which threatens the immediate health, safety or general
welfare of the occupant or general public, the Construction Services
Administrator may immediately issue an order suspending the Rental Certificate.
Upon issuance of the order, the occupant of the unit shall immediately vacate
the premise until the Rental Certificate is reinstated.
   6.   Transfer. Rental Certificates shall not be transferable to succeeding
owners. Rental Certificates shall automatically terminate and become null and
void, without further action of the City, upon transfer of property ownership
or upon execution of an agreement to purchase property on contract.
      A.   Notice of Ownership Change.
         (1)   Every buyer and seller of a rental property shall give notice to
the Community Development Department within 30 days after closing or execution
of a contract. This notice shall include the name and address of the buyer and
their agent. If the department has not been notified within 30 days, a notice
of violation may be issued.
   7.   Outstanding Issues. If an owner has outstanding fees, fines or
violations on any property within the City of Clive, the issuance of a Rental
Certificate may be withheld by the Community Development Department.
   8.   Fees. The fees for services performed by the Community Development
Department in carrying out its responsibilities under this Code shall be as
indicated in a fee schedule adopted from time to time by the City Council.
10-12-9 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   For the purposes of this Code, the Construction Services Administrator may
also be referred to as the Building Official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the
Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons
may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction Services
Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise discharging their
official duties, the Construction Services Administrator or an appointed
assistant or agent shall have the right to enter at any time any building,
area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having
charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of the Construction
Services Administrator, any structure is suspected of being or found to be
defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the premises shall be in
such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers,
or the general public, the Construction Services Administrator shall at once
order the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition.
10-12-10 AUDIT INSPECTION.
   The Community Development Department shall seek to conduct an audit
inspection of every rental unit within the corporate limits of the City every
six (6) years. Additional inspections required beyond one reinspection shall be
charged to the owner as indicated in the fee schedule adopted from time to time
by City Council. The owner or designated operator shall be present for all
inspections. As part of the inspection process, the City may determine to
extend or shorten the timeframe to the next scheduled inspection. Factors that
may influence the City to inspect more or less frequently include, but are not
limited to, the following:
   1.   Age and condition of building or unit.
   2.   Inspection history.
   3.   Tenant/management/resident complaints.
   4.   Natural disasters such as flooding.
   5.   Delayed maintenance/repairs, follow-up, or fee payments by the owner.
10-12-11 COMPLAINT BY TENANT.
   Unless there are significant health, safety or general welfare issues, a
tenant must first complain to the owner or agent. Complaints must be submitted
in writing and if desired, forms for that purpose will be available from the
Community Development Department.
   1.   An owner or operator shall have seven days to address the complaint. If
the complaint is not remedied to the tenant’s satisfaction within twenty days,
the Community Development Department will schedule an inspection with the
tenant and owner. If violations are found, an inspection fee shall be charged
to the owner. If the violation(s) are not corrected before or on the correction
date indicated by the inspector, the City has the authority to place a rent
abatement order per Section
10-12-16(1) Rent Abatement, on the rental unit.
   2.   No person shall pursue an action for eviction because the occupant has
reported a violation of this chapter.
   3.   No person shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility
required under this chapter to be removed, shut off, or discontinued in
retaliation for a complaint.
10-12-12 DELETIONS.
   The following sections are deleted from the Property Maintenance Code and
are of no force or effect in this chapter.
   1.   Section 101 Scope and General Requirements
   2.   Section 103 Code Compliance Agency
   3.   Section 107 Means of Appeal
10-12-13 AMENDMENTS.
   The paragraphs in this section represent amendments to the requirements
contained in the Property Maintenance Code.
   1.   Section 202 General Definitions add the following:
      A.   “Bedroom” means a habitable room within a dwelling or sleeping unit
used or intended to be used for sleeping. Minimum size requirements for
bedrooms are set forth in Table 404.5 of this Code.
      B.   “Code Compliance Settlement Agreement” means a written agreement
that shall include a list of specific actions and a specific schedule of
deadlines for actions to abate the current violation(s) and avoid further code
violations. It may also include provisions for periodic reassessment of the
agreement or any written modification of the agreement.
      C.   “Cooking provisions, permanent” means a room or space within a
dwelling unit that is used or designed to be used for the preparation and
cooking of food. The minimum components include a countertop, a sink with
running water, and a stove or stove hookup utilizing gas or 220 volt electric.
      D.   “Dwelling” means any building that contains one or more dwelling
units occupied or designed to be occupied for residential living purposes.
Dwelling excludes hotels, mobile homes, nursing facilities, and assisted living
residential facilities. Types of dwellings and/or dwelling units include:
         (1)   “Dwelling, accessory unit” means an additional residential
dwelling unit that is subordinate to the principal dwelling unit on the same
lot, does not provide direct and free access to the principal dwelling unit and
its amenities, and provides a reasonable expectation of privacy from residents
of the principal dwelling. Accessory dwelling units may either be a detached
building or attached or internal to the principal building. For the purposes of
this definition, a dwelling unit is “subordinate” to the principal dwelling
when all the following apply:
            a.   The additional dwelling unit does not have an exterior door
oriented toward and readily visible from the front yard.
            b.   The additional dwelling unit does not have a separate address.
            c.   The additional dwelling unit is provided water from the same
metered service as the existing principal dwelling.
         (2)   “Dwelling, apartment” means a dwelling unit within a multiple
family dwelling. Apartments may be either leased or owned by the occupant.
         (3)   “Dwelling, boarding house” means a building providing completed
living facilities, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking, and sanitation, where, for compensation, meals or lodging are provided
under 2 or more leases. Boarding house does not include accessory dwelling
units, or a facility, home, or program otherwise subject to licensure by the
Code of Iowa.
         (4)   “Dwelling, duplex” means a building containing only two dwelling
units located on the same lot, where neither unit is accessory nor subordinate
to the other in terms of size, scale, and use. A duplex dwelling shall have a
separate address, and a separate water metered service for each dwelling unit.
         (5)   “Dwelling, lodging house” means an owner-occupied single-family
dwelling unit or portion thereof, containing not more than 4 guestrooms which
are used for overnight lodging and made available to the general public, where
rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. Meals, with or without
additional compensation, may be provided or served to overnight guests. Also
referred to as a “Bed and Breakfast.”
         (6)   “Dwelling, multiple-family” means a building that contains three
or more dwelling units located on the same lot, exclusive of permitted
accessory dwelling units.
         (7)   “Dwelling, single-family” means a building that contains only
one principal dwelling unit and occupied exclusively for residence purposes,
including naturally or commonly occurring uses specified herein.
         (8)   “Dwelling, townhouse” means a single dwelling unit in a
townhouse development that extends from foundation to roof and that has a yard
or public way on not less than two sides. Townhouse dwelling units may be
either attached by one or more common walls or detached.
         (9)   “Dwelling unit” means a single unit providing complete
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. A dwelling
unit shall contain no more than two interior rooms or spaces providing
permanent cooking provisions. For the purposes of this definition with rental
housing, a bed, day bed, couch, futon or other similar multipurpose sleeping
furniture shall constitute the provisions for sleeping.
      E.   “Family, immediate” means a spouse, child, parent, stepparent,
stepchild, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother, sister, daughter-in-law, son-
in-law, grandchild, and grandparent.
      F.   “Guest” means an individual who shares a dwelling unit on a
temporary basis for not more than 30 days in any given calendar year. For the
purposes of the Rental Housing Code, guests shall not possess a signed lease
with the owner or be defined as a tenant. All short-term rental occupants shall
be considered tenants. All guests shall be included in the maximum occupant
load count for the dwelling unit.
      G.   “Long term rental property” means any rental unit that is occupied
or intended to be occupied for 31 or more consecutive days in a calendar year.
      H.   “Occupant” means a person who is physically present in the dwelling
and is engaged in activities of daily living, including, but not limited to,
sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation, for at least thirty 31 days in a
calendar year or who is a tenant.
      I.   “Operator” means any person who has custody or control of the
building or parts thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let or
who has custody or control of the premises.
      J.   “Owner” means any person who has custody and/or control of any
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit by virtue of a contractual interest in
or legal or equitable title to said dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit as
guardian or conservator.
      K.   “Rental Certificate” means a certificate that is issued by the
Community Development Department after written application if the dwelling
unit, at the date of such application, is entitled thereto.
      L.   “Rental unit” means any house or building or portion thereof which
is occupied in whole or part as a home or residence of one or more tenants, on
a rental basis, or when, in return for housing, a tenant agrees to occupy and
maintain the premises and pay utilities.
      M.   “Short term rental property” means any individually or collectively
owned single-family dwelling or dwelling unit; any unit or group of units in a
condominium, cooperative, or timeshare; or an owner-occupied residential home
that is offered for a fee for 30 or fewer consecutive days in a calendar year.
All short-term rental occupants shall be considered tenants.
      N.   “Single-family rental home” means a non-owner-occupied single-family
dwelling unit where rent is paid under a single lease with no subleases
allowed.
      O.   “Sleeping provision, permanent” relating to the Rental Housing Code,
means a bed, day bed, couch, futon or other similar multipurpose sleeping
furniture.
      P.   “Tenant” means: (i) an occupant who occupies a dwelling unit who
pays, or has payments made on their behalf, a stated payment at fixed intervals
for the use of the dwelling unit; or (ii) a person occupying a dwelling unit
owned by another individual, who, in return for housing, agrees to occupy and
maintain the premises and pay utilities, or (iii) an occupant of a short-term
rental property.
   2.   Add Section 301.2.1 Basic Duties of Owner:
      A.   Comply with all obligations primarily imposed upon tenants by
applicable provisions of building and housing codes affecting health and
safety.
      B.   Make all repairs and do whatever is necessary to put and keep the
premises in a fit and habitable condition.
      C.   Keep all common areas of the premises, including the exterior areas,
in a clean and safe condition.
      D.   Maintain in good and safe working order and condition all
electrical, plumbing, sanitary, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, and
other facilities and appliances, including elevators, supplied or required to
be supplied by the owner.
      E.   Provide and maintain appropriate receptacles and conveniences,
accessible to all tenants, for the central collection and removal of ashes,
garbage, rubbish, and other waste incidental to the occupancy of the dwelling
unit and arrange for their removal.
      F.   Supply running water and hot water at all times, and supply heat as
required by the code.
      G.   Practice reasonable due diligence in accepting tenant(s) to ensure
the health, safety, and general welfare of the community is preserved.
Violations of Code Title 5 (Chapters 4-11) shall be directed to the Rental
Certificate owner.
      H.   Execution of a rental agreement (lease) with the tenant which uphold
the regulations of the City and the Iowa Uniform Residential Landlord and
Tenant Act. Rules shall be established within the rental agreement to expedite
the termination of the rental agreement and eviction for problematic tenants.
   3.   Add Section 301.2.2 Tenant Obligations:
      A.   Comply with all obligations primarily imposed upon tenants by
applicable provisions of building and housing codes materially affecting health
and safety.
      B.   Comply with all City regulations regarding nuisances, parking, and
City Code Title 7 (Chapters 4-11).
      C.   Keep that part of the premises that the tenant occupies and uses
clean and safe as the condition of the premises permit.
      D.   Dispose from the tenant’s dwelling unit all ashes, rubbish, garbage,
and other waste in a clean and safe manner.
      E.   Keep all plumbing fixtures in the dwelling unit or used by the
tenant as clean as their condition permits.
      F.   Use in a reasonable manner all electrical, plumbing, sanitary,
heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other facilities and appliances
including elevators or stairways in the premises.
      G.   Not deliberately or negligently destroy, deface, damage, impair or
remove a part of the premises or knowingly permit a person to do so.
      H.   Upon proper notice (24 hours), shall not unreasonably withhold
consent to the landlord to enter the dwelling unit in order to inspect the
premises, make necessary or agreed repairs, alterations, or improvements,
supply necessary or agreed services, or exhibit the dwelling unit to
prospective or actual purchasers, mortgagees, tenants, workers, or contractors.
      I.   Not act in a manner that will disturb a neighbor’s peaceful
enjoyment of the premises or surrounding premises.
   4.   Section 302.4 Weeds. Delete in its entirety and insert the following.
      A.   Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free
from grasses and weeds in accordance with Title 5,
Chapter 6 Nuisances; Abatement Procedures.
   5.   Section 303.2 Enclosures. Delete this section and insert the following.
      A.   Enclosures. Enclosures, covers, and gates protecting swimming pools
and hot tubs and spas shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
Title 10,
Chapter 10 of the City Code.
   6.   Section 304.14 Insect Screens. Insert the following dates.
      A.   April 1st to November 1st.
   7.   Add Section 307.3 New/Replacement Handrails or Guardrails.
      A.   Handrails and guardrails undergoing any change, remodel or
replacement shall be installed in accordance with the currently adopted Clive
Building Code.
   8.   Section 404.4.1 Room Area. Delete this section and insert the
following.
      A.   Every living room shall contain not less than 120 square feet, and
every bedroom shall contain not less than 70 square feet.
      Exception: Efficiency units as established in the International Property
Maintenance Code.
   9.   Section 404.5 Overcrowding. Delete this section in its entirety,
including Table 404.5, and replace with the following.
      A.   Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than
permitted by the minimum area requirements of the following table.
 
Room Type         Room Area                    Maximum Occupant Load
Bedroom           At least 70 sq. ft. but less 1 per room
                  than 120 sq. ft.
Bedroom           120 sq. ft. to 180 sq. ft.   2 per room
Bedroom           180 sq. ft. or more          3 per room
Multipurpose Room At least 70 sq. ft.          1 per room, not more than 2 per
                                               dwelling unit
Notes:
•   See Section 202 for bedroom definition.
•   For the purposes of this section, a multi-purpose room may include a
living room, den, study, or other similar room that by design or layout is not
primarily intended to be used as a bedroom, but that is otherwise habitable
and provides accommodations for sleeping such as a bed, daybed, couch, futon
or similar multipurpose sleeping furniture. All rooms used for sleeping shall
contain a code compliant emergency escape and rescue opening and code
compliant smoke alarms.
 
   10.   Section 602.3 Heat Supply. Insert the following dates.
      A.   September 1st to May 30th.
   11.   Section 602.4. Occupiable Workspaces. Insert the following dates.
      A.   September 1st to May 30th.
   12.   Add Section 603.7 Corrugated Stainless-Steel Tubing (CSST).
      A.   Corrugated stainless-steel tubing shall be bonded to the electrical
grounding system or panelboard utilized by the existing electrical service.
This shall be done in accordance with the tubing manufacturer’s
recommendations.
      B.   All new CSST shall be arc resistant corrugated stainless-steel
tubing listed in accordance with ANSI LCI (Optional Section 5.16)/CSA 6.026.
   13.   Add Section 605.2.1 Kitchen Receptacles.
      A.   All 15- and 20-amp receptacle outlets that serve kitchen countertop
areas shall be ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protected. If no ground
wire is present, the GFCI shall be properly labeled as such.
   14.   Add Section 605.2.2 Bathroom Receptacles.
      A.   All 15- and 20-amp receptacle outlets located within bathrooms shall
be ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protected. If no ground wire is
present, the GFCI shall be properly labeled as such.
   15.   Add Section 605.2.3 Other Receptacle Outlets.
      A.   All 15- and 20-amp receptacle outlets located within 6’ of a sink
shall be ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protected. If no ground wire
is present, the GFCI shall be properly labeled as such.
   16.   Add Section 605.2.4 Garage/Accessory Building Receptacles.
      A.   All 15- and 20-amp receptacle outlets located within garages/
accessory buildings shall be ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protected.
If no ground wire is present, the GFCI shall be properly labeled as such.
   17.   Add Section 605.2.5 Outdoor Receptacles.
      A.   All 15- and 20-amp receptacle outlets located outdoors shall be
ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protected. If no ground wire is
present, the GFCI shall be properly labeled as such.
   18.   Section 702.4 Emergency Escape and Rescue Openings. Delete this
section and insert the following language.
      A.   All emergency escape and rescue windows original to when the
dwelling unit was constructed, that easily open to the maximum extent designed
and are located within 52 inches or less from the finished floor or provided
platform shall be allowed to remain in place. All emergency escape and rescue
windows considered for replacement or that have already been replaced with
replacement windows or insert windows shall meet the following conditions:
         (1)   Buildings built prior to January 1, 1972:
            a.   The replacement window is the manufacturer’s largest standard
size window that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening.
The replacement window is of the same operating style as the existing window or
a style that provides for an equal or greater window opening area than the
existing window.
            b.   The minimum net clear opening height shall be 20 inches, and
the minimum net clear opening width shall be 20 inches.
            c.   In no case shall the replacement window provide less than 4.0
square feet of net clear opening.
            d.   The bottom of the clear opening of the replacement window
shall not be greater than 48 inches above the finished floor or code-approved
window platform.
         Exception: Existing window openings that open directly to existing
finished grade level are allowed up to (52) fifty-two inches above the finished
floor or code-approved window platform to accommodate existing taller
foundations.
         (2)   Buildings built after January 1, 1972:
            a.   The replacement window is the manufacturer’s largest standard
size window that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening.
The replacement window is of the same operating style as the existing window or
a style that provides for an equal or greater window opening area than the
existing window.
            b.   In no case shall the measurement from the bottom of the window
opening to the finished floor and minimum net opening width and height
requirements be less than the code-applicable when the building was built.
      B.   All new window openings created that will serve as an emergency
escape and rescue opening, shall be sized and placed to accommodate windows
with net openings and heights like that for new construction. New construction
requirements shall follow the most currently adopted International Residential
Code or International Building Code.
      C.   Doors used as emergency escape and rescue openings shall be
maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction.
      D.   All emergency escape and rescue openings shall meet both of the
following requirements:
         (1)   Shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use
of keys, tools or special knowledge.
         (2)   Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be
placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided that the minimum net
clear opening size complies with the code referenced above and the unit is
equipped with code compliant smoke alarms. Such devices shall be releasable or
removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool, special knowledge or
force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape
and rescue opening.
   19.   704.6 Single and Multiple-Station Smoke Alarms. Add the following
language:
         A.   Smoke alarms shall be listed in accordance with UL 217.
Combination smoke and carbon monoxide alarms shall be listed in accordance with
UL 217 and UL 2034.
   20.   704.6.1 Where Required. Delete the three exceptions.
   21.   704.6.1.2 Groups R-2, R-3, R-4, and I-1. Add the following:
      A.   Immediate vicinity shall mean the following distances from the alarm
to the bedroom door:
         (1)   (25’) twenty-five feet for alarms with primary power from
building wiring or per manufacturer recommendations, whichever is less.
         (2)   (10’) ten feet for battery operated alarms or per manufacturer
recommendations, whichever is less.
         (3)   In Theater Rooms, Exercise Rooms, and Mechanical Rooms.
Mechanical closets less than 16 square feet are exempt from the requirement of
having a smoke alarm within the closet if another smoke alarm is located within
the immediate vicinity of the closet door as determined above.
   22.   704.6.3 Power Source. Add the following language.
      A.   Existing smoke alarms powered by building power shall never be
replaced with solely battery-operated alarms.
      B.   All solely-battery operated smoke alarms shall be 10-year sealed in
place battery type.
   23.   705.2.1 Power Source. Add the following language:
      A.   All solely-battery operated carbon monoxide alarms shall be 10-year
sealed in place battery type.
10-12-14 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT STRATEGIES.
   The City reserves the right to impose any of the following enforcement
strategies to keep all rental housing in good standing. Any strategy may be
used individually, or multiple strategies may be used concurrently.
   1.   Rent Abatement. No rent shall be recoverable by the owner or lessee of
any dwelling which does not comply with the Rental Housing Code until such time
as the dwelling does comply with the Rental Housing Code.
      A.   The Construction Services Administrator may order rent abated when
they have determined the owner has:
         (1)   Failed to provide an essential service (water, sewer,
electricity, heat);
         (2)   Failed to remedy a condition that poses a substantial risk to
the health or safety of the tenant(s);
         (3)   Rented at the subject dwelling unit without a rental permit; or
         (4)   Rented the subject dwelling unit in a manner not permitted by
this Code.
      B.   Rent abatement means that the owner may not recover rent from the
tenant. Rent shall be abated until the condition for which rent abatement was
ordered has, in the judgement of the Construction Services Administrator, been
remedied.
      C.   The Construction Services Administrator shall provide a copy of the
rent abatement order to the owner at the address on the Rental Permit and to
the tenant by U.S. Mail and by posting the entrance door to the dwelling unit.
Notice of termination of the rent abatement order will be given in the same
manner.
   2.   Municipal Citation. Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or
failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal
infraction as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Article A of this Code. In the
event the City seeks court intervention for a violation of any provision of
this chapter, the City may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and
additional costs. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking
such other lawful actions as necessary to prevent or remedy violations.
   3.   Code Compliance Meeting. A code compliance meeting may be scheduled if
any combination of three or more written nuisance, zoning, building, housing,
other notices of Code violation, or three or more parking tickets issued on
separate dates are written within a 12-month period on or directly adjacent the
premises.
      A.   Said meeting shall be scheduled during normal business hours of the
City.
      B.   The owner, operator, and one adult tenant of each involved dwelling
unit shall attend the scheduled meeting.
      C.   A Code Compliance Settlement Agreement shall be drafted in which the
owner, operator and tenant(s) agree to take corrective action to avoid future
violations. If the property owner, operator or tenant does not attend the
scheduled code compliance meeting, fails or refuses to sign the Code Compliance
Agreement, or fails to comply with the guidelines outlined in the agreement,
the City may then refer the owner to the Building Codes Appeal Board with a
recommendation to impose one or more of the rental permit sanctions identified
in this chapter.
   4.   Sanctions. The City, including the Building Codes Appeal Board,
reserves the right to impose sanctions as necessary to safeguard the health,
safety, and general welfare of the neighborhood and tenants. Sanctions may be
applied to an individual dwelling unit, the entire rental dwelling, or the
premises. Each separate violation may constitute a Rental Permit sanction
unless the owner qualifies for a defense to an enforcement action. Unless an
emergency exists, all sanction requests shall be heard by the Building Codes
Appeal Board with the request stayed until the board rule is final. Failure of
the owner or operator to attend the hearing shall forfeit the owner’s
opportunity for a hearing and the recommended sanctions shall be placed in
immediate effect. Referral to the Building Codes Appeal Board for sanction
related cases shall not require an application fee to be paid by the owner.
   Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the Rental Permit sanctions are
not applicable to victims of abuse or crime as provide in the Code.
   Transfer of Ownership. Transfer of ownership does not modify or alter any
sanction imposed unless approved by the City or unless the transfer is due to a
sale of the property between disinterested parties as determined by the City.
   In deciding the severity of the rental permit sanction, the City will
consider the following:
      A.   Level of cooperation of the parties to resolve all issues;
      B.   Level of disturbance associated with the violations;
      C.   Impact of violations on neighbors or other victims;
      D.   Degree to which parties have taken reasonable steps to resolve the
issues; and
      E.   Property/owner violation history.
   Property owner defenses to an enforcement action:
      A.   Owner reported the violation of law enforcement.
      B.   Owner evicted or attempted to evict tenants charged with a
violation.
      C.   Owner undertook reasonable means to avoid a reoccurrence of Code
violations.
      D.   Owner executed a written plan/agreement/new rental agreement with
the tenants to address any future issues.
   5.   Reduced Term Rental Certificate. Reduced term Rental Certificates shall
be renewed annually and inspected by the City every 2 years. Fees charged shall
be per the fee schedule adopted from time to time by Council. This sanction
shall be in effect for a period of not less than four years from the date of
the final ruling. A reduced term Rental Certificate sanction may be imposed for
the following reasons:
      A.   If the owner, occupant, or any guest has, on two or more occasions
within a Rental Certificate cycle, been issued criminal convictions for
violations of the Iowa Code, City Code, or federal Code pertaining to:
         (1)   Controlled substance
         (2)   Assault
         (3)   Willful injury
         (4)   Terrorism
         (5)   Stalking
         (6)   Trafficking stolen weapons
         (7)   Reckless use of a firearm
         (8)   Consumption of alcohol in a public place
         (9)   Alcohol intoxication in a public place
         (10)   Possession of alcohol under the legal age
         (11)   Noise control (due to reckless activities)
         (12)   Criminal mischief
         (13)   Trespassing
         (14)   Interference with official acts
         (15)   Disorderly conduct
         (16)   Obstructing an officer
         (17)   Damaging or defacing property
         (18)   Indecent exposure
         (19)   Disorderly house
         (20)   Public urination and defecation
      B.   If the owner, any occupant, or any guest has, on four or more
occasions within a Rental Certificate cycle, been issued municipal citations,
tickets or written violations of the City Code on the premises of a rental
property regarding:
         (1)   Building or housing codes
         (2)   Zoning ordinance
         (3)   Nuisance ordinance
         (4)   Graffiti
         (5)   Illegal parking
   6.   Suspension of Rental Certificate. A Rental Certificate shall be
suspended for no more than 180 days beginning on the date the ruling is a final
non-appealable decision. Subject to federal or State law to the contrary,
suspension of a Rental Certificate shall be cause for the tenants to be evicted
within 45 days of the suspension final non-appealable decision. The Building
Codes Appeal Board may suspend a Rental Certificate for any of the following
reasons:
      A.   Failure to comply with the conditions of the reduced term Rental
Certificate.
      B.   Failure to comply with a court decision concerning a violation of
any provision in the building, housing, or Zoning Code.
      C.   Adjudication by the court that the owner, operator, or persons
acting on behalf of the owner has:
         (1)   Violated the maximum occupancy provisions of this Code.
         (2)   Illegally used or allowed the illegal use of non-habitable or
non-occupiable space.
         (3)   Illegally converted space to habitable use.
      D.   Failure to comply with an order to abate a dangerous building.
      E.   Failure to comply with any emergency order or placarding of a
structure.
      F.   Additional violations of the City Code, Iowa Code, or federal code
that occur within one year of the conditions imposed pursuant to the reduced
term Rental Permit.
      G.   Failure by the owner to pay a court judgement to the City.
   7.   Revocation of Rental Certificate. A Rental Certificate shall be revoked
for not less than one year beginning on the date the ruling is a final non-
appealable decision. Subject to federal or State law to the contrary,
revocation of a Rental Certificate shall be cause for the tenants to be evicted
within 45 days of the revocation final non-appealable decision. The Building
Codes Appeal Board may revoke a Rental Certificate for any of the following
reasons:
      A.   Failure to comply with a suspension of the Rental Certificate.
      B.   Failure to comply with an order to abate a dangerous building.
      C.   Failure to comply with an emergency order or placarding of a
structure.
      D.   More than one determination for Rental Certificate suspensions
within two (2) years of the reinstated Rental Certificate on a premises.
      E.   The owner is convicted for making false statements on a Rental
Certificate application and/or informational disclosure and acknowledgement
form.
10-12-15 COLLECTION OF FEES, FINES, PENALTIES AND COSTS.
   All fees, fines, penalties and costs imposed upon an owner in the
enforcement of this chapter shall be due when notice of the amount of such
fees, fines, penalties and costs is mailed to the owner.
   1.   If notice containing the information required by Iowa Code 364.17 is
given and the total amount of such fees, fines, penalties and costs is not paid
within 30 days of when due, or within 10 days of the final action of the
Building Codes Appeals Board, then:
      A.   The owner shall be charged a late payment penalty in the amount set
forth in the fee schedule adopted by the City Council from time to time.
      B.   Interest shall thereafter accrue on the unpaid balance at the rate
of 1.5% per month; and
      C.   The City may certify the unpaid balance, interest and late payment
penalty to the County Auditor as a lien upon the rental property for collection
in the same manner as a property tax.
10-12-16 APPEALS.
   Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator
may request and shall be granted, a hearing on the decision before the Building
Code Appeal Board as set forth in Title 2,
Chapter 2 Building Codes Appeal Board. Such appeal shall be taken within ten
(10) days by filing application request on the forms provided by the Community
Development Department. Additionally, the application must be accompanied with
the appropriate fee as determined in fee schedule adopted, from time to time by
the City Council. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Construction Services Administrator certified to the
Building Codes Appeal Board after notice of appeal shall have been filed that
by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of the
Construction Services Administrator cause imminent peril to life or property.
In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Building Code Appeals Board or by a court of record
on application, on due cause shown.
(Title 10, Chapter 12 – Ord. 1172 – Dec. 25 Supp.)
TITLE 11 - ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
 
11-1-1 Title          11-1-5 Enforcement
11-1-2 Purpose        11-1-6 Violation Complaints
11-1-3 Policy         11-1-7 Penalties
11-1-4 Interpretation  
 
11-1-1 TITLE.
   This title shall be officially known, cited, and referred to as the “Zoning
Regulations of the City of Clive, Iowa.”
11-1-2 PURPOSE.
   This zoning chapter is adopted in order to lessen congestion in the streets;
to secure safety from fire, flood, panic, and other dangers; to promote health
and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the
overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate
the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewer systems, schools, parks,
and other public improvements; and to encourage orderly development and the
most appropriate use of land throughout the City; all in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan. The provisions established by this chapter for the
development of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to the
development of land are an exercise of valid police power delegated by the
State. A developer has the duty of compliance with conditions laid down by the
City for design, dedication, improvements, and restrictive use of land to
conform to the physical and economic development of the City for the health,
safety, and welfare of the community at large.
11-1-3 POLICY.
   1.   The regulations of this chapter apply to development of any parcel of
land located within the corporate limits of the City or outside the corporate
limits of the City, as provided by law.
   2.   The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be
properly related to the requirements shown in the Comprehensive Plan, Official
Map, State “Urban Standard Specifications for Public Improvements Manual”
(SUDAS), State “Urban Design Standards for Public Improvements Manual,” the
“Development Standards Manual,” and it is intended that these regulations
supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards
contained in Building and Housing Codes and subdivision regulations.
   3.   Land that has been developed before the effective date hereof shall,
whenever possible, be brought within the scope of these regulations to further
the purposes of regulations identified in Section
11-1-2 of this chapter.
   4.   An entitlement to construct a structure on any land shall only be
issued for a legal platted lot of record.
   5.   No certificates of zoning compliance or Certificate of Occupancy shall
be issued for any parcel of land or development not in substantial conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. No excavation of land or construction of
any public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in
conformity with this chapter.
   6.   No building permit shall be issued until a final plat, site plan, site
plan amendment, or administratively approved site plan amendment has been
approved.
   7.   It being essential to the proper government and administration of the
City and to protect the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens, the
Council has determined that it is necessary to enact a temporary moratorium on
certain zoning and development activities within the Emerald Isle area, as
defined in Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein ("Emerald Isle
area"). The purpose of this moratorium is to allow sufficient time for land use
planning in order to facilitate development of the Emerald Isle area.
      A.   During the effective period of this moratorium, no official,
officer, or agency of the City shall accept development applications, plans, or
permits for any property modification requiring development review or approval.
      B.   Those provisions of the City zoning ordinance that are inconsistent
or conflicting with the provisions of this Subsection 7 are hereby repealed for
the duration of the moratorium hereby ordained and any extension thereof, but
not otherwise.
11-1-4 INTERPRETATION.
   1.   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, such
provisions shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and welfare. The regulations of this chapter shall be
construed broadly to promote the purposes for which they are adopted.
   2.   The regulations of this chapter are not intended to interfere with,
abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, statute, private
covenants, or other provision of law except as provided in these regulations.
If a conflict between requirements appears within this chapter, the most
restrictive requirement shall prevail.
   3.   Information erroneously presented by any official or employee of the
City does not negate or diminish the provisions of this chapter pertaining
thereto.
   4.   Whenever a number of days are specified in this chapter, or in any
permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given, as set forth in this
chapter, such number of days shall be deemed to be consecutive calendar days,
unless otherwise specified.
   5.   Whenever application of this chapter results in standards being
expressed in fractions of whole numbers, such fractions are to be rounded to
the next higher whole number, except that quantities expressing units per acre
shall not be rounded.
   6.   All references to density in this chapter are based on gross site area
unless otherwise specified.
   7.   Whenever this chapter refers to setback distances, the setback standard
shall be measured from the official property lines, unless noted otherwise.
   8.   No action of the City, its Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, or
the Community Development Director shall be deemed invalid by reason of failure
to comply with or conform to the provisions of this chapter, provided that the
procedural requirements of the Code of Iowa have been met.
   9.   It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of interpretation
and enforcement shall be first presented to the Community Development Director,
and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on
appeal from the decision of the Community Development Director, and that
recourse from the decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be as provided by
law.
11-1-5 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Community Development Director is hereby designated and ordered to
enforce this chapter. In the case any building or structure is erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any
building, structure, or land is used in violation of this chapter, the
Community Development Director, in addition to other remedies, shall institute
any proper action or proceedings in the name of the City to prevent such
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversions, maintenance, or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation,
to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, or land, or to prevent
any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about said premises. All
departments, officials, and employees of the City who are vested with the duty
or authority to issue permits or licenses shall issue no such permit for any
license for any use, structure, or purpose if the same would not conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
11-1-6 VIOLATION COMPLAINTS.
   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a complaint. Such complaint must be written, stating fully
the causes and basis thereof and shall be filed with the Community Development
Director. Parties witnessing such alleged violation shall sign such complaint.
The Community Development Director shall record properly such complaint,
immediately investigate, and take action as provided by this chapter.
11-1-7 PENALTIES.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any
of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in
Title 1 Chapter 4A of this Code. Each day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks court
intervention for violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may seek
reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and administrative costs. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as
is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
11-2-1 WORDS AND TERMS DEFINED.
   As used in this title, the word “or” also means “and/or;” the words “used”
or “occupied” include the words "intended, designed, or arranged to be" used or
occupied; the word “lot” includes the words “plot or parcel” and all other
words or phrases used to denote an individual site that complies with the
minimum provisions of this title. For the purpose of this title, the following
terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
   1.   Words beginning with “A.”
      A.   “Abut” or “abutting” means contiguous; having a common boundary,
wall, or property line.
      B.   “Accessory living quarters” means living quarters within an
accessory building for the sole use of persons fully employed on the premises
or for the temporary use by guests of the occupants of the premises.
      C.   “Accessory use” means a use subordinate to the principal permitted
use of a premises serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal
permitted use and which is located on the same lot as the principal building,
except for such accessory parking facilities as are specifically authorized by
this title.
      D.   “Addition” means an extension or increase in floor area, size, or
height, number, or capacity of a building or structure.
      E.   “Administrative decision” means a decision made by the Community
Development Director.
      F.   “Adult artist, body painting, or body piercing studio” means an
establishment or business which provides the services of piercing, applying
paint, or other substance, whether transparent or nontransparent, to or on the
human body distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” (as defined in this section).
      G.   “Adult bookstore” means an establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, videos, and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas” (as defined in this section); or an establishment
or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.
      H.   “Adult cabaret” means any place holding a liquor license or beer
permit, or combination for consumption of beer or liquor, or both, on the
premises wherein entertainment is characterized by emphasis on matters
depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas” (as defined in this section).
      I.   “Adult entertainment establishment” means any other establishment
not otherwise defined herein, but of the same general classification as the
other establishments herein defined, having as a substantial or significant
portion of its business the offering of entertainment, stocks in trade of
materials, scenes or other presentations characterized by emphasis on depiction
or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”
(as defined in this section).
      J.   “Adult massage parlor” means any place of business wherein any
method of pressure on or friction against, or rubbing, stroking, kneading,
tapping, pounding, or vibrating the external parts of the body with the hand or
any body parts, or by a mechanical or electrical instrument, under such
circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the individual to whom the
treatment is provided, or some third person on their behalf, will pay money or
give other consideration or gratuity therefor, wherein the massage is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities,”
or involving “specified anatomical areas” (as defined in this section).
      K.   “Adult mini-motion picture theater” means an enclosed building with
a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” (as defined in
this section), for observation by patrons therein.
      L.   “Adult motion picture theater” means an enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” (as defined in
this section), for observation by patrons therein.
      M.   “Adult theater” means a motion picture theater or stage show
theater, or combination thereof, used for presenting materials distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” (as defined in
this section), for observation by patrons therein.
      N.   “Agriculture” means the use of land for agricultural purposes,
including agriculture, farming, floriculture, forestry, horticulture, and
necessary accessory uses for treating, packing, or sorting produce; however,
the operation of the accessory uses shall be subordinate to that of the normal
agricultural activities.
      O.   “Air animated display” means a temporary sign, typically constructed
out of a flexible fabric, and inflated to allow movement and animation. All air
animated displays must be properly secured to the ground to prevent a change in
location.
      P.   “Amendment” means a change in the wording, context, or substance of
this title, or a change in the zoning or district boundaries of the Official
Zoning Map, a part of this title, when adopted by ordinance passed by the
proper authoritative body in the manner prescribed by law.
      Q.   “Animation” means rotation or any other movement or appearance
thereof, or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or
scene, whether by atmospheric movement, mechanical, or electrical means, or any
combination thereof.
      R.   “Apartment” means a room or suite of rooms intended or designed for
use as a dwelling unit typically made available for lease.
      S.   “Apartment house” See definition of dwelling, multiple-family.
      T.   “Appeal” means a request that another authority reviews or
reconsiders a decision that an interested party believes to have been made in
error.
      U.   “Applicant” means the owner or lessee of property, or said person’s
agent, or a person who has contracted to purchase the property contingent upon
such person’s ability to acquire the necessary permits under this title, or the
agent of such person.
      V.   “Appraisal” means an estimate or opinion of the value of real or
personal property or an interest or estate in that property as determined by a
qualified appraisal.
      W.   “Assisted living residential facility” means a building consisting
of individual dwelling units where meals and assistance for daily living
activities are provided for residents, who are primarily elderly persons. Such
facility must be licensed as a residential care facility or skilled nursing
facility under Chapter 135C of the Code of Iowa.
      X.   “Automobile sales and display” means the use of land or building for
the display, sale, or lease of new or preowned passenger vehicles with a gross
vehicle weight rating of less than 9,000 pounds. The servicing or repair of
vehicles may be conducted as an accessory use.
      Y.   “Automobile supply” means an establishment for the retail sales of
motor vehicle parts, supplies, and other similar products. It may also include
minor installation of parts or accessories such as batteries, windshields,
tires, wheels, electronic components, and other similar products. Automotive
repair and the sale of vehicles are expressly prohibited.
      Z.   “Automobile wrecking” means the dismantling or wrecking of motor
vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled or wrecked
vehicles or their parts. The presence on any lot, parcel, or tract of land, of
five or more vehicles or trailers which for a period exceeding 30 days have not
been capable of operation under their own power, and from which parts have been
removed or are to be removed for reuse, salvage, or sale, shall constitute
evidence of an automobile wrecking yard.
      AA.   “Automotive repair” means an establishment used for the repair and
maintenance of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, trailers, or similar vehicles
including, but not limited to: brake/exhaust/engine repair or work, oil change
and lubrication, provided all functions of the business are entirely contained
within the confines of the building and no outdoor storage of vehicles or parts
is allowed.
      BB.   “Awning” means a roof-like cover typically constructed of fabric,
metal, or glass, designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a
decorative feature to the principal structure, which projects from a wall or
roof of a structure over a window, walkway, door, or similar.
   2.   Words beginning with “B.”
      A.   “Balcony” means a covered or uncovered platform area projecting from
the wall of a building, unenclosed except by a railing, which projects from the
outer wall of a building above ground level without support other than the
building.
      B.   “Bar/lounge” means any place devoted primarily to the selling,
serving, or dispensing and drinking of malt, vinous, or other alcoholic
beverages, or any place where any sign is exhibited or displayed indicating
that alcoholic beverages are obtainable within or thereon, and where such
beverages are consumed on the premises.
      C.   “Base flood” means the flood having one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. (Also commonly referred to as the “100-
year flood.”)
      D.   “Base flood elevation” means the elevation floodwaters would reach
at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
      E.   “Basement” means a story having more than one-half of its height
below grade. A basement shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of
height regulation, unless designed or used for habitation or business purposes
and provided that the finished floor level directly above is not more than six
feet above grade. (See definition of story.)
      F.   “Basement” (Flood Control) means any enclosed area of a building
which has its floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides.
Also see definition of “lowest floor.”
      G.   “Beer garden” means any establishment that includes any area out of
doors or not completely contained within a building in which alcoholic
beverages are served or consumed, and, may or may not, include the serving or
consumption of food. The facility shall be duly approved and licensed as
required by applicable State and local regulations.
      H.   “Big box retailer” means a single tenant user with a minimum of
25,000 square feet in gross floor area.
      I.   “Blade” means an element of a wind turbine which acts as a part of
an airfoil assembly, thereby extracting through rotation, mechanical energy
directly from the wind.
      J.   “Board” means the Board of Adjustment.
      K.   “Board of adjustment” means an administrative hearing board created
by the Code of Iowa, as amended, which is authorized to issue special use
permits, interpret, and grant variances from this title.
      L.   “Boarding house” means a building other than a hotel where, for
compensation, meals or lodging are provided for four or more persons, but does
not include rest homes.
      M.   “Breezeway” means a covered passageway connecting a primary
structure to an accessory structure or two accessory structures.
      N.   “Buffer” means a landscaped area, identified on a site plan or plat,
intended to separate, and partially obstruct the view of two adjacent land uses
or properties from one another.
      O.   “Buildable area” means the area of a lot remaining after the minimum
open space or yard requirements of this title have been complied with.
      P.   “Building” means any structure having a roof supported by walls or
by columns intended for enclosure, shelter, or housing of persons, animals, or
chattel. When any portion thereof is entirely separated by walls in which there
are no connecting doors or windows or any similar opening, each portion so
separated shall be deemed a separate building, except for townhouses, duplexes,
and condominiums wherein two or more dwelling units shall constitute a separate
building. “Building” does not include signs or billboards.
      Q.   “Building, accessory” means a building subordinate to the principal
use of a building on the lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to
the use of the principal building. Among other things, the following are
considered to be accessory buildings: shed, gazebo, garage.
      R.   “Building face” or “wall” means all the window and wall area of a
building in one plane or elevation.
      S.   “Building frontage” means that wall or side of a building containing
the main entry that is adjacent and most nearly parallel to a street.
      T.   “Building height” means the vertical distance from the average
finished ground grade at the building line to the highest point of the coping
of a flat roof, or to the deck of a mansard roof, or to mean height level
between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. On a corner lot, the
height is the mean vertical distance from the average natural grade at the
building line from the higher of the two grades.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3009.png]
 
      U.   “Building Mounted WES” means a wind turbine that is mounted to any
portion of a building, whether attached directly to the building or attached to
a tower structure which is supported by the building.
      V.   “Building official” means the City employee designated by the
Community Development Director to enforce the City’s building and zoning
ordinances.
      W.   “Building permit” means official certification, issued by the
Building Official, that a proposed improvement complies with the provisions of
this title and other applicable ordinances.
      X.   “Bulk station” means distributing stations, commonly known as bulk
or tank stations, used for the storage and distribution of flammable liquids or
liquefied petroleum products where the aggregate capacity of all storage tanks
is more than 12,000 gallons.
   3.   Words beginning with “C.”
      A.   “Canopy” means a permanent roof-like cover that projects from the
wall of a building over a door, entrance, or window; or a freestanding or
projecting cover above an outdoor service area, such as a gasoline service
station. Provides shelter to persons from elements of weather.
      B.   “Caretaker” means a person who is hired on a full-time basis to
provide home based service to a resident occupant of the dwelling unit,
including, but not limited to, a nurse, nanny, therapist, or maid.
      C.   “Certificate of Occupancy” means official certification that a
premises conforms to provisions of this title and other applicable ordinances
and may be used or occupied. A Certificate of Occupancy is granted upon
completion of new construction or completion of alterations or additions to
existing structures.
      D.   “Certificate of zoning compliance” means a written statement issued
by the Community Development Department authorizing building uses, accessory
building, and structures, or use consistent with the terms of this title and
for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing its provisions.
      E.   “Certified survey” means a sketch, plan, map, or other exhibit
bearing a written statement of its accuracy or conformity to specified
standards which is signed and sealed by a registered surveyor.
      F.   “Channel” means any natural or artificial watercourse exhibiting
definite banks, boundaries, and beds, and which contains visible evidence of
flow or occurrence of water.
      G.   “Channel letter” means a multi-dimensional letter, number, or symbol
that is individually formed and mounted to form a sign. For the purpose of this
chapter, all channel letters must be at least one inch in thickness as defined
by Subsection
11-12-7(3) of this title.
      H.   “Childcare facility” means a State licensed or registered facility
where more than six children are temporarily left with attendants.
      I.   “Church” means any building, premises, or site whose primary use is
public religious worship.
      J.   “Clear cutting” means the indiscriminate removal of trees, shrubs,
or undergrowth with the intention of preparing real property for
nonagricultural development purposes. This definition does not include the
selective removal of nonnative tree and shrub species when the soil is left
relatively undisturbed.
      K.   “Clinic” means an office occupied by one or more members of a
healing profession.
      L.   “Clinic, small animal” means an establishment where a licensed
veterinarian carries out the prevention and treatment of diseases and injuries
in small and domestic animals. For purposes of this title, this definition does
not include a kennel.
      M.   “Commercial entertainment” means an establishment that provides
facilities for the physical entertainment of patrons for a fee, including
batting cages, billiard parlors, bowling alleys, go-cart racing, ice skating,
miniature golf courses.
      N.   “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      O.   “Communication device” means a structure in a fixed location used as
an antenna or to support antennas for the primary purpose of transmitting or
receiving electronic signals.
      P.   “Community Development Director” means the City employee designated
by the City to administer and enforce this title.
      Q.   “Consignment shop” means an enclosed facility in which used personal
items such as clothes, jewelry, or furniture is resold through a broker for the
owner at an agreed upon price. It is understood that the owner retains title to
the item at all times and can end the arrangement with the broker at any time
by requesting a return of the item.
      R.   “Consumer fireworks” means first-class consumer fireworks and
second-class consumer fireworks that are intended for the retail sale and use
by the general public provided that they are manufactured, labeled, and sold in
conformance with the regulations of the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission
published in Title 16, CFR.
      S.   “Consumer fireworks sales” means an establishment used for the
retail display and sales of consumer fireworks.
      T.   “Convalescent homes” See definition of nursing home.
      U.   “Convenience store” means an establishment for retail sale of
petroleum products and other supplies for motor vehicles, as well as for the
retail sale of a variety of other items typically sold in grocery stores, not
including the repair or sale of vehicles.
      V.   “Copy” means words, letters, logos, figures, symbols, statues,
illustrations, patterns, decorative panels, or inserts that form a message or
otherwise call attention to a business, product, service, or activity, or to
the sign itself. Lighting and similar features adding to the architecture
element of the building are not considered as signage but shall be regulated by
the site plan.
      W.   “Courtyard” means a space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located
at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three or more sides by walls of
a building.
      X.   “Covenants, restrictive” means any contract restricting the manner
in which land may be used.
      Y.   “Cul-de-sac” means a local street, one end of which is closed and
consists of a circular turnaround.
      Z.   “Condominium” means one or more rooms occupying all or part of a
floor or floors in a building of one or more floors or stories, and
notwithstanding whether the rooms are intended for use or used as a residence
or office for the operation of any industry or business, or for any other use
not prohibited by law, where ownership of the general common elements of the
structure, as defined under Chapter 499B of the Code of Iowa, is shared by one
or more persons, corporations, or other legal entities capable of holding or
owning an interest in real property.
(Paragraph Z – Ord. 1164 – Jul. 25 Supp.)
      AA.   “Cooking provisions, permanent” means a room or space within a
dwelling unit that is used or designed to be used for the preparation and
cooking of food. The minimum components include a countertop, a sink with
running water, and a stove or stove hookup utilizing gas or 220v electric.
(Paragraph AA – Ord. 1164 – Jul. 25 Supp.)
   4.   Words beginning with “D.”
      A.   “Deck” means an unroofed platform, constructed above grade,
unenclosed except by a railing, which projects from the outer wall of a
building and is attached to the ground.
      B.   “Delayed deposit service provider” means every person who, for a
fee, does either of the following:
         (1)   Accepts a check dated subsequent to the date it was written.
         (2)   Accepts a check dated on the date it was written and holds the
check for a period of time prior to deposit or presentment pursuant to an
agreement with, or any representations made to, the maker of the check, whether
express or implied.
      C.   “Demising wall” means a wall used to provide separation between
individual tenants located within a multiple-tenant building.
      D.   “Density, gross” means the number of dwelling units per unit area of
land usually expressed as dwelling units per acre.
      E.   “Development” means any humanmade change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, building or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials. “Development” does not include “minor
projects” or “routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities” as
defined in this section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and
similar practices that do not involve filling or grading.
      F.   “Development plan” means a type of plan that becomes part of the
zoning for a property. The plan depicts site characteristics and development
information and provides guidance for site plans.
      G.   “Display fireworks sales” means an establishment used for the
manufacturing, storage, or distribution of any firework classified as a 1.3G
firework by the American Pyrotechnics Association.
      H.   “District” means a section or sections of the City within which the
regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, or the height and area
of buildings and premises, are uniform.
      I.   “Domesticated animal boarding/kennel” means any premises in which
meals, exercise, and lodging for four or more domesticated animals, six months
old or older, are provided for compensation, or in which such domesticated
animals are raised for the purpose of sale, and are kept under constant
restraint. Domesticated animals shall include dogs, cats, rabbits, and ferrets.
      J.   “Domesticated animal exercise yard” means an enclosed or open air
structure, adjacent to or part of a principal structure which is located in a
commercial or industrial district, which is utilized for the periodic exercise
of domesticated animals.
      K.   “Domesticated animal run” means an accessory structure in a
residential district that is built or constructed primarily to enclose
domesticated animals.
      L.   “Drinking places” means those uses that include bars, taverns,
saloons, cabarets, and nightclubs; which involve the sale or distribution of
alcoholic beverages as a significant portion of business generated.
      M.   “Drip line” means a vertical line extending from the outermost
branches of a tree to the ground.
      N.   “Drive-in/drive-through facility” means any portion of a building or
structure from which a business is transacted, or is capable of being
transacted, directly with customers located in a motor vehicle during such
business transaction.
      O.   “Dumpster enclosure” means any type of approved screening, which
encompasses trash receptacles, grease receptacles, or recycling containers.
      P.   “Direct and free access” means a minimum 36” opening that opens
directly to habitable space on both sides. For the purposes of this definition,
habitable space shall be as defined in the International Residential Code as
adopted by Title 10 Building Regulations of the Clive City Code.
(Paragraph P – Ord. 1164 – Jul. 25 Supp.)
      Q.   “Dwelling” means any building that contains one or more dwelling
units occupied or designed to be occupied for residential living purposes.
Dwelling excludes hotels, mobile homes, nursing facilities, and assisted living
residential facilities. Types of dwellings and dwelling units include:
         (1)   “Dwelling, accessory unit” means an additional residential
dwelling unit that is subordinate to the principal dwelling unit on the same
lot, does not provide direct and free access to the principal dwelling unit and
its amenities, and provides a reasonable expectation of privacy from residents
of the principal dwelling. Accessory dwelling units may either be a detached
building or attached or internal to the principal building. For the purposes of
this definition, a dwelling unit is “subordinate” to the principal dwelling
when all of the following apply:
            a.   The additional dwelling unit does not have an exterior door
oriented toward and readily visible from the front yard;
            b.   The additional dwelling unit does not have a separate address;
            c.   The additional dwelling unit is provided water from the same
metered service as the existing principal dwelling.
         (2)   “Dwelling, apartment” means a dwelling unit within a multiple
family dwelling. Apartments may be either leased or owned by the occupant.
         (3)   “Dwelling, boarding house” means a building providing completed
living facilities, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking, and sanitation, where, for compensation, meals or lodging are provided
under 2 or more leases. Boarding house does not include accessory dwelling
units, or a facility, home, or program otherwise subject to licensure by the
Code of Iowa.
         (4)   “Dwelling, duplex” means a building containing only two dwelling
units located on the same lot, where neither unit is accessory nor subordinate
to the other in terms of size, scale, and use. A duplex dwelling shall have a
separate address and a separate water metered service for each dwelling unit.
         (5)   “Dwelling, lodging house” means an owner-occupied single-family
dwelling unit or portion thereof, containing not more than 4 guestrooms which
are used for overnight lodging and made available to the general public, where
rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. Meals, with or without
additional compensation, may be provided or served to overnight guests. Also
referred to as a “bed and breakfast.”
         (6)   “Dwelling, multiple-family” means a building that contains three
or more dwelling units located on the same lot, exclusive of permitted
accessory dwelling units.
         (7)   “Dwelling, single-family” means a building that contains only
one principal dwelling unit and occupied exclusively for residence purposes,
including naturally or commonly occurring uses specified herein.
         (8)   “Dwelling, townhouse” means a single dwelling unit in a
townhouse development that extends from foundation to roof and that has a yard
or public way on not less than two sides. Townhouse dwelling units may be
either attached by one or more common walls or detached.
         (9)   “Dwelling unit” means a single unit providing completed
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. A dwelling
unit shall contain no more than two interior rooms or spaces providing
permanent cooking provisions.
(Paragraph Q – Ord. 1173 – Dec. 25 Supp.)
   5.   Words beginning with “E.”
      A.   “Easement” means a right given by the owner of land to another
person for specific limited use of that land.
      B.   “Egress” means an exit.
      C.   “Employee” means any person working, regardless of full-time, part-
time, or volunteer status, as an owner, partner, subcontractor, independent
contractor of the business.
      D.   “Enclosed area below lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest
enclosed area in a building when all the following criteria are met:
         (1)   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions
of Subsection
11-11-5(4)(A) of this title, and
         (2)   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.)
and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking,
or storage, and
         (3)   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater,
furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at
least one foot above the base flood elevation, and
         (4)   The enclosed area is not a “basement” as defined in this
section.
      E.   “Equipment sales and display” means the use of land or building for
the display, sale, or lease of new or preowned trucks with a gross vehicle
weight of greater than 9,000 pounds, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats,
construction equipment, or other similar equipment capable of traveling upon
the roadway. The servicing or repair of vehicles may be conducted as an
accessory use.
      F.   “Erect” means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or
affix, and includes the painting of wall signs.
      G.   “Events center” means a facility:
         (1)   With a capacity to seat 500 or more persons;
         (2)   Which does not have regular business hours; and
         (3)   Which is open exclusively for special events, such as sporting
events, musical events, weddings, private parties, banquets, and similar
activities.
      H.   “Existing construction” means any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community. For the purposes of this
regulation, the effective date of the first floodplain management regulation is
November 1, 1979.
      I.   “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-
built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the first floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
      J.   “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means
the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   6.   Words beginning with “F.”
      A.   “Factory-built home” means any structure, designed for residential
use, which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or
assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and
installation on a building site. For the purpose of this title, factory-built
homes include mobile homes, manufactured homes, and modular homes and also
include recreational vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive
days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
      B.   “Factory built home park” means a parcel or contiguous parcels of
land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for rent or sale.
      C.   “Family” means a person living alone or in a group living as a
single nonprofit housekeeping unit and sharing common living, sleeping,
cooking, and eating facilities up to a maximum occupant dwelling load as
provided in Chapter 6 of this title. For the purposes of this definition,
anyone who spends more than 90 nights within a 12-month period will be counted
as an occupant. The definition of family does not include, and is not intended
to provide an exclusion for, any of the following:
         (1)   More than eight people who are:
            a.   Residents of a “family home” as defined in Section 414.22 of
the Code of Iowa; or
            b.   “Handicap” as defined in the Fair Housing Act, 42 USC Section
3602(h).
         (2)   Any group of individuals who are in a group living arrangement
as a result of criminal offenses;
         (3)   Any group of individuals whose association is temporary,
seasonal in nature, or limited to the duration of an educational school year
cycle;
         (4)   Any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, or
like organization.
      D.   “Fence” means an enclosure or barrier constructed of wood or other
material(s) used to delineate boundary, provide screening, or prevent access to
or from the area enclosed.
      E.   “Fence, ornamental” means all fencing which is ornamental or
embellished and includes, but is not limited to, the following types of
fencing: post and rail or split rail, but not chain link.
      F.   “First class consumer fireworks” means the following consumer
fireworks, as described in American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1,
Chapter 3:
         (1)   Aerial shell kits and reloadable spinners.
         (2)   Chasers.
         (3)   Helicopters and aerial spinners.
         (4)   Firecrackers.
         (5)   Mine and shell devices.
         (6)   Missile type rockets.
         (7)   Roman candles.
         (8)   Skyrockets and bottle rockets.
         (9)   Multiple tube devices with a similar nature as the above-
described devices provided that they are manufactured in accordance with the
American Pyrotechnics Association standard 87-1, Chapter 3, Section 3.5.
      G.   “500-year flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which has a 0.2
percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on
average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every 500 years.
      H.   “Flag” means any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive
colors, lettering, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government,
political subdivision, or other entity.
      I.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of
streams or rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from
any source.
      J.   “Flood Insurance Rate Map” (FIRM) means the official map prepared as
part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which
delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
      K.   “Flood Insurance Study” (FIS) means a report published by FEMA for a
community issued study along with the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map(s).
The study contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water
surface elevations that were used to prepare the FIRM.
      L.   “Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water as a result of a flood.
      M.   “Floodplain management” means an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing, and floodplain management regulations.
      N.   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural or nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such
structures.
      O.   “Floodway” means the channel of a watercourse and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel, which must be reserved in order to
discharge flood flows and so that confinement of flood flows to the floodway
area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood by more than one foot.
      P.   “Floodway fringe” means the portion of the special flood hazard area
outside of the floodway.
      Q.   “Floor area” means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls or from the centerline of common walls separating two attached buildings.
For determining off-street parking and loading requirements for any specific
use, the “floor area” is the total amount of “floor area,” as described above,
which is devoted to such specific use, including accessory storage areas, such
as counters, racks, or closets when located within selling or working areas.
      R.   “Foundation plantings” means landscaping material designed to hide
structure foundations from view at eye level from the adjacent rights-of-way.
      S.   “Frontage” means the dimension of a front lot line as measured along
the public street (see definition of lot lines).
   7.   Words beginning with “G.”
      A.   “Garage, mechanical” means a structure in which major mechanical
repair or rebuilding of motor-powered vehicles is performed for commercial gain
and in which the storage, care, and minor servicing are accessory uses.
      B.   “Garage, private” means an accessory building, or an accessory
portion of the main building, designed or used for the shelter or storage of
vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main building.
      C.   “Garage, public” means any building or premises, other than a
private garage, used for equipping, refueling, servicing, repairing, hiring,
selling, or storing motor driven vehicles.
      D.   “Garage sale reseller” means the act of selling or offering for sale
of personal property on residential premises to the general public in excess of
two events per year. Such sales include, but are not limited to, a porch sale,
yard sale, moving sale, or auction.
      E.   “General farming” or “agriculture” means the use of land for crop
production, including corn, soybeans, alfalfa, pumpkins, hay, but excluding
swine, poultry, and bovine production and breeding.
      F.   “Grade” means the average elevation of the finished ground at the
exterior walls of the main building.
      G.   “Greenhouse” means a building or accessory building constructed
chiefly of glass or other translucent material, which is devoted to the
protection or cultivation of flowers or other plants.
      H.   “Group home for the handicapped” means a dwelling shared by four or
more handicapped persons, including resident staff, who live together as a
single housekeeping unit and in a long term, family-like environment in which
the staff provide care, education, and participation in community activities
for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the resident to live as
independently as possible.
   8.   Words beginning with “H.”
      A.   “Half-story” means a story with at least two of its opposite sides
situated in a sloping roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds
of the floor area of the floor immediately below it.
      B.   “Hazardous material” means any item or agent (biological, chemical,
radiological, or physical), which has the potential to cause harm to humans,
animals, or the environment, either by itself or through interaction with other
factors.
      C.   “Healthcare facility” means a facility or institution, whether
public or private, principally engaged in providing services for health
maintenance, diagnosis or treatment of human diseases, pain, injury, deformity,
or physical condition, including, but not limited to, a general hospital,
diagnostic center, treatment center, rehabilitation center, extended care
center or intermediate care facility.
      D.   “Hedge” means a landscape barrier that consists of a continuous,
dense planting of shrubs.
      E.   “Height of building” See definition of building height.
      F.   “Height, total WES” means the height above grade of the wind energy
system, including the tower, generating unit, and the highest vertical
extension of any blades. Height shall be measured from the adjacent grade of
the tower/building to the tip of the turbine (blade) at its highest point.
      G.   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
      H.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
         (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing in
the National Register;
         (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
         (3)   Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or,
         (4)   Individually listed on a local Inventory of Historic Places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by
either: 1) an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior or 2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
      I.   “Home, manufactured” means a factory-built structure built under
authority of 42 USC Section 5403, is required by federal law to display a seal
from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and was
constructed on or after June 15, 1976. If a manufactured home is placed in a
mobile home park, the home must be titled and is subject to the Mobile Home
Square Foot Tax. If a manufactured home is placed outside a mobile home park,
the home must be titled and is assessed and taxed as real estate.
      J.   “Home, mobile” means a vehicle without automotive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed, or reconstructed
as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or
more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with automotive power not
registered as a motor vehicle in the State. A mobile home is not built to a
mandatory Building Code, contains no federal or State seals, and was built
before June 15, 1976.
      K.   “Home, modular” means a factory-built structure which is
manufactured to be used as a place of human habitation, is constructed to
comply with the State Building Code for modular factory built structures, and
must display the seal issued by the State Building Code Commissioner.
      L.   “Home occupation” means a business, profession, occupation, or trade
conducted for gain or support within a residential building, accessory
building, or accessory structure thereto, which is incidental and secondary to
the use of such building for dwelling purposes and which does not change the
essential residential character of such building.
      M.   “Horizontal axis WES” means traditional wind turbine design, in
which the rotating shaft is parallel to the ground, and the blades rotate
through a vertical plane.
      N.   “Hospital” means an institution specializing in giving clinical,
temporary, and emergency service of a medical or surgical nature to injured
persons and patients, other than persons suffering from a lingering mental
sickness, disease, disorder, or ailment.
      O.   “Hotel” means any building containing six or more guestrooms
intended or designed to be used or which are used, rented, or hired out to be
occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.
   9.   Words beginning with “I.”
      A.   “Impervious surface” means any material that substantially reduces
or prevents the infiltration of stormwater into previously undeveloped land.
Impervious surfaces include graveled driveways and parking areas.
      B.   “Impervious surface, permanent” means a concrete or asphalt surface.
Temporary or movable concrete blocks, two-foot by two-foot concrete pads, mats,
pavers, or similar nonpermanent surfacing are not considered permanent
impervious surfaces.
      C.   “Independent living residential facility” means a development
providing individual dwelling units designed specifically for the needs of
elderly persons who are able to function and live independently. In addition to
housing, this type of facility may provide convenience services such as meals,
housekeeping, and transportation.
      D.   “Ingress” means an entrance.
   10.   Words beginning with “J.”
      A.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other
nonferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood, dismantled vehicles, machinery
and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances; iron, steel,
or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discharged glass, concrete,
tinware, plastic or old or discharged household goods or hardware, mattresses,
beds or bedding, or any other kind of scrap or waste material which is stored,
kept, handled, or displayed for barter, resale, reuse, salvage, stripping, or
trade. Neatly stacked firewood located in a side yard or rear yard is not
considered junk.
      B.   “Junkyard” means any area where junk is bought, sold, exchanged,
baled, or packaged, disassembled or handled, including house wrecking yards,
used lumberyards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking or
structural steel material and equipment; but not including areas where such
uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not
including the processing of used, discarded, or salvaged materials necessary as
a part of manufacturing operations.
   11.   Words beginning with “K.”
   12.   Words beginning with “L.”
      A.   “Landscaping” means any combination of living plants, such as grass,
ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees, and nonliving landscape
material, such as rocks, pebbles, mulch, walls, fences, or decorative
fountains.
      B.   “Large Wind Energy Conversion Systems” (LWECS) means a wind energy
system consisting of at least one of the following: a wind turbine, tower, and
associated controls or conversion electronics, and is intended for the
production of electricity in excess of the needed on-site consumption of
supplied utility power. Wind energy systems having a nameplate rated capacity
of greater than 15 kilowatts for residential uses or 100 kilowatts for
commercial or industrial uses shall be considered a large LWECS.
      Large LWECS are not permitted on any parcel in the City.
      C.   “Loading space” means any off-street space or berth on the same lot
with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary
parking (less than 24 hours) of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise.
      D.   “Lodging house” means any building or portion thereof, containing
not more than four guestrooms which are used by not more than four guests where
rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. A lodging house shall comply
with all the requirements of this title for dwellings.
      E.   “Logo” means the graphical content of a sign surface in pictographic
or symbolic form.
      F.   “Lot” means any parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet
minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such
yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have
frontage on a dedicated or private street and may consist of:
         (1)   A single lot of record;
         (2)   A portion of a lot of record;
         (3)   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record;
         (4)   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that in
no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the requirements of this title.
      G.   “Lot lines” means all lots shall be in compliance with Code of Iowa
with respect to the subdivision of land.
         (1)   Front. The line separating the front of the lot from the street.
In the case of a corner and double frontage lots, all lots fronting on a public
or private street are deemed front lot line.
         (2)   Rear. The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and
most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a corner lot, the line
opposite the shorter street frontage dimension shall be construed as the rear
lot line. In case of an interior triangular or irregular shaped lot, it means a
straight line 10 feet in length which:
            a.   Is parallel to the front lot line or its chord.
            b.   Intersects the two other lot lines at points most distant from
the front lot line.
         (3)   Side. Any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
      H.   “Lot measurements”
         (1)   Lot Area. The gross area, exclusive streets, or other public
right-of-way, within the boundary lines of lots.
         (2)   Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines as measured perpendicular to the midpoint of the mean front lot
line. In the case of an interior triangular or gore shaped lot, the depth is
the horizontal distance between the midpoints at the front and rear lot lines.
         (3)   Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines as
measured perpendicular to the line comprising the lot depth at its point of
intersection with the required minimum front setback. When the lot width is
decreasing from front to rear, the horizontal distance between the side lot
lines as described above shall be measured at its point of intersection with
the required minimum rear setback.
      I.   “Lot of record” means a lot that is part of subdivision, the deed of
which is recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
      J.   “Lot types.”
         (1)   Corner Lot. A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets, with the street right-of-way abutting the front and one or more side
lines of the lot. See
Figure 11-2-1.2 of this section.
         (2)   Double Frontage Lot. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage
on more than one street or public thoroughfare which do not intersect one
another. See
Figure 11-2-1.2 of this section.
         (3)   Key Lot. A lot so subdivided as to have its side lines coincide
with the rear lot lines of adjacent lots on either or both sides of the
aforesaid lots. See
Figure 11-2-1.2 of this section.
         (4)   Reversed Frontage Lot. A corner lot, the side street line of
which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first
interior lot to its rear. See
Figure 11-2-1.2 of this section.
Figure 11-2-1.2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3011.png]
 
      K.   “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building including a basement, except when the criteria listed in the
definition of enclosed area below lowest floor are met.
      L.   “Livable space” means the habitable space within a dwelling unit
that has finished walls, floors, and ceilings. Walls and ceilings shall be
considered finished only if they are covered by wallboard or similar material;
floors shall be considered finished only if they are covered by carpet, tile,
linoleum, polished concrete, or similar material. For finished second floor or
attic spaces, the livable space includes only the floor area with a ceiling
height of 5 feet or greater. For finished basement spaces, the livable space
includes only the floor area with a ceiling height of 7 feet or greater.
Unfinished basements and attics, unheated porches and breezeways, garages, and
maintenance shops shall be excluded from the livable space.
(Paragraph L – Ord. 1164 – Jul. 25 Supp.)
   13.   Words beginning with “M.”
      A.   “Massage” means any method of treating the external parts of the
human body by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, or vibrating with the hand
or any instrument for any form of consideration or gratuity.
      B.   “Massage establishment” means any establishment having a fixed place
of business where massage is administered for any form of consideration or
gratuity, including, but not limited to, massage parlors, health clubs, sauna
baths, and steam baths. This definition shall not be construed to include:
         (1)   Persons licensed in the State under the provisions of Chapters
148, 148A, 148B, 150, 150A, 151, 152, 157, or 158 of the Code of Iowa, when
performing massage, when performing massage therapy or massage services as part
of the profession or trade for which licensed;
         (2)   Persons performing massage therapy or massage services under the
direction of a person licensed as described in Subsection (1) of this
definition;
         (3)   Persons performing massage therapy or massage services upon a
person pursuant to the written instruction or order of a licensed physician;
         (4)   Nurses aids, technicians, and attendants at any hospital or
healthcare facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 135B, 135C, or 145A of the
Code of Iowa, in the course of their employment and under the supervision of
the administrator thereof or of a person licensed as described in Subsection
(1) of this definition;
         (5)   An athletic coach or trainer in any accredited public or private
secondary school, junior college, college, or university, or employed by
professional or semiprofessional athletic team or organization, in the course
of their employment as such coach or trainer. This definition shall not be
construed to include a volunteer Fire Department, a volunteer rescue squad or a
nonprofit organization operating a community center, swimming pool, tennis
court, or other educational, cultural, recreational, and athletic facilities,
and facilities for the welfare of the residents of the area.
      C.   “Maximum damage potential uses” means hospitals and like
institutions; buildings or building complexes containing documents, data, or
instruments of great public value; buildings or building complexes containing
materials dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; electrical power
installations; buildings or building complexes that provide emergency services
to the general public; buildings or building complexes that house students and
are used for education purposes; buildings or building complexes that provide
long and short term care, convalescent care, or assisted living operations; or
other buildings or building complexes similar in nature or use.
      D.   “Meeting hall” means a facility providing space for lectures, social
functions, exhibitions, entertainment, instruction, and similar purposes as
well as customary ancillary space, such as restrooms, kitchens, foyers, work,
and dressing rooms and storage areas.
      E.   “Mental institution, hospital or home” means an institution
specializing in giving clinical and psychiatric aid and treatment to and in
conjunction with the housing of persons and patients suffering from temporary,
lingering, or chronic mental ailment, disorder, or sickness.
      F.   “Mini-warehouse facilities” means a building or group of buildings,
which are rented and designed, through individual compartments or controlled
stalls, for self-storage purposes.
      G.   “Minor projects” means small development activities (except for
filling, grading, and excavating) valued at less than $500.00.
      H.   “Motel, motor lodge” means a building or group of two or more
buildings designed to provide sleeping accommodation for transient or overnight
guests, with garage attached or parking facilities conveniently located to each
such unit.
      I.   “Motor vehicle” means a motorized conveyance for transporting
people, goods, etc., especially over land.
      J.   “Mulch” means an organic or synthetic material placed on the soil to
prevent erosion, control weeds, and enrich the soil.
      K.   “Multiple tenant building, horizontal” means a single-story building
designed for the collocation of two or more tenants located side by side with
each tenant separated by demising walls.
      L.   “Multiple tenant building, vertical” means a multiple story building
designed for the collocation of two or more tenants located side by side or on
separate floors of the building.
   14.   Words beginning with “N.”
      A.   “Neon, exposed” means any neon type lighting used as or in a sign,
not encased in a solid colored light diffusing lens, so as to limit the visible
appearance of the illuminated light source.
      B.   “New construction” means those structures or development for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the first
floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
      C.   “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after
the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by
the community.
      D.   “Nightclub” means any place of business located within any building
or establishment, operated for the purpose of supplying entertainment or music,
or both, and providing meals and refreshments prepared on the premises, having
a seating capacity of not less than 40 people at tables; providing a dance
floor containing not less than 308 square feet, and serving beer, wine, or
liquor for consumption on the premises.
      E.   “Nonconforming lot” means a lot which does not conform to the
provisions of this title relative to lot frontage, width, or area for the
district in which it is located, by reason of the adoption of this title or
subsequent amendments hereto.
      F.   “Nonconforming structure” means a structure or portion thereof which
does not conform to the provisions of this title relative to the height,
structures, yards, or building coverage for the district in which it is
located, by reason of the adoption of this title or subsequent amendments
hereto.
      G.   “Nonconforming use” means any use not allowed in the zone in which
it is located or use of land or a building that does not comply with the
provisions of this title, by reason of the adoption of this title or subsequent
amendments hereto.
      H.   “Nonprofit institution” means a nonprofit establishment maintained
and operated by a society, corporation, individual, foundation, or public
agency for the purpose of providing charitable, social, educational, or similar
services to the public, groups, or individuals. Cooperative nonprofit
associations, performing a service normally associated with retail sales or
trade such as cooperative groceries, granaries, equipment sales, etc., are not
considered nonprofit institutions under this title.
      I.   “Nuisance” means a situation which is injurious to health, indecent,
offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of the property so
as to interfere essentially with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property.
      J.   “Nursing home” means a building or structure having accommodations
and where care is provided for invalid, infirm, aged, convalescent, memory
disabled, or physically disabled persons, not including insane, inebriate, or
contagious persons.
   15.   Words beginning with “O.”
      A.   “Obscene” means matter which is offensively or repulsively indecent.
      B.   “Occupant” means a person recorded as such on official records and
including duly authorized agent or notary, a purchaser, devisee, judiciary; any
person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in question.
      C.   “Off grid” means an electrical system that is not connected to a
utility distribution facility or to any building or structure that is connected
to a utility distribution facility.
      D.   “100-year flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which has a one
percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the
average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every 100 years.
      E.   “Open space” means a developed area that is intended to provide
light and designed for resource protection, scenic, or amenity purposes. Open
space may include, but is not limited to, lawns, decorative plantings,
walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains, wooded
areas, and watercourses. Open space shall not be deemed to include buildings,
driveways, parking lots, or other hard surfaces designed or intended for
vehicular travel.
      F.   “Open space, common” means open space within or related to a
development, not in individually owned lots or dedicated for public use, but
which is designed and intended for the common use and enjoyment of the
residents of the development.
      G.   “Outdoor eating establishment” means picnic tables, benches,
counters, and similar facilities, or area, provided in conjunction with a
restaurant for the serving or consumption of food out of doors, and not
contained within a building.
      H.   “Outdoor sound system” means any sound equipment, stereo equipment,
or amplification equipment that is permanently or temporarily placed outdoors,
or which directs sound outdoors.
      I.   “Overlay district” means a district which overlays and acts in
conjunction with the underlying zoning district or districts.
   16.   Words beginning with “P.”
      A.   “Parapet” or “parapet wall” means that portion of a building wall
that rises above the roof level.
      B.   “Parking space, automobile” means a permanent hard surfaced area,
other than a street, reserved for the parking of automobiles, plus such
additional area as is necessary to afford adequate ingress and egress.
      C.   “Patio” means a level surface constructed at grade directly adjacent
to the principal building.
      D.   “Pawnbroker” means every person who makes loans or advancements upon
pawn, pledge, or deposit of personal property or who receives actual possession
of personal property as security for loans, with or without a mortgage or bill
of sale thereon, or who by advertisement, sign or otherwise, holds himself out
as a pawnbroker.
      E.   “Pennant” or “streamer” means a long, narrow ribbonlike flag or
tapering flag used individually or attached to a rope or structure of any
length in a series.
      F.   “Plat” means a map recorded in final form, which represents a tract
of land showing the boundaries and location of individual properties and
streets.
      G.   “Porch” means an unenclosed or enclosed roofed projection from a
building. A porch shall be considered as part of the principal building for all
yard requirements.
      H.   “Premises” means any lot, plot, parcel, or tract of land, building
or buildings, structure or structures, used publicly or privately as a place of
business, dwelling, or meeting place.
      I.   “Principal building” means the building situated or to be placed
nearest the front property line and the use of which conforms to the primary
use permitted by the zoning classification in which it is located.
      J.   “Principal use” means the main use of land or structures, as
distinguished from a secondary or accessory use.
      K.   “Public thoroughfare” means any right-of-way under the jurisdiction
and maintenance of the governmental agencies of the federal, State, and
municipal government; which may be used by the public in general; and which
serves as the frontage street to the abutting property.
   17.   Words beginning with “Q.”
      A.   “Queue space” means a temporary waiting area for motor vehicles
obtaining a service or other activity.
   18.   Words beginning with “R.”
      A.   “Raceway” means an enclosed channel designed expressly for holding
wires, cables, or bus bars. In no case shall a raceway width be greater than
the attached letters. A raceway width greater than the attached letters shall
be considered a panel sign for the purposes of this title.
      B.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
         (1)   Built on a single chassis;
         (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
         (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
         (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
      C.   “Residential” or “residence” means any lot, plot, parcel, tract,
area, or piece of land or any building used exclusively for family dwelling
purposes or intended to be used, including concomitant uses specified herein.
      D.   “Restaurant, fast food” means an establishment, located within a
multi- tenant building, whose principal business is the sale of food and
beverages to the public, provided the food and beverages are generally served
“ready to consume” or “carry out” in a cafeteria style, such as cafes, coffee
shops, and delicatessens.
      E.   “Restaurant, fast food, drive-through” means any establishment whose
principal business is the sale of food, frozen desserts, or beverages in ready
to consume individual servings, for consumption either within the restaurant
building or for carryout. The establishment may also include a drive-up or
drive-through services facility or offer curb service.
      F.   “Restaurant, full service, sit down” means an establishment whose
principal business is the sale of food and beverages, where customers are
generally served on demand from a menu during stated business hours, served by
an employee of the business, served on reusable containers and dinnerware, to
be consumed on the premises primarily inside the building at tables.
      G.   “Retail” means a business that provides goods or services directly
to the consumer where goods are available for immediate purchase and removal
from the premises by the purchaser and includes, but is not limited to, apparel
and clothing stores, bookstores, department stores, drugstores, etc.
      H.   “Right-of-way” or “row” means a strip of land acquired by
reservation, dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be
occupied by a road, trail, water line, sanitary sewer, or public uses.
      I.   “Roofline” means the point at which the roof meets the building
walls.
      J.   “Room, utility” means a room used in a dwelling that primarily
houses the furnace, water heater, heat pump, boiler, etc.
      K.   “Routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities” means
repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do
not trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general
improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs
include:
         (1)   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing
roofing tiles, and replacing siding;
         (2)   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting,
cabinets, counter tops, and similar finish work;
         (3)   Basement sealing;
         (4)   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
         (5)   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or air
conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
   19.   Words beginning with “S.”
      A.   “Second class consumer fireworks” means the following consumer
fireworks, as described in American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1,
Chapter 3:
         (1)   Cone fountains.
         (2)   Cylindrical fountains.
         (3)   Flitter sparklers.
         (4)   Ground and handheld sparking devices, including multiple tube
ground and handheld devices provided that they are manufactured in accordance
with American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, Chapter 3, Section 3.5.
         (5)   Ground spinners.
         (6)   Illuminating torches.
         (7)   Toy smoke devices that are not classified as novelties pursuant
to American Pyrotechnic Association Standard 87-1, Chapter 3, Section 3.2.
         (8)   Wheels.
         (9)   Wire or dipped sparklers that are not classified as novelties
pursuant to American Pyrotechnic Association Standard 87-1, Chapter 3, Section
3.2.
For the purposes of this title, a retail operation in which less than 50
percent of the retail floor space is devoted to the sale or display of second
class consumer fireworks shall not be considered a consumer fireworks sales
use.
      B.   “Setback” means the minimum horizontal distance between the front,
rear, or side lines of the lot and the front, rear, or side lines of the
building or structure, respectively.
      C.   “Shadow flicker” means alternating changes in light intensity caused
by the moving blade of a wind energy system casting shadows on stationary
objects such as the ground or facade of an adjacent structure.
      D.   “Shrub” means a self-supporting woody perennial plant of low to
medium height characterized by multiple stems and branches continuous from the
base, usually not more than eight feet in height.
      E.   “Sign” means every sign or advertisement as defined herein,
including any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration,
or insignia used to advertise, promote, or draw attention to the interests of
any person or firm when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general
public.
      F.   “Sign, a-frame” means a temporary sign, constructed of wood,
cardboard, plastic, or other lightweight and rigid material having the
capability to stand on its own supports and being portable.
      G.   “Sign area” means the area of a sign as determined by the Community
Development Director in accordance withSection
11-12-7 of this title.
      H.   “Sign, awning” means a non-illuminated sign that is either attached
to, affixed to, or painted on an awning or canopy.
      I.   “Sign, bag” means a temporary cover made of a cloth or canvas
material, used to alter the message of an obsolete sign until such time as it
is replaced with a new sign.
      J.   “Sign, banner” means a temporary sign composed of lightweight
material either enclosed in a rigid frame or not enclosed, secured, or mounted
to a structure or post on two or more edges. A national, State, or municipal
flag, or the official flag of any institution or business is not considered a
banner.
      K.   “Sign, billboard” means an off-premises sign, displayed out of doors
or visible from a public way.
      L.   “Sign, building mounted” means any sign attached to or erected
against the wall or painted on the surface of the wall of a building, with the
exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel with a plane of said wall. This
definition includes fascia signs.
      M.   “Sign, capsule” means a sign fabricated from metal, aluminum, or
some other material with a face constructed out of a panel product. For the
purpose of this chapter, capsule signs may not exceed 25 percent of the total
sign area as defined by Subsection
11-12-2(19)(G) of this title.
      N.   “Sign, commercial abandoned” means any sign face remaining in place
for a period of 30 days or more which no longer advertises an activity,
business, product, or service available on the premises on which the sign is
located.
      O.   “Sign, detached rigid” means a temporary sign, typically constructed
out of a stiff or non-flexible material and mounted to poles/posts or a similar
style support structure.
      P.   “Sign, directional” means a sign, other than warning and regulatory
signs, which is located on private property for the purposes of controlling all
modes of traffic.
      Q.   “Sign, electronic changeable copy” means the graphical content, in
letter or alphabetical form, of a sign, which can be changed or altered
automatically through electrical or electronic means.
      R.   “Sign face” or “surface” means the copy area, background area, and
the peripheral encasement, structural elements, or trim, which forms the outer
perimeter of the sign.
      S.   “Sign, ground-mounted” means a ground sign that does not have any
exposed pole or pylon, and is attached to a single columnar base. Ground-
mounted signs shall be constructed with materials chosen for their consistency
with the principal building, as well as their durability and strength, in
addition to the aesthetic values.
      T.   “Sign height” means the vertical distance from the average finished
road grade at the sign location to the highest point of the sign.
      U.   “Sign, interstate ground-mounted” means a sign on a property
abutting an interstate right-of-way that is oriented to the interstate, or is
located within 300 feet of the interstate right-of-way as shown on Section
11-12-8 
Figure 11-12-8A of this title.
      V.   “Sign, manual changeable copy” means the graphical content, in
letter or alphabetical form, of a sign, which can be changed or altered by
manual placement of letters or symbols.
      W.   “Sign, non-commercial” means a temporary or permanent sign which
contains no message, statement, or expression related to commercial interests.
      X.   “Sign, nonconforming” means a sign that does not conform to the
regulations provided herein.
      Y.   “Sign, number of” means for the purpose of determining the number of
signs, a sign is considered to be a single display surface or displaying device
containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit. Where
matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of
elements, each element is considered a single sign.
      Z.   “Sign, obsolete” means a sign that no longer advertises or
identifies a legitimate business conducted on the property.
      AA.   “Sign, off-site” means any sign advertising any interest of any
person or firm, products, accommodations, services, or activities not provided
on the premises in which the sign is placed.
      BB.   “Sign, panel” means a sign consisting of a frame which may be
covered by a translucent material, which may be internally illuminated. The
placement of individual letters, at least one inch thick on a metal, stone, or
Dryvit surface, is not considered a panel sign.
      CC.   “Sign, person” means any form of signage that may be accomplished
through gestures, signals, costumes, or carrying of “signs, temporary” (as
defined in this section) by persons affiliated with a business to advertise,
promote, or draw attention to such business.
      DD.   “Sign, pole” means a sign which is erected upon one or more posts
or pylons directly in or upon the ground and not attached to, or braced by, any
other structure.
      EE.   “Sign, political” means a temporary sign erected for the purpose of
soliciting votes or support for or in opposition to any candidate or any
political party under whose designation any candidate is seeking nomination or
election or any public question on the ballot in an election held under the
laws of the State.
      FF.   “Sign, portable” means any sign not permanently attached to the
ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported,
including, but not limited to, the following: signs designed to be transported
by the means of wheels, trailers, or chassis, whether or not the wheels are
presently attached; signs constructed as or converted to A- or T-frames; menu
and sandwich board signs; balloons or other hot air or gas filled figures; and
signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public
right-of-way and not being used in the normal day to day operations of the
business excluding storage.
      GG.   “Sign, roof” means a sign erected on or above the roof of a
building.
      HH.   “Sign, service” means a sign identifying parking and handicapped
parking, restrooms, public telephone facilities, first aid stations, fallout
shelters and other similar public service facilities.
      II.   “Sign, subdivision” means a sign identifying the name of a
residential complex or neighborhood development included on a landscape feature
including planter beds, fountains, decorative walls, or fences.
      JJ.   “Sign, temporary” means any commercial or residential sign (as
defined in this section), not permanently attached to a building, post, or
ground, including, but not limited to, banners, sandwich boards, sign persons,
balloons, streamers, and air-filled figures, not to be continued after the
expiration of the allowed time period.
      KK.   “Sign, traffic control” means a public or private sign, permanently
installed to inform, guide, and control vehicles, pedestrians, and bicyclists.
      LL.   “Sign, vehicle” means any sign, logo, or advertisement placed,
painted, attached, or displayed on a vehicle advertising a company, store, or
service.
      MM.   “Sign, yard” means a small temporary sign, typically constructed
out of corrugated plastic, or similar light weight material.
      NN.   “Site” See definition of lot.
      OO.   “Site plan” means a plan prepared to scale showing, accurately and
with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all
buildings, structures, uses, and principal site development features proposed
for a specific parcel of land.
      PP.   “Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems” (SWECS) means a wind energy
system consisting of at least one of the following: a wind turbine, tower, and
associated controls or conversion electronics, and is intended to solely reduce
on site consumption of supplied utility power, is incidental and subordinate to
a permitted use on the same parcel. Small wind energy systems shall not have a
nameplate rated capacity of greater than 15 kilowatts for residential uses or
100 kilowatts for commercial or industrial uses.
      QQ.   “Special Flood Hazard Area” (SFHA) means the land within a
community subject to the base flood. This land is identified on the community’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, or A99.
      RR.   “Special use permit” means a permit issued by the Board of
Adjustment that authorizes the recipient to make use of the property in
accordance with the requirements of this title as well as any additional
requirements imposed by the Board of Adjustment, the Planning and Zoning
Commission, or the Council. A special use permit may be issued only for those
uses listed under the “special uses” of this title.
      SS.   “Specified anatomical areas” means less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals, mature human buttocks, mature human female
breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and human male
genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
      TT.   “Specified sexual activities” means human genitals in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal, acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse,
or sodomy, fondling, or other touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, or female breast, minors engaged in a prohibited sexual act or
simulation of a prohibited sexual act.
      UU.   “Stables”
         (1)   Private Stable. A building or structure used, or intended to be
used, for housing horses belonging to the owner of the property and for
noncommercial purposes.
         (2)   Public Stable or Riding Academy. A building or structure used,
or intended to be used, for the housing of horses on a fee basis. Riding
instructions may be given in connection with a public stable or riding stable.
         (3)   Riding Club. A building or structure used, or intended to be
used, for the housing only of horses by a group of persons for noncommercial
purposes.
      VV.   “Start of construction” means substantial improvement, and means
the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
      WW.   “Story” means a portion of the building included between the upper
surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that
the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the
upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling above, not including
unfinished attics. If the finished floor level directly above a basement or
cellar is more than six feet above, such basement or cellar is considered a
story.
      XX.   “Street” means any thoroughfare or public space that has been
dedicated or deeded to the public for public use, primarily to provide
principal means of access to abutting property.
      YY.   “Structural alterations” means any replacement or change in the
shape or size of any portion of a building or of the supporting members of a
building or structure such as walls, columns, beams, arches, girders, floor
joist, roof joist, or roof trusses, beyond ordinary repairs and maintenance.
      ZZ.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories,
sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities, or
other similar uses.
      AAA.   “Structure, accessory” means any structure that is not considered
a building, including, but not limited to: decks, fences, landscaping, signs,
pools, walls, temporary/permanent domesticated animal runs.
      BBB.   “Subdivision” means a division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
into three or more lots, plats, sites, or other subdivision of land for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease, building
development, anchorage, right-of-way dedication, or other use.
      CCC.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be
included in the estimated cost of repair.
      DDD.   “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure
which satisfies either of the following criteria:
         (1)   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure
either: 1) before the improvement or repair is started; or 2) if the structure
has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
         For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either: 1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 2) any alterations of
a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State
Inventory of Historic Places.
         (2)   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a
building by 25 percent or more. All additions constructed after the effective
date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community
shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total
increase in original floor space would exceed 25 percent.
      EEE.   “Schools, elementary and secondary” means an educational
institution consistent with NAICS Code 6111 Elementary and Secondary Schools
and having an established curriculum the same as ordinary given in the local
public school system. Student housing or dormitories are not included in this
definition.
      FFF.   “Schools, post-secondary” means an educational institution
consistent with NAICS Codes 6112 Junior Colleges, 6113 Colleges, Universities,
and Professional Schools, and 6114 Business Schools and Computer and Management
Training. Student housing or dormitories, student recreational centers,
athletic facilities, and similar supporting uses commonly associated with post-
secondary schools are not included in this definition.
      GGG.   “Schools, technical and trade” means an educational institution
consistent with NAICS Code 6115 Technical and Trade Schools. For zoning
purposes, technical and trade schools shall be interpreted to be the same use
category as the job specific training it provides.
(Paragraphs EEE–GGG – Ord. 1156 – Feb. 25 Supp.)
   20.   Words beginning with “T.”
      A.   “Telecommunications” means the transmission, between or among points
as specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change
in form or content of the information as sent and received.
      B.   “Telecommunications antenna” means any system of wires, poles, rods,
reflecting disks, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of
electromagnetic waves when such system is either external to or attached to the
exterior of a structure.
      C.   “Telecommunications satellite dish antenna” means any antenna in the
shape of a shallow dish, and the appurtenant equipment, used for the reception
of communications (television or otherwise) from orbiting satellites of ground
transmitters. This definition includes those satellite dishes less than one
meter in diameter.
      D.   “Telecommunications tower” means a tower, pole, or similar structure
that supports a telecommunications antenna operated for commercial purposes
aboveground in a fixed location, freestanding, guyed, or on a building or other
structure.
      E.   “Tenant frontage” means, in the case of determining permitted sign
area, the dimension between the tenant separation walls along the side of the
building containing the main business entry.
      F.   “Thrift shop” means an enclosed facility in which used personal
items such as clothes, jewelry, or furniture are donated to a nonprofit
business or organization that engages in the resale of the items. A retail
store that sells used merchandise not donated for sale, including, but not
limited to, used record stores, used bookstores, used furniture stores, used
sporting goods, and used sports trading card stores, shall not be considered a
thrift store for the purpose of this title.
      G.   “Topsoil” means a medium composed of naturally occurring mineral
particles and organic matter, which provides physical, chemical, and biological
properties necessary for plant growth.
      H.   “Tower-mounted WES” means a wind turbine that is mounted to a
freestanding tower.
      I.   “Trailer” means any structure used for sleeping, business, or
storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks,
sawhorses, or skirting, or being attached to a permanent foundation, and which
is, has been, or reasonably may be, equipped with wheels or other devices for
transporting the structure from place to place, whether by automotive power or
other means.
      J.   “Tree, evergreen” means any living, self-supporting woody perennial
plant which, at maturity, attains a trunk diameter of at least three inches or
more when measured at a point two feet above ground level and which normally
displays green leaves or needles throughout the year.
      K.   “Tree, overstory” means any living, self-supporting woody perennial
plant which, at maturity, attains a trunk diameter of at least three inches or
more when measured at a point two feet above ground level and which normally
attains an overall height of at least 15 feet, usually with one main stem or
trunk and many branches.
      L.   “Tree, understory” means any living, self-supporting woody perennial
plant, which, at maturity, normally attains an overall height of 10 feet. Trees
with multiple trunk growth characteristics shall have no more than five main
trunks. These trees will provide the midlevel landscaping within the specified
height range.
      M.   “Townhouse development” means a subdivision for attached or detached
townhouse units wherein the land or lot beneath each dwelling unit may be
individually owned by the owner of the dwelling unit and where the development
is characterized by common elements, which are specified in or determined under
the rules and regulations set forth by recorded covenants.
(Paragraph M – Ord. 1164 – Jul. 25 Supp.)
   21.   Words beginning with “U.”
      A.   “Use” means the purpose or activity, for which the land, or building
thereon, is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or
maintained.
   22.   Words beginning with “V.”
      A.   “Variance” means a modification of the specific regulations of this
title granted by resolution of the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the
terms of this title for the purpose of assuring that no property, because of
special circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges
commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone.
      B.   “Vehicle” means a conveyance for transporting people, goods, etc.,
especially over land.
      C.   “Vertical axis WES” means a wind turbine design where the rotating
shaft is perpendicular to the ground and the blades rotate through a vertical
plane.
      D.   “Video message board” means a sign that displays an electronic
video, or collection of images and text on a screen or screen(s).
      E.   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with the regulations contained within the chapters of this
title.
      F.   “Vision clearance” means an open, unoccupied triangular space at the
street corner or a corner lot, the space being defined as a setback line
extending across the corner between points established 25 feet along the right-
of-way lines by measurement from the corner.
   23.   Words beginning with “W.”
      A.   “Wind Energy System” (WES) means an electrical generating facility
comprised of an aggregation of parts such as a wind turbine, tower,
transformer, power lines, or battery banks, used in a manner to convert wind
into mechanical or electrical energy.
      B.   “Wind turbine” means any piece of electrical generating equipment
that converts the mechanical energy of wind into electrical energy.
   24.   Words beginning with “X.”
   25.   Words beginning with “Y.”
      A.   “Yard, corner interior” means, on a corner lot, a yard extending
from the front yard to the rear yard and measured between the side lot line
(adjacent lot) and the building or any projections thereof.
      B.   “Yard, front” means a yard extending across the full width of the
lot and measured between the front lot line and the building. See
Figure 11-2-1.3 of this section.
      C.   “Yard, rear” means a yard extending across the full width of the lot
and measured perpendicularly between the rear lot line or its extension and the
building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies, porches, or
decks. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard is at the opposite
end of the lot from the front yard. See
figure 11-2-1.3 of this section.
      D.   “Yard, required” means any yard as required by the setback
regulations of this title.
      E.   “Yard, secondary front” means, on a corner lot, the yard having
frontage on a public street not having the main entrance to the principal
building. See
Figure 11-2-1.3 of this section.
      F.   “Yard, side” means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear
yard and measured between the side lot lines and the building or any
projections thereof. See
Figure 11-2-1.3 of this definition.
Figure 11-2-1.3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3013.png]
 
   26.   Words beginning with “Z.”
      A.   “Zone” means any one of the classes of districts established by this
title.
CHAPTER 3
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
 
11-3-1 Board Created; Members; Terms 11-3-7 Variances
11-3-2 Purpose                       11-3-8 Interpretive Review
11-3-3 Meetings; General Duties      11-3-9 Decisions
11-3-4 Appeals                       11-3-10 City Council Remand
11-3-5 Hearings Notice               11-3-11 Appeals from Board
11-3-6 Special Use Permit            11-3-12 Expiration of Special Use Permit
                                     and Variance
 
11-3-1 BOARD CREATED; MEMBERS; TERMS.
   A Board of Adjustment is hereby established which shall consist of five
members. The terms of office of the members of the Board of Adjustment and the
manner of their appointment shall be as provided by State law and the Board of
Adjustment procedure manual.
11-3-2 PURPOSE.
   It shall be the purpose of the Board of Adjustment:
   1.   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Community
Development Department in the enforcement of this chapter;
   2.   To hear and decide only such other special use permits and variances as
the Board of Adjustment is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of
this chapter;
   3.   To decide such questions as are involved in determining whether special
use permits or variances should be granted; and
   4.   To grant special use permits or variances with such conditions and
safeguards as are appropriate under this chapter, or to deny special use
permits and variances when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this
chapter.
11-3-3 MEETINGS; GENERAL DUTIES.
   1.   Meetings. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call
of the chairperson, and at such other times as the Board of Adjustment may
determine.
   2.   Duties Generally; Open Meetings; Quorum. Such chairperson or, in the
absence of the chairperson, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board of Adjustment and
hearings shall be open to the public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question,
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records
of its examinations and other official actions all of which shall be
immediately filed in the Community Development Department and shall be a public
record. The presence of three members shall be necessary to constitute a
quorum.
11-3-4 APPEALS.
   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by a person aggrieved or by
any official, department, and board of the City affected by any decision of the
Community Development Department. Such appeal shall be taken within 10 days by
filing application request on forms provided by the Community Development
Department. Additionally, the application must be accompanied with the
appropriate fees in an amount determined by resolution of the Council from time
to time. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the Community Development Department certifies to the Board of
Adjustment after notice of appeal shall have been filed that, by reason of
facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of the Department
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not
be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board
of Adjustment or by a court of record on application, on due cause shown.
11-3-5 HEARINGS NOTICE.
   After the Community Development Department has set the Board of Adjustment
meeting date, surrounding property owners within 310 feet, exclusive of
intervening right-of-way, shall be notified. Notice shall be sent not less than
seven days and not more than 20 days before the Board of Adjustment meeting.
The notice shall follow the format established by the Community Development
Department and be sent by first class mail. Notice shall contain date, time,
location, and subject of the Board of Adjustment meeting. The Community
Development Department shall post at least one notification sign at least seven
days and not more than 20 days prior to the Board of Adjustment meeting. At
least one sign must be placed so that it may be seen from a public street, and
in cases of through lots and or corner lots, a sign may be posted at both
frontages.
11-3-6 SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   1.   Review; Board Determination. The Board of Adjustment shall review,
before issuing any special use permit, the conformity of the proposed building
or use with the standards of the Comprehensive Plan and recognized principals
of land use planning. The Board of Adjustment may approve the special use
permit as submitted, or before approval, may require that the applicant modify,
alter, adjust, or amend the proposal as the Board of Adjustment deems necessary
to preserve the intent and purpose of this chapter in order to promote the
health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
   2.   Site Plan Review; Amendment. Following approval of the special use
permit, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review a site plan/site plan
amendment as required in Chapter 15 of this title.
   3.   Resubmission After Changes. In the event a special use permit is
granted under the terms of this section, any changes thereafter in the approved
use or site plan shall be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as the
original proposal.
   4.   Conditions for Issuance of Permit. A special use permit shall not be
granted by the Board unless and until:
      A.   A written application, on forms provided by the Community
Development Department, is submitted indicating the section of this chapter
under which the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it
is requested.
      B.   Notice of public hearing shall be given at least seven and not more
than 20 days in advance of public hearing. Notice of public hearing shall occur
in the same manner as required by law for variances.
      C.   The Board shall look specifically upon the following criteria in
granting or denying a special use permit, plus any additional criteria the
Board finds necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
in accordance with the intent of this chapter:
         (1)   That the proposed location, design, construction, and operation
of the particular use adequately safeguards the health, safety, and general
welfare of persons residing or working in adjoining or surrounding property;
         (2)   That such use shall not impair an adequate supply of light and
air to surrounding property;
         (3)   That such use shall not unduly increase congestion in the
streets or public danger of fire and safety;
         (4)   That such use shall not diminish or impair established property
values in adjoining or surrounding property; and
         (5)   That such use will not unduly burden public utilities.
      D.   Conditions and Safeguards. In granting any special use permit, the
Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with this chapter. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when
made a part of the terms under which the special use permit is granted, shall
be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable under Section
11-1-7 of this title.
      E.   Growth Plan for Elementary and Secondary Schools. In granting a
Special Use Permit related to elementary and secondary schools, a growth plan
forecasting the student, staff, and facility needs over an approximately 10-
year period shall be provided.
(Parapgraph E – Ord. 1156 – Feb. 25 Supp.)
11-3-7 VARIANCES.
   1.   Variance Related to Use.
      A.   Application Requirements. Application for variance from the terms of
this chapter will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter
shall be observed and substantial justice done. No nonconforming use of
neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be
considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
      B.   Conditions for Granting. Variances related to use shall only be
granted upon:
         (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause; and
         (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in a substantial hardship to the applicant; and
         (3)   A determination that the substantial hardship is not self-
imposed; and
         (4)   A determination that the granting of the variance will not be
contrary to the public interest or the neighborhood integrity; and
         (5)   A determination that the granting of a variance is the minimum
necessary to afford relief from this chapter while preserving the spirit of the
zoning ordinance.
   2.   Variance Related to Dimensional Requirements.
      A.   Application Requirements. Application for variance from the terms of
this chapter with respect to the area, dimensional, or other numerical
limitations, will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
would result in practical difficulties to the property owner in making a
beneficial use of the property allowed by the zoning ordinance, and so that the
spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. No
nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in other
districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
      B.   Conditions for Granting. Variances related to dimensional
requirements shall only be granted upon:
         (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause; and
         (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in practical difficulties to the applicant; and
         (3)   A determination that the practical difficulties faced are unique
to the property; and
         (4)   A determination that the practical difficulties faced are not
self-imposed; and
         (5)   A determination that the practical difficulties cannot be
alleviated by a feasible method other than a variance; and
         (6)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
significantly alter the essential character of the surrounding neighborhood.
   3.   Resubmittal After Changes. In the event a variance is granted under the
terms of this chapter, any changes thereafter in the approved use or site plan
shall be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as the original
proposal. Before granting a variance, the Board of Adjustment shall make
findings that the applicant has met the requirements of this chapter, and the
Board of Adjustment shall further find that the reasons set forth in the
application justify the granting of variance. The burden shall be upon those
seeking the variance to establish their entitlement to the requested variance.
   4.   Conditions and Safeguards. In granting any variance, the Board of
Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity
with this chapter. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a
part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter and punishable under Section
11-1-7 of this title.
(Section 11-3-7 – Ord. 1165 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
11-3-8 INTERPRETIVE REVIEW.
   The Board shall review appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Community
Development Director in the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
11-3-9 DECISIONS.
   1.   Authority of Board. In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board
of Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of
this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may make such order,
requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end,
shall have powers of the Community Development Department from whom the appeal
is taken.
   2.   Vote of Members. The concurring vote of three members of the Board of
Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order requirement, decision, or
determination of Community Development Department, or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter,
or to grant any special use permit or variance.
   3.   Written Testimony or Evidence. Every decision granted or denied by the
Board of Adjustment shall be supported by a written testimony or evidence
submitted in connection therewith.
   4.   Denial of Application. If any application has been denied by the Board
of Adjustment, then no new application for the same relief shall be considered
by the Board of Adjustment unless the Board shall find conditions have changed.
   5.   Council Review. Any decision made by the Board of Adjustment shall not
be deemed effective until reviewed and accepted by the Council, at the next
regularly scheduled meeting, no more than 20 days from the date of such
deciding vote.
11-3-10 CITY COUNCIL REMAND.
   The Council, may, at its discretion, review any affirmative decision of the
Board of Adjustment at any time before the effective date of the decision.
After such review, but prior to the effective date of the variance, the Council
may remand any such decision to the Board of Adjustment for further review.
Upon remand, the Board of Adjustment may reconsider its decision and issue its
final decision on the request within 30 days after the date of such remand.
11-3-11 APPEALS FROM BOARD.
   Any person or persons, any officer, department, or board of the City
severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may present to a
court of record, a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is
illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such
petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the
decision in the office of the Board of Adjustment. The court may reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the decision brought up for review.
11-3-12 EXPIRATION OF SPECIAL USE PERMIT AND VARIANCE.
   All special use permits and variances shall expire and terminate 90 days
after the date of the granting of such special use permit or variance unless a
building permit has been issued for the construction authorized by such special
use permit or variance, or if no construction is authorized, then unless a
certificate of zoning compliance has been issued for such authorized use. The
Board of Adjustment may, upon written request of the affected person, extend
the time for the issuance of a building permit or certificate of zoning
compliance for 60 days. In the event the building permit for the construction
so authorized is canceled, such special use permit or variance shall thereupon
expire and terminate.
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
11-4-1 General Regulations           11-4-12 Home Occupations
11-4-2 Interpretation of Standards   11-4-13 Communication Equipment
11-4-3 Jurisdiction; Nonconformities 11-4-14 Subdivision Associations
11-4-4 Scope                         11-4-15 Prohibition On Sale of Alcoholic
                                     Beverages from Drive-Through Window
11-4-5 Vision Clearance              11-4-16 Adult Oriented Businesses
11-4-6 Street Frontage               11-4-17 Exceptions, Modifications, and
                                     Interpretations
11-4-7 Accessory Buildings           11-4-18 Automobile Sales and Display Lots
11-4-8 Accessory Structures          11-4-19 Renewable Energy Systems
11-4-9 Outdoor Areas and Activities  11-4-20 Pawnbrokers and Delayed Deposit
                                     Services
11-4-10 Yard Coverage                11-4-21 Accessory Dwelling Units
11-4-11 Special Events                
 
11-4-1 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of general
zoning regulations. This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the
“General Zoning Regulations of the City of Clive, Iowa.”
11-4-2 INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted and applied as minimum
requirements. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is imposed
or required by other provisions of law or by other rules, regulations, or
ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall control. For a specific land
use, where the requirements of any other City ordinance are more stringent or
restrictive than the requirements in this chapter, nothing in this chapter
shall not be construed to waive compliance with the provisions of such other
ordinances.
11-4-3 JURISDICTION; NONCONFORMITIES.
   The lawful use of facilities existing at the time of the enactment of this
chapter may continue, although such use may not conform to the regulations in
this chapter. For those facilities permitted before the adoption of this
chapter, such facilities shall be classified as “permitted nonconforming”
facilities. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these “nonconforming”
facilities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their
survival. Such facilities are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with
the permitted facilities in the districts involved. No permit shall be issued
for any lot, tenant, or development after the effective date of this chapter
which is not in substantial conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
Furthermore, no facility shall be substantially improved, converted, enlarged,
or otherwise altered without conforming except where specified to the
provisions of this chapter. On any building, devoted in whole or in part, to
any nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs or on repair or
replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing; provided that
the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of enactment or
amendment of the zoning ordinance is not increased. This chapter shall not be
construed to prohibit the improvement of any building or structure from a state
of disrepair, neglect, or potentially harmful condition to a minimum level of
safety as determined by the Building Official.
11-4-4 SCOPE.
   1.   Conformance Required. Except as specified in this chapter, no land use,
building, or structure shall be erected, extended, converted, enlarged, moved,
or structurally altered which does not comply with all the regulations
established by this chapter for the district in which the building or land is
located.
   2.   Continuing Existing Nonconforming Uses. The lawful use of land,
building, or structure existing at the time of the enactment of the zoning
ordinance may be continued even though such use may not conform with the
regulations of this chapter. Any use in existence at the adoption of the zoning
ordinance which was not an authorized “nonconforming use” under previous zoning
ordinances, shall not be authorized to continue as a nonconforming use in
accordance with this chapter, or amendments in this section. If no structural
alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a building or structure may be
changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted
classification. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more
restrictive use or to another conforming use, such use shall not be changed to
a less restrictive use. When a nonconforming use of land, building, or
structure is discontinued or abandoned for six months, the building, structure,
and premises in combination shall not be used except in conformance with the
regulations in the district in which it is located. Where nonconforming use
status applies to a building, structure, and premises in combination, removal
of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Any
nonconforming building or structure damaged more than 50 percent of its
replacement cost, exclusive of the foundations, at the time of damage by any
means shall not be restored or reconstructed, except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. If the structure is less than 50 percent damaged
above the foundation, it may be restored, reconstructed, or used as before,
provided that reconstruction is completed within six months of such happening,
and is built of like or similar materials as appropriate to the zoning
district.
   3.   Existing Building Permits.
      A.   Nothing contained in this section shall require any change in the
overall layout, plans, construction, size, or designated use of any building or
part of, for which approval and required building permits have been granted
before the effective date of this section. The construction, in conformance
with such plans, shall have started prior to the effective date and completion
carried on in a normal manner and not discontinued for any reason, other than
those beyond the builder’s control.
      B.   “Actual construction” is defined to include the placing of
construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent
manner; except where demolition or removal of an existing building has been
substantially begun prior to rebuilding. Demolition or removal shall be deemed
to be actual construction, provided that such work is diligently carried on
until completion of the building.
   4.   Yard, Open Space, and Parking. No part of a yard or other open space,
off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any
building, for the purpose of complying with this chapter, shall be included as
such required for any other building unless otherwise permitted through the
development review and approval process.
   5.   Reduction in Yard or Lot Requirements. No yard or lot existing at the
time of passage of this chapter shall be reduced in dimension or area below the
minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the
effective date of this chapter shall meet the minimum requirements established
by this chapter.
11-4-5 VISION CLEARANCE.
   The purpose of this provision is to prevent obstructions on private
property, which substantially impair or interfere with the visibility of
pedestrian or vehicular movement on and along public streets and sidewalks,
create an unreasonable risk of death, personal injury, or property damage, and
otherwise interfere with the unobstructed and safe use of the public right-of-
way.
   1.   On a corner lot in any district, nothing shall be erected, placed,
planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to impede vision between a
height of two and one-half and 10 feet above the centerline grades of the
intersecting streets in the area bounded by the ROW lines of such corner lots
and a line adjoining points along said ROW lines 25 feet from the point of
intersection of right-of-way lines. See
figure 11-4-5.1 of this section.
   2.   In the case of private streets or drives, the vision clearance triangle
shall be measured from the back of curb or edge of the private road surface and
the point of intersection with the right-of-way line.
   3.   Staff may require an engineering analysis to be performed and submitted
for review before permits are issued. Based on the analysis, differing greater
or lesser dimensions may be required based upon the current standards of the
Institute of Transportation Engineers or the Association of American State
Highway Officials.
Figure 11-4-5.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3015.png]
 
11-4-6 STREET FRONTAGE.
   Except as provided in this section, no lot shall contain any building used,
in whole or in part, for any residence purposes unless such lot abuts for at
least 40 feet on at least one public street. An exclusive unobstructed ingress/
egress easement of access or right-of-way of at least 24 feet wide to a public
street may be used to satisfy this requirement in unique circumstances.
11-4-7 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   Accessory buildings require a permit and a fee in an amount determined, from
time to time, by resolution of the Council.
Figure 11-4-7.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3017.png]
 
   1.   Accessory Building, Large. A building greater than 75 square feet
subordinate to the principal use of a building on the lot and serving a purpose
customarily incidental to the use of the principal building.
      A.   Location. Large accessory buildings may be erected in rear yards
only. For commercial and multi-family developments, large accessory buildings
may be permitted in any yard subject to site plan approval.
      B.   Setbacks. Setbacks for large accessory buildings shall be no less
than five feet from a principal building or any other large accessory building.
Large accessory buildings shall be at least five feet from side and rear lot
lines. See
figure 11-4-7.1. Large accessory buildings 600 square feet or larger shall meet
the setback requirements of the principal building.
      C.   Design Characteristics. Large accessory buildings shall be
constructed of materials similar to the principal structure, and in character
with the surrounding built environment, as determined by the Community
Development Director. For commercial and multi-family developments, design
characteristics shall be subject to site plan approval.
   2.   Accessory Building, Small. A building 75 square feet or less
subordinate to the principal use of a building on the lot and serving a purpose
customarily incidental to the use of the principal building.
      A.   Location. Small accessory buildings may be erected in rear yards
only.
      B.   Setbacks: Small accessory buildings may be placed next to primary or
large accessory buildings. Small accessory buildings shall be at least five
feet from rear lot lines.
      C.   Design Characteristics. Small accessory buildings are not required
to conform with design standards that apply to primary and large accessory
buildings. Small accessory structures must be constructed with durable outdoor
materials.
   3.   General Standards. The following shall apply to all accessory
buildings:
      A.   Corner Lots or Double Frontage. In the case of a corner lot or a
double frontage lot, accessory buildings with floor area greater than 75 square
feet shall not be located in the primary or secondary front yards. Accessory
buildings with floor area less than or equal to 75 square feet are permitted to
encroach into the secondary front yard. In this case, the “secondary front
yard” is defined as that yard that fronts on a public street or ROW, but does
not contain the main entrance to the principal structure. See
figure 11-4-8.3 in Section
11-4-8 of this chapter.
      B.   Principal Building Relationship. Accessory buildings, except
buildings housing animals or fowl, may be erected as part of the principal
building or may be connected thereto by a breezeway or similar structure, and
such accessory building shall be considered as part of the principal building
for all yard requirements and building codes.
      C.   Height. No accessory building shall exceed one story or 15 feet in
maximum height.
      D.   Accessory buildings shall not be constructed in such a way as to
impede drainageways or interfere with overland flowage easements.
      E.   Principal Building Constructed. No accessory building shall be
constructed on a lot until the construction of the main building has begun, and
no accessory building shall be used unless the Building Official has issued a
Certificate of Occupancy for the principal building. An accessory building may
be constructed on a lot without a principal building, provided the following
conditions are met:
         (1)   A principal building is located on an adjacent lot.
         (2)   The lot containing the principal building and the lot with the
accessory building shall have the same owner.
         (3)   The lot containing the principal building and the lot with the
accessory building shall be bound by a recorded lot tie agreement.
11-4-8 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   Accessory structures require a permit and a fee in an amount determined,
from time to time, by resolution of the Council. Accessory structures may be
erected with the following provisions:
   1.   Location.
      A.   Accessory structures shall be permitted in any yard, unless
specified in this section.
      B.   Accessory structures shall not be constructed in such a way to
impede drainageways or interfere with overland flowage easements.
      C.   A minimum rear yard setback of five feet and a minimum side yard
setback of two feet shall be maintained for accessory structures unless
specified elsewhere in this title.
   2.   Decks.
      A.   Decks not exceeding 50 square feet in area shall be permitted in any
yard, provided a minimum side yard setback of five feet is maintained.
      B.   Decks larger than 50 square feet shall be permitted in side and rear
yards only, provided a minimum side and rear yard setback of five feet is
maintained.
   3.   Fences And Walls.
      A.   Ornamental Fences. Ornamental fences not exceeding 36 inches in
height are permitted within the limits of any yard in all districts. However,
in no event shall a fence be permitted that interferes with vision clearance
triangle.
      B.   Barbed Wire or Electric Fences. The use of barbed wire or electric
fences to enclose land is prohibited within the corporate limits without prior
approval of the Council.
      C.   Residential Districts.
         (1)   Requirements for Fences and Walls. Fences and walls not
exceeding six feet in height are permitted within the limits of side and rear
yards with a zero foot setback in all residential districts except corner and
double frontage lots as permitted in Subsections (C)(3)(c) and (C)(3)(4) of
this section. The face of the fence shall be equally attractive on both sides.
Structural members shall be directed toward the developing property or away
from the public thoroughfare. In all cases, access shall be provided to the
unenclosed property or ROW for maintenance purposes.
         (2)   Safety or Physical Handicap Issues. In a circumstance in which a
fence, ramp, or similar structure is required for safety or access due to a
bona fide personal physical handicap or developmental disability, an accessory
structure may be permitted to encroach up to 10 feet within the required front
yard, provided such accessory structure is approved by the Council. The Council
may condition its approval upon an agreement that the accessory structure be
removed if the person with disability no longer resides at the dwelling.
         (3)   Double Frontage Lots. In the case of double frontage lots with
an arterial street forming the rear property line, fences may be permitted up
to the property line in the secondary front yard, provided no landscaping
buffer exists. See
Figure 11-4-8.3 of this section. Such fences may be up to six feet in height.
The finished surface of the fence shall face outside the property.
a.   Arterial streets within the City are defined for the purposes of this
chapter as N.W. 86th Street, N.W. 100th Street, N.W. 114th Street, N.W. 128th
Street, N.W. 142nd Street, N.W. 156th Street, R-30, University Avenue,
University Boulevard, Hickman Road, Douglas Parkway, Meredith Drive, Warrior
Lane, and other streets as determined, from time to time, by the Council.
b.   For double frontage lots backing to a street other than an arterial,
fences up to six feet in height may be permitted, provided a 20-foot setback is
preserved in the secondary front yard, and no landscape buffer exists. See
figure 11-4-8.3 of this section.
Figure 11-4-8.3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3019.png]
 
         (4)   Corner Lots. In the case of fences in corner lots, fences not
exceeding six feet in height are permitted in the secondary front yard provided
a minimum setback of 20 feet from the property line is maintained. See
Figure 11-4-8.4 of this section. In the case of corner lots with an arterial
street forming the secondary front property line, fences may be permitted up to
the property line in the secondary front yard, provided no landscaping buffer
exists. Such fences may be up to six feet in height.
Figure 11-4-8.4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3021.png]
 
         (5)   Ornamental Fence Restrictions. In the following streets, as
determined by the Council, from time to time, and in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan, no fences other than three feet high ornamental may be
constructed in a front or secondary front yard, regardless of regulations
above:
            a.   Boston Parkway, west of N.W. 156th Street to the west
corporate limits,
            b.   Berkshire Parkway,
            c.   Devonshire Parkway,
            d.   Westgate Parkway.
         (6)   R-3 and R-4 Districts. Following site plan approval, fences may
be constructed within the setback lines determined above, for developments in
R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts.
      D.   Commercial and Industrial Districts. Fences and walls not exceeding
eight feet in height are permitted within the limits of any side or rear yard.
Fences and walls exceeding eight feet in height require site approval by the
Council. Fences may be constructed within the building setback lines for
commercial and industrial districts, following site plan approval by the
Council.
   4.   Miscellaneous Structures. Permanent uses, including, but not limited
to, sport courts, tennis courts, and metal batting cages shall maintain a
setback consistent with Subsection 1C of this section (minimum setbacks for
accessory structures).
   5.   Domesticated Animal Runs. In residential districts, domesticated animal
runs are permitted within the limits of rear yards. A five-foot setback is
required from all lot lines and adequate screening (landscaping or opaque
fencing) shall be provided to reduce visibility and noise to the adjoining
property owners. Pet runs/kennels shall not exceed six feet in height.
   6.   Domesticated Animal Exercise Yard. In commercial or industrial
districts, a domesticated animal exercise yard may be constructed adjacent to
or as part of the principal structure, may be indoors or outdoors, and need not
be climate controlled. Such structures shall not be utilized as the primary
enclosure for any animal. If outdoors, such structure shall be screened with
solid fencing, eight feet in height, and shall be set back at least 10 feet
from any adjacent property.
   7.   Dumpster Enclosures. Dumpster enclosures shall be constructed of
permanent materials that are durable and complementary to the principal
structure or similarly approved material with a metal framed gate with opaque
screening. Adequate landscape screening shall be provided to reduce visibility
to the adjoining property owners. Dumpster enclosures shall be required for
trash dumpsters, grease bins, and cardboard bins for all uses, except single
and duplex and townhome residences.
   8.   Swimming Pools. Swimming pools, hot tubs, and saunas are permitted in
any rear or side yard, provided a five-foot setback shall be maintained from
all side and rear yard property lines. In addition, regulations in Title 10,
Chapter 10 of this Code shall apply.
   9.   Cart Corrals. Cart corrals shall be constructed of permanent materials
of a like or similar nature to the principal structure, such as brick, block,
poured concrete, ornamental steel, or similarly approved material. Concrete
curbing shall define the area of landscaping and cart storage. “Pole” or “tube”
type cart corrals are expressly prohibited.
11-4-9 OUTDOOR AREAS AND ACTIVITIES.
   1.   Storage Areas. Outdoor storage areas, where permitted, shall provide an
effective screen, completely obscuring the enclosed material. Adequate
landscaping, or walls, shall be provided to reduce visibility to the adjoining
property owners and public view. Storage screening shall require site plan
approval. Slats in chain-link fencing shall not be deemed an acceptable
alternative to privacy fencing.
   2.   Product Display and Vending. Products or items for sale may be placed
in outdoor areas with the following criteria:
      A.   Items cannot be placed in any parking stalls or drive lanes,
      B.   Items cannot interfere with site safety, circulation, and
visibility,
      C.   Items must be at least 10 feet from all property lines,
      D.   Items must be on a paved surface adjacent to the building,
      E.   Minimum sidewalk width;
         (1)   A minimum aisle width of 48 inches must be maintained if the
product display or vending is adjacent to a sidewalk.
         (2)   A minimum aisle width of 72 inches must be maintained if the
product display or vending is adjacent to a sidewalk that abuts head-in parking
stalls.
   3.   Service Areas. A restaurant or drinking place may utilize an outdoor
service area, provided the following conditions are met and a site plan/site
plan amendment has been approved:
      A.   Outdoor service area associated with the serving or dispensing of
alcohol must maintain a minimum 42-inch tall continuous enclosure with Code
compliant pedestrian ingress and egress. Such enclosure shall be constructed of
materials chosen for their strength and permanency, as well as compatibility
with the principal structure. Proper panic hardware will be required for all
exits.
      B.   Minimum sidewalk width.
         (1)   A minimum aisle width of 48 inches must be maintained if the
outdoor service area is adjacent to a sidewalk.
         (2)   A minimum aisle width of 72 inches must be maintained if the
outdoor service area is adjacent to a sidewalk that abuts head-in parking
stalls.
      C.   A restaurant or drinking place shall not be required to provide
parking for the first 300 square feet of outdoor service area, provided the
following conditions are met:
         (1)   If existing parking stalls are removed for the construction of
the outdoor service area, a like number of parking stalls shall be added or
compensated for elsewhere on the site.
         (2)   Stated occupancy for the establishment shall not increase as the
result of additional outdoor service area, unless required parking as outlined
in Section
11-13-8 of this title is provided.
         (3)   Any outdoor service area over the initial 300 square feet shall
provide the required parking as outlined in Section
11-13-8 of this title.
Figure 11-4-9.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3023.png]
 
   4.   Sound Systems. Commercial establishments using an outdoor sound system
shall not place the outdoor sound system within 300 feet of a dwelling or a
building that contains a dwelling. Location requirement shall not include
equipment utilized for drive-thru transactions. The use of any sound system
shall follow the provisions in
Title 5 Chapter 8 Noise Control.
11-4-10 YARD COVERAGE.
   1.   Corner Lots.
      A.   For corner lots, platted and of record at the time of September 30,
1999, the minimum required lot width shall be increased by at least 20 feet so
as to allow for the additional required street secondary front yard; i.e., for
a minimum required lot width of 60 feet, the minimum width of a corner lot
shall be at least 80 feet.
      B.   On corner lots, platted and of record at the time of September 30,
1999, the buildable envelope shall not be required to be reduced to a width
less than 28 feet in order to meet the additional lot width required bySection
11-4-10(1)(A).
      C.   On corner lots, platted and of record as of March 1, 1972, the
secondary front yard regulations shall apply to the longer street side of the
lot except in the case of reversed frontage lots. In the case of reversed
frontage, there shall be a secondary front yard of not less than 50 percent of
the setback required on lots to the rear, and no accessory building shall
project beyond the setback line of the lots in the rear. This regulation shall
not be interpreted as to reduce the buildable envelope to a width less than 28
feet.
   2.   Building Lines on Approved Plats. Whenever the plat of a land
subdivision, approved by the Council and on record in the office of the County
Recorder, shows a setback building line along any frontage for the purpose of
creating a front yard or side street yard line, the building line thus shown
shall apply along such frontage in place of any other yard line required in
this title, unless specific yard requirements in this title require a greater
setback.
   3.   Yard Coverage Area. A maximum of 30 percent of front and side yards
shall be impervious. A maximum of 50 percent of rear yards shall be impervious.
This shall not prohibit the construction of a permitted driveway to support
access to a garage, plus one additional parking stall or required sidewalks and
walkways.
Figure 11-4-10.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3025.png]
 
11-4-11 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   The City recognizes that, in certain instances, some flexibility to allow
special events out of the confines of a building can be beneficial to business
interests, as well as the consumers and the City alike, provided such events
continue to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. The
following special event applications shall require a fee in an amount
determined by resolution of the Council.
   1.   Seasonal Sales. “Seasonal sales events” shall be defined as those
events that, due to the nature of the product being sold or the time of year
that such product is for sale, are best accomplished out of doors, including,
but not limited to, temporary or portable greenhouses or similar structure,
pumpkin patches, holiday tree farms, etc. Seasonal sales events shall be
permitted for two events per year for a maximum duration of 60 days per event,
subject to approval by the Community Development Director. Seasonal sales
events shall maintain fire and emergency access at all times. Seasonal sales
events shall not include the sale of equipment or motor vehicles or the sale or
dispensing of alcoholic beverages. The sales of farm produce, or similar, is
not permitted within City limits at any time.
   2.   Special Events. Special events held on private property, other than
those mentioned above, require a temporary site plan approved by Community
Development Director. Such events shall require the appropriate permits,
including, but not limited to: noise, outdoor liquor license, and temporary
signs. Temporary site plans shall show that the event will not impact the
neighboring properties due to noise, congestion, lighting, or additional
factors. Temporary site plans shall be submitted on forms supplied by the
Community Development Department.
11-4-12 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   The City recognizes that certain types of home-based businesses may be
conducted without an adverse impact on the residential property or surrounding
neighborhood. It is the intent of this section to provide flexibility in
conducting a home-based business, provided that the operations of the home-
based business do not impact the quality of life or character of the
surrounding residential neighborhood.
   1.   Accessory Use. Home occupations shall be permitted as an accessory use
in all residential zoning districts subject to compliance with the regulations
within this section and any other applicable law. Any permit issued for a home
occupation may be summarily revoked for failure to conduct the home occupation
in accordance with the standards set forth in this section.
   2.   Classification. Home occupations shall be classified by the Community
Development Director as either a Level 1: no impact home occupation, Level 2:
minor impact home occupation, or Level 3: major impact home occupation. The
distinction between the three levels of home occupations shall be based
primarily upon the degree of impact that the home occupation operations may
result in on the surrounding residential neighborhood.
   3.   Performance Standards. The classification level shall be determined
based on the performance standards below:
      A.   Level 1 No Impact Home Occupation. No permit shall be required for
Level 1 home occupation use.
         (1)   The activities associated with the home occupation shall not be
visible from an adjacent property, street, or other public area. Outdoor play
areas typical to a residential setting associated with childcare shall not be
required to construct additional screening or fencing beyond the requirements
of Code of Iowa.
         (2)   The home occupation may be conducted within the dwelling,
approved accessory building or structure, or within the yards of the property;
however, no storage of goods, materials, equipment, trailers, or products
connected with the home occupation shall be allowed outdoors.
         (3)   The total number of on-site employees and clients shall not
exceed the dwelling occupant load in Section
11-6-10(6) of this title.
         (4)   Deliveries to or from the property shall be limited to the
services provided by routine residential carriers.
         (5)   There shall be no signage or window displays.
         (6)   Customer or client interaction occurring at the property shall
be limited to between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through
Sunday.
         (7)   Customer or client interaction occurring outside of the dwelling
shall be limited to not more than four customers/clients per hour, between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
         (8)   Employee parking is provided on-site.
         (9)   Special conditions. The following service-based uses may be
considered Level 1 home occupations provided the following standards are met:
            a.   Pet sitting, grooming, or training provided no overnight
boarding, no outdoor kenneling, and no more animals on site than permitted
bySection
5-7-12 of this Code.
            b.   Daycare services provided through a non-registered child care
home as authorized in Section 237A of the Code of Iowa, with hours of operation
limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
      B.   Level 2 Minor Impact Home Occupation. A permit must be obtained for
any Level 2 home occupation prior to commencement of the business activity. An
application for permit shall be made on forms provided by the Community
Development Department. A fee in an amount determined by resolution of the
Council shall accompany such application.
         (1)   The activities associated with the home occupation shall be
screened from ground level view from an adjacent property, street, or other
public area. Outdoor play areas typical to a residential setting associated
with childcare shall not be required to construct additional screening or
fencing beyond the requirements of Code of Iowa.
         (2)   The home occupation may be conducted within the dwelling,
approved accessory building or structure, or within the yards of the property;
however, no storage of goods, materials, equipment, trailers, or products
connected with the home occupation shall be allowed outdoors.
         (3)   The total number of on-site employees and clients shall not
exceed the dwelling occupant load in Section
11-6-10(6) of this title.
         (4)   Customer or client interaction occurring within the dwelling
shall be limited to between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday
through Sunday.
         (5)   Customer or client interaction occurring outside of the dwelling
shall be limited to not more than four customers/clients per hour, between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
         (6)   Deliveries to or from the property shall be limited to the
services provided by routine residential carriers.
         (7)   Employee parking is provided on site.
      C.   Level 3 Major Impact Home Occupation. A special use permit shall be
obtained by the Board of Adjustment for any Level 3 home occupation prior to
commencement of the business activity. An application for special use permit
shall be made on forms provided by the Community Development Department. A fee
in an amount determined by resolution of the Council shall accompany such
application.
         (1)   Any use that exceeds the standards set forth for a Level 2 home
occupation shall be considered a Level 3 home occupation.
         (2)   The following uses shall be considered Level 3 home occupations:
            a.   Garage sale reseller.
            b.   Repair and maintenance of automobiles, yard equipment,
appliances, and other similar products.
            c.   Pet kenneling or other similar overnight boarding of animals.
            d.   Other similar uses as determined by the Community Development
Director.
   4.   General Standards. The following general standards shall apply to all
home occupations:
      A.   Home occupation permits are valid only for the applicant and use
approved, and are not transferable.
      B.   No dwelling shall be built, altered, furnished, or decorated for the
purpose of conducting the home occupation in such a manner that would change
the residential character and appearance of the building, or in such a manner
as to cause the structure to be recognized as a place where a business is
conducted.
      C.   There shall be no home occupation activities that are objectionable
due to glare, dust, fumes, odor, vibration, noise, or other nuisances that
disturb the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City.
      D.   No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible electrical or mechanical interference in any radio, television receiver
or device outside the dwelling unit structure, or causes fluctuations in the
line voltage outside the dwelling unit structure.
      E.   The home occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic or
vehicular parking which degrades or is otherwise detrimental to the residential
nature of the neighborhood and thus becomes objectionable to the neighboring
residents.
      F.   A home occupation permit shall not be required for garage sale
events, provided that the number of garage sale events do not exceed two events
per year for a maximum duration of three consecutive days per event.
      G.   Home occupation signage shall be restricted to a maximum of two
square feet of sign area.
      H.   Noise generated by the home occupation should not exceed 65 dB
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., and 55 dB between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., when measured from the adjoining property line.
      I.   All home occupation uses shall be registered, licensed, and operated
in compliance with all federal, State, or County regulations.
      J.   Failure to comply with any of the requirements in, or conditions of
approval of, a special use permit may result in revocation of the home
occupation permit.
11-4-13 COMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT.
   1.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines
for the siting of communication equipment and communication towers. The goal of
this section is to encourage the location of communication towers and equipment
in areas of the City which would be least adversely impacted by the visual,
aesthetic, and safety implications of their siting; minimize the total number
of communication towers throughout the City; strongly encourage the joint use
of new and existing tower sites; and enhance the ability of the providers of
telecommunication services to provide such services to the community quickly,
efficiently, and effectively.
   2.   City Policies and Criteria. The Telecommunications Act of 1996
prohibits the City from establishing policies that discriminate against one or
a group of telecommunication providers in favor of another group of providers
or potential group of providers. The following criteria will be applied
consistently to all telecommunication providers that request a permit:
      A.   Communication Equipment. Communication equipment shall be permitted
in any residential, commercial, or manufacturing district. Communication
equipment shall:
         (1)   Be screened from adjoining properties by the use of landscape
plantings, screen fences, walls, or parapet extensions when located on a
building. The City is aware of the operating needs of these types of structures
and acknowledges that it may be impossible to totally screen communication
equipment or a tower; however, every effort must be made by the communication
equipment owner to minimize visual impact of the communication equipment on
surrounding properties.
         (2)   Communication equipment larger than 36 inches in diameter shall
be permitted in rear yards only and is permitted a maximum height of 12 feet.
Such communication equipment must be set back at least five feet from all rear
and side property lines.
         (3)   Communication towers, including television antennas and amateur
radio antennas, not used for commercial purposes, may be utilized in
residential districts, provided they do not exceed 10 feet above the height
limit determined for principal structures in the applicable district and are at
least one-half the total height of the tower from any lot lines. Total height
shall be measured as the distance from the average grade at the base of the
supporting structure to the top of the highest point of the tower, including
beacons and antennas.
      B.   Towers Permitted in Certain Districts; Site Plan. Communication
towers shall be permitted in any C-5, M-1, M-2 Zoning Districts and City-owned
property. A site plan, consistent with the requirements as outlined in the
Clive Development Standards Manual, shall be required for all new communication
tower and equipment facilities, expansion of existing facilities, or major
modifications of existing facilities.
      C.   Required Information. In addition to site plan requirements as set
forth herein, the following information must be provided for review of a
communication equipment development request:
         (1)   Map showing the location of the applicant’s proposed facility
and any existing facilities within three miles of the proposed site location.
         (2)   Report from a structural engineer showing the tower antenna
capacity by type and number, and a certification that the tower is designed to
withstand winds in accordance with ANS/EIA/TIA 222, latest revision standards.
         (3)   Evidence that a valid FCC license for the proposed activity has
been issued.
         (4)   A written agreement signed by the communication facility owner
and property owner to remove the tower, foundation, and any other accessory
equipment within 60 days after abandonment. As used herein, the term
“abandonment” means a communication tower that is not used for its intended and
approved purpose for more than 180 days.
         (5)   Establish that the use of and frequencies emitted from the tower
and equipment will not interfere with the transmissions of law enforcement,
fire, emergency response, public works, or other service agencies.
         (6)   Additional information, as required, to determine that all
applicable zoning and siting regulations are met.
      D.   Tower and Equipment Standards. Communication towers and equipment
shall meet the following design standards:
         (1)   Communication towers shall be set back from all property lines
and all other principal structures a distance of not less than one-half of the
tower height, unless a tower is adjacent to a residential district or City
park, in which case the tower shall be set back a distance of not less than the
full tower height.
         (2)   Communication towers shall have a maximum height of 60 feet in
any permitted zoning district.
         (3)   Communication towers shall be painted a non-contrasting gray or
similar color, minimizing its visibility, unless otherwise required by the
Federal Communications Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration.
         (4)   Lights and signage shall not be permitted on any tower unless
specifically required and permitted by the Federal Communications Commission,
Federal Aviation Authority, and the City.
         (5)   Security fencing eight feet in height shall surround the
communication tower, equipment structure, and any guywires.
         (6)   Communication tower equipment enclosures and accessory
structures shall be designed with architectural compatibility with the
surrounding built environment.
         (7)   Communication facilities mounted to a building wall shall be
painted to blend with the color and materials of the surface to which it is
attached. All wiring and accessory equipment shall be concealed from view.
Communication facilities located above the roof of the structure shall be
appropriately screened from view through the use of panels, walls, fences, or
other screening techniques approved by the City.
      E.   Number of Towers Limited. In order to minimize the overall number of
towers within the City, providers can be required to collocate and enter into
collocation agreements.
         (1)   All new communication towers, and any preexisting communication
towers, owned by a licensed carrier, upon which this section permits
collocation of additional communication facilities, shall be made available for
use by the owner or initial user thereof, together with as many other licensed
carriers as can be technically collocated thereon. However, nothing in this
section shall prevent such licensed carriers from charging a reasonable fee for
the collocation of additional communication facilities upon said tower which
does not exceed the fair market value for the space occupied.
         (2)   All licensed carriers shall cooperate with each other in
collocating additional communication facilities upon such towers. All licensed
carriers shall exercise in good faith in collocating with other licensed
carriers and in the sharing of towers, including technical information to
evaluate the feasibility of collocation. This covenant of good faith and fair
dealing shall be a condition of any permit issued pursuant to this section for
a new communication tower.
      F.   Compliance with Federal Regulations. Communication towers and
equipment shall meet or exceed the current standards and regulations of the
Federal Aviation Administration, and any other agency of the federal government
with the authority to regulate communication towers and equipment.
   3.   Review of Application by Technical Expert. The Community Development
Director is authorized to submit a communication equipment development
application to an independent technical expert to review any technical
materials submitted including, but not limited to, those required under this
section. The applicant shall pay all reasonable costs of said review, including
any administrative costs incurred by the City. Any proprietary information
disclosed to the City, or the technical expert hired, shall remain confidential
and shall not be disclosed to any third party.
11-4-14 SUBDIVISION ASSOCIATIONS.
   1.   Formation. A subdivision association may be formed to perform services
for the development as a whole, per the requirements Chapter 504 of the Code of
Iowa.
   2.   Registration. All subdivision associations within the City shall
register on forms provided by the Community Development Department.
   3.   Covenants; Requirements of Association.
      A.   In accordance with covenants formed by such associations, provisions
shall provide for the maintenance of uses and structures including, but not
limited to:
         (1)   Walls and fences;
         (2)   Structures, such as gatehouses and decorative fountains;
         (3)   Directional signs and signs identifying the development,
provided such signs conform to provisions outlined in Chapter 12 “Signs” of
this title;
         (4)   Monuments;
         (5)   Underground irrigation;
         (6)   Hedges, shrubs and trees;
         (7)   Berms and buffers;
         (8)   Private streets; and private utilities;
         (9)   Stormwater management facilities.
      B.   If any structure or use outlined above becomes in a state of
disrepair as determined by the City, the City may require improvement of the
condition of the structure or use. If the structure or use is not improved,
then such use shall be construed as a site plan violation and enforced as such.
   4.   Responsibilities. Provisions set forth in the covenant shall become the
responsibility of the subdivision association when 70 percent of the lots are
developed, unless otherwise stated in the agreement.
11-4-15 PROHIBITION ON SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FROM DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOW.
   No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made from a drive-through window in
any zoning district classification in the City.
11-4-16 ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   In adopting the zoning ordinance, it is recognized that adult entertainment
facilities have certain objectionable side effects which render these
facilities incompatible with residential, public, and other family uses, when
the adult facilities are located close to or adjacent to such uses. This
section seeks to ensure that residential, public, family-orientated business,
and adult entertainment facilities will be located in separate and compatible
locations. It is a subject of legitimate concern for the City to use its zoning
power to preserve the quality of life, preserve the City’s neighborhoods, and
to meet effectively the increasing encroachments upon the quality of life
within the City.
   1.   Location. No person, whether as principal or agent, clerk, or employee,
either for himself or any other person, or as an officer of any corporation, or
otherwise, shall place, maintain, own, or operate any adult bookstore, adult
movie theater, adult nightclub, adult motel, or adult business in the following
locations:
      A.   In any zoning district other than C-2 Commercial, M-1 Light
Industrial, and M-2 Heavy Industrial.
      B.   Within 1,000 feet of any residentially zoned or used property, or
any property designated on the City’s Comprehensive Plan as residentially
orientated.
      C.   Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of real property upon which is
located any of the following facilities:
         (1)   A children’s daycare, nursery school, preschool, elementary
school, junior high school, senior high school.
         (2)   A church which conducts religious programs.
         (3)   Park or recreational facilities operated and improved by the
City, Polk or Dallas County, the Polk or Dallas County Conservation Board or
the State.
         (4)   Federal, State, County, City, or special district governmental
offices.
         (5)   Supermarket or convenience store.
         (6)   Restaurant, fast food, or food establishment catering to family
trade.
      D.   Within 1,000 feet of any other adult entertainment facility.
   2.   Measurement of Distance. The distance between any two adult
entertainment facilities shall be measured in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each
business. The distance between any adult entertainment facilities and any
religious institution, school, or public park, governmental office,
supermarket, restaurant, or any property designated for residential use or used
for residential purposes shall be measured in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures, from the closest property line of the adult
entertainment facility to the closest property line of the religious
institution, school, public park, government office, supermarket, restaurant,
or the property designated for residential use or used for residential
purposes.
   3.   Restrictions. All building openings, entries, windows, etc., shall be
located, covered, or screened in such a manner to prevent a view into the
interior from public or semipublic area; and for construction, and whenever
else it seems feasible by the City, the building shall be orientated so as to
minimize any possibility of viewing the interior from public or semipublic
areas. Adult material advertisements, displays, or other promotional materials
shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from
pedestrian sidewalks, or walkways, or from other areas, public or semipublic.
In this case, “adult material” shall be defined as material describing or
depicting any “specified sexual activity” or “specified anatomical areas”, as
defined in this title.
11-4-17 EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS, AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   1.   Height. The building height limitations of this title shall be modified
as follows:
      A.   Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers,
monuments, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers,
ornamental towers and spires, communication towers or necessary mechanical
appurtenances may be erected to a height in excess of the building height limit
for any district upon the issuance of a special use permit by the Board of
Adjustment as provided in Chapter 3 of this title.
      B.   Public, semipublic, or public service buildings, hospitals, or
schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding
60 feet. Churches and temples, when permitted in a district, may be erected to
a height not exceeding 75 feet. In addition to the minimum yard requirements,
the building setback from each property line shall be at least one foot, for
each two feet of additional building height above the height limit otherwise
provided in the district in which the building is constructed. Any zoning
districts without a maximum building height shall utilize 60 feet as the
permitted height limit for calculating additional setback.
   2.   Other Exceptions to Yard Requirement. Every part of a required yard
shall be open to the sky unobstructed with any building or structure, except:
      A.   A permitted accessory building or structure.
      B.   Ordinary projections not to exceed 36 inches include;
         (1)   Roof overhangs;
         (2)   Fireplace chases;
         (3)   Bay windows;
         (4)   Awnings and canopies.
      C.   Unenclosed fuel island canopies may extend from the minimum building
setback line into any required yard, but not to exceed 10 feet into that yard.
   3.   Front Yard; Exceptions. In areas where some lots have been developed
with a front yard less than the minimum required for the district by this
title, or where some lots have been developed with a front yard greater than
required by this title, the following rule shall apply. Any new building, or
addition in front of the existing building, shall not be closer to the street
right-of-way than the average of the front yards for the first buildings on
either side of the new building or addition, except as follows:
      A.   Buildings located entirely on the rear half of a lot shall not be
counted.
      B.   No building shall be required to have a front yard greater than 50
feet, except between Harbach Boulevard and Franklin Avenue on the east side of
N.W. 86th Street, where no building shall be required to have a front yard
greater than 65 feet.
      C.   If no building exists on one side of a lot within 200 feet of the
lot in question, the minimum front yard shall be the same as the front yard for
the building on the other side.
   4.   Rear Yard; Exceptions. Detached single-family dwelling units shall be
permitted up to twenty feet (20’) of the dwelling to be constructed at a
twenty-five foot (25’) rear yard setback. The twenty feet (20’) shall be
measured linearly along the plane of the dwelling’s rear façade.
11-4-18 AUTOMOBILE SALES AND DISPLAY LOTS.
   1.   Site Plan Approval. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of zoning
compliance or building permit for an automobile sales and display and equipment
sales and display uses, a site plan for the property and proposed use shall be
approved.
   2.   Restrictions. In addition to all other requirements of this title, the
following additional restrictions for automobile sales and display and
equipment sales and display uses shall apply and be reviewed during the site
plan review process:
      A.   The property must be a minimum of one acre in size.
      B.   The property must maintain a minimum of 25 percent open space.
      C.   The property must maintain a minimum 2,000 gross square foot
building dedicated to the office and service needs of the operations.
      D.   The property must contain a parking lot capable of displaying a
minimum of 15 vehicles, in addition to the required employee/customer parking
for the building.
      E.   The vehicle display parking areas must maintain a 15-foot setback
from the property line.
      F.   The display of vehicles shall only occur within the parking lot and
other display areas specifically approved on the site plan.
      G.   The property will be compliant with all other provisions of the
current zoning ordinance prior to occupancy, unless specific deferments are
approved during the site plan approval process.
      H.   Additional provisions listed in Chapter
11-13-5(12) of this title.
11-4-19 RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   1.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines
for the location and operation of wind and solar energy systems and associated
equipment. The intent of this section is to balance the need for clean,
renewable energy with the necessity to protect the health, safety, and general
welfare of the community. The City finds these regulations are necessary to
ensure that renewable energy systems are appropriately designed, sited, and
installed.
   2.   General Regulations.
      A.   Restriction on Use of Electricity Generated. Energy generated by
renewable energy systems shall be used exclusively to supply electrical power
for on-site consumption, except that when a parcel on which a renewable energy
system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility
company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for on-site
use may be used by the utility company in accordance to State and local utility
company requirements.
      B.   Interconnection. The renewable energy systems shall meet the
requirements for interconnection and operations as set forth by MidAmerican
Energy and the Iowa Utilities Board. No building permits shall be issued until
the applicant has provided a copy of an executed interconnection agreement.
Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
      C.   Lighting. Lights shall not be permitted on any renewable energy
system unless specifically required and permitted by the Federal Aviation
Authority or other federal or State agencies, and the City.
      D.   Signage. No advertising or signage other than required safety
signage and equipment labels shall be permitted on any renewable energy system.
No temporary signage shall be permitted to be mounted or otherwise affixed to
any renewable energy system. One sign, limited to four square feet, shall be
posted at or near the base of any ground-mounted solar energy system or any
wind energy system. The sign shall include a notice of no trespassing, a
warning of high voltage (if applicable), and the phone number of the property
owner/operator to call in case of emergency.
      E.   Maintenance. Facilities shall be well maintained in an operational
condition that poses no potential safety hazard. Should the renewable energy
system fall into disrepair and be in such dilapidated condition that it poses a
safety hazard or would be considered generally offensive to the senses of the
general public, the system may be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated in
accordance with Title 5 Chapter 6 of this Code.
      F.   Noise. No renewable energy system shall emit sound exceeding the
requirements established in
Title 5 Chapter 8 of this Code.
      G.   Electromagnetic Interference. All renewable energy systems shall be
designed and constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference.
If it is determined that the system is causing electromagnetic interference,
the operator shall take the necessary corrective action to eliminate this
interference, including relocation or removal of the facilities, subject to the
approval of the appropriate City authority. A permit granting a renewable
energy system may be revoked if electromagnetic interference from the system
becomes evident.
      H.   Removal. If the renewable energy system remains nonfunctional or
inoperative for a continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed to
be abandoned. The owner/operator shall remove the abandoned system at their
expense. Removal of the system includes the entire structure, collector panels,
and related equipment from the property. Should the owner/operator fail to
remove the renewable energy system, the system will be considered a public
nuisance and will be abated in accordance with
Title 5 Chapter 6 of this Code.
      I.   Nonconforming Systems. A renewable energy system that has been
installed on or before the effective date of this section, is in active use,
and does not comply with any or all of the provisions of this section shall be
considered a legal nonconforming structure and will be regulated by the
provisions noted in Section
11-4-3 of this title.
   3.   Wind Energy Systems. The following criteria will be applied
consistently to all small Wind Energy Conversion System (SWECS) providers that
request a permit:
      A.   Special Use Permit Requirements. An SWECS shall only be allowed as
an accessory structure to a permitted principal use and shall require special
use permit approval from the Board of Adjustment prior to construction,
installation, and operation. As a condition of approval of the special use
permit, the applicant shall execute an SWECS operations agreement which shall
be recorded by the appropriate County Recorder’s office. The agreement will
memorialize the responsibilities of the property owner and allow the City to
access the property in order to remove the SWECS, if the property owner does
not comply with this section. The Board of Adjustment may review the issuance
of a special use permit, at any time, if a previously approved system does not
comply with the rules set forth in this section or the conditions imposed by
the Board of Adjustment. The owner/operator of the SWECS shall obtain all other
permits required by federal, State, and local agencies prior to construction
and operation of the system.
      B.   Construction Permits. Applications for the construction of an SWECS
shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine, including the
tower, base, and footings. An engineering analysis, certified by a State
licensed professional engineer, shall be provided demonstrating that the tower
is compliant with the applicable Building Code. For roof-mounted structures, an
engineering analysis, certified by an State licensed professional engineer,
shall be provided demonstrating that the mounting method is compliant with the
applicable Building Code. Applications shall also be accompanied by a line
drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of installation conforms to the Electrical Code.
All electrical components must be listed as meeting Code recognized test
standards.
      C.   Bulk Regulations.
         (1)   Minimum Lot Size. Minimum lot size for a tower-mounted SWECS or
building-mounted SWECS shall be one acre.
         (2)   Setback Requirements.
            a.   Tower-mounted SWECS shall be set back from all property lines
a distance of at least 150 percent of the wind energy system (WES) total
height.
            b.   Building-mounted SWECS shall be set back in accordance with
the applicable building setback requirement for the zoning district. In no case
shall a building-mounted SWECS be located closer than 15 feet from a property
line.
         (3)   Maximum Height.
            a.   Tower-mounted SWECS shall have a maximum WES total height of
60 feet for all lots.
            b.   Building-mounted SWECS may be a maximum of 10 feet higher than
the primary point of attachment to the building on which they are attached.
         (4)   Number of Systems Allowed.
            a.   No more than one SWECS may be installed on any parcel zoned R-
1, R-2, R-5, or TC-2.
            b.   No more than two SWECS may be installed on any parcel zoned C-
1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, M-1, M-2, TC-1, TC-3, or T3,-4.
            c.   Building-mounted SWECS shall be prohibited on any parcel zoned
R-1, R-2, or R-5.
         (5)   Location.
            a.   Tower-mounted SWECS shall be located entirely in the rear yard
on any parcel.
            b.   No part of an SWECS shall be located within or over a
drainage, utility, or other established easement, parking, driveway, sidewalk,
or on or over property lines.
      D.   Tower and Equipment Standards. SWECS and associated equipment shall
meet the following design standards:
         (1)   Only monopole towers shall be permitted for tower-mounted SWECS.
         Lattice, guyed, or towers of any other type shall not be permitted.
The monopole tower must be designed to prevent climbing within the first 10
feet.
         (2)   The SWECS shall be painted a non-contrasting gray/sky blue or
similar color that would minimize its visibility, unless otherwise required by
the Federal Aviation Administration. The surface shall be nonreflective.
         (3)   A privacy screen fence eight feet in height shall surround the
SWECS and any equipment structure in commercially or industrially zoned
properties. A six-foot privacy fence enclosing the rear yard of a residentially
zoned property shall be deemed appropriate to address this provision.
         (4)   All SWECS shall be equipped with manual and automatic overspeed
controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design limits of the
wind energy conversion system. The control system shall be capable of stopping
all turbine rotation in the event of a power outage in order to prevent back
feeding of the electrical grid.
         (5)   No SWECS shall be installed in any location where its proximity
with existing fixed broadcast, retransmission, or reception antenna for radio,
television, or wireless phone or other personal communication systems would
produce electromagnetic interference with signal transmission or reception. If
it is determined that the SWECS is causing electromagnetic interference, the
operator shall take the necessary corrective action to eliminate this
interference including relocation or removal of the facilities, subject to the
City.
         (6)   The enactment of this section does not constitute the granting
of an easement by the City. The owner/operator shall obtain covenants,
easements, or similar documentation to assure sufficient wind to operate the
SWECS. unless adequate accessibility to the wind is provided by the site.
         (7)   No SWECS shall be installed and operated in a manner that causes
a shadow flicker to fall on any occupied adjacent structure.
      E.   Owner Responsibilities.
         (1)   The property owner of any SWECS shall maintain such system in a
safe and attractive manner, including replacement of defective parts, painting,
cleaning, and other acts that may be required for the maintenance and upkeep of
the function and appearance of such a system.
         (2)   At least every 24 months, every tower mounted SWECS shall be
inspected by an expert who is regularly involved in the maintenance,
inspection, or erection of towers. At a minimum, this inspection shall be
conducted in accordance with the tower inspection checklist provided in the
Electronics Industries Association (EIA) Standard 222, “Structural Standards
for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Support Structures ” Inspection record
shall provide verifiable proof of ongoing energy production. A copy of the
inspection record shall be provided to the City.
         Any SWECS that is not operated for a continuous period of 180 days
shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed within 30 days. Removal of
the system includes the entire structure including foundations, transmission
equipment, and fencing from the property. If the abandoned SWECS is not removed
in the specified amount of time, the City may remove it and recover its costs
from the property owner.
         Operation of a wind energy system includes, but is not limited to, the
actual production of measurable energy. Wind energy systems that function
mechanically, but no longer produce energy, shall be considered abandoned.
         (3)   The owner/operator of a wind energy conversion system must
demonstrate adequate liability insurance. Upon the granting of a permit,
applicant shall assume full responsibility for any and all damages, claims,
expenses, liabilities, judgments, and costs of any kind, including reasonable
attorney fees related to or caused by the erection, location, use, or removal
of a facility, whether on public or private property, and shall agree to hold
the City harmless, indemnify and defend it from all such liabilities incurred
or judgments entered against it as a result of the erection, location, use, or
removal of the facility.
   4.   Solar Energy Systems. No Solar Energy Systems (SES) shall be installed
within the City without first obtaining a building permit. The following
criteria will be applied consistently to all solar energy system providers that
request a permit:
      A.   Engineer Certification. Applications for any SES shall be
accompanied by standard drawings of the receiving structure, if newly
constructed, including the supporting frame and footings. For systems to be
mounted on existing buildings, an engineering analysis showing sufficient
structural capacity of the receiving structure to support the SES per the
applicable code regulations, certified by an State licensed professional
engineer shall be submitted.
      B.   Color. The SES shall be a neutral color. All surfaces shall be
nonreflective to minimize glare that could affect adjacent or nearby
properties. Measures to minimize nuisance glare may be required, including
modifying the surface material, placement, or orientation of the system, and if
necessary, adding screening to block glare.
      C.   Building integrated and building mounted systems shall be allowed in
all zoning districts.
         (1)   Location. Placement of building integrated SES and building-
mounted SES systems shall adhere to all local fire and building code
regulations.
         (2)   Height.
            a.   The collector panel surface and mounting system shall not
extend higher than 18 inches above the roof surface of a sloped roof.
            b.   For building-mounted SES, the collector panel must match roof
slope whenever possible. For building integrated SES, the collector panel shall
maintain a uniform profile or surface with the building’s vertical walls,
window openings, and roofing.
         (3)   Design. The SES shall be designed to minimize their visual
presence to surrounding properties and public rights-of-way. Panel arrangement
shall take in account the proportion of the roof surface and place the panels
in a consistent manner without gaps, unless necessary to accommodate vents,
skylights, or equipment.
      D.   Ground-mounted systems shall not be allowed in Zoning Districts R-1,
R-2, R-4, R-5. In no case shall a ground-mounted SES be installed on a lot
developed with a single-family residence.
         (1)   Special Use Permit Requirements. An SES shall only be allowed as
an accessory structure to a permitted principal use and shall require special
use permit approval from the Board of Adjustment prior to construction,
installation, and operation.
As a condition of approval of the special use permit, the applicant shall
execute an SES operations agreement, which shall be recorded by the appropriate
County Recorder’s office. The agreement will memorialize the responsibilities
of the property owner and allow the City to access the property in order to
remove the SES if the property owner does not comply with this section.
The Board of Adjustment may review the issuance of a special use permit, at any
time, if a previously approved system does not comply with the rules set forth
in this section or the conditions imposed by the Board of Adjustment. The
owner/operator of the SES shall obtain all other permits required by federal,
State, and local agencies prior to construction and operation of the system.
         (2)   Bulk Regulations.
            a.   Height. Maximum height of the ground mounted SES shall not
exceed 10 feet in height as measured from existing grade.
            b.   Size. Ground- mounted SES are restricted in size to no more
than 50 percent of the area of the primary structure(s) footprint. Size of the
SES is calculated by measuring the total surface area of the collector panels
for the system.
            c.   Location. Ground-mounted SES units shall be located in side
and rear yards only. SES units shall be setback 10 feet from side and rear
property lines.
11-4-20 PAWNBROKERS AND DELAYED DEPOSIT SERVICES.
   It is recognized that pawnbrokers and delayed deposit service facilities
have certain objectionable side effects which render these facilities
incompatible with residential, public, and family uses, when located close to
or adjacent to such uses. This section seeks to ensure that pawnbrokers and
delayed deposit services will be located in separate and compatible locations
from residential, public, and family uses. It is a subject of legitimate
concern for the City to use its zoning power to preserve the quality of life
and protect the property values and economic vitality of its neighborhoods.
   1.   Location. No person, whether as principal or agent, clerk, or employee,
either themself or any other person, or as an officer of any corporation, or
otherwise, shall place, maintain, own, or operate any pawnbroker or delayed
deposit service business in the following locations:
      A.   In any zoning district other than C-2 Commercial, M-1 Light
Industrial, and M-2 Heavy Industrial.
      B.   Within 1,000 feet of any residentially zoned or used property, or
any property designated on the City’s Comprehensive Plan as residential
oriented.
      C.   Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of real property upon which is
located, any of the following facilities:
         (1)   A children’s daycare, nursery school, preschool, elementary
school, junior high school, senior high school.
         (2)   A church which conducts religious programs.
         (3)   Park or recreational facilities operated and improved by the
City, Polk or Dallas County, the Polk or Dallas County Conservation Board, or
the State.
         (4)   Within 1,000 feet of any adult-oriented business, pawnbroker, or
delayed deposit service facility.
   2.   Measurement of Distance. The distance between any two adult-oriented
businesses, pawnbroker, or delayed deposit service facilities shall be measured
in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest
exterior structural wall of each business. The distance between any pawnbroker
or delayed deposit service facilities and any daycare, school, church, public
park, or any property designated for residential use, or used for residential
purposes, shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures, from the closest property line of the pawnbroker or delayed deposit
service facility to the closest property line of any daycare, school, church,
public park, or any property designated for residential use or used for
residential purposes.
   3.   Restrictions. Visibility into the store shall be maintained by
utilizing clear, transparent glass on all windows and doors, and by keeping all
windows free of obstructions for at least three feet into the store. Product
may be displayed for sale in the window provided that the display, including
signage, does not occupy more than 30 percent of the window area. Interior and
exterior bars, grills, mesh, or similar obstructions, whether permanently or
temporarily affixed, shall not cover any exterior door or window.
11-4-21   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS.
   1.   Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted as an accessory use on lots
with a principal single-family dwelling, duplex dwelling, or townhome dwelling
in all residential zoning districts subject to compliance with regulations
within this title and any other applicable law.
   2.   Construction of an accessory dwelling unit requires a permit and a fee
in an amount determined, from time to time, by resolution of the Council.
   3.   Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the following:
      A.   Quantity. No lots shall contain more than 1 accessory dwelling unit.
      B.   Dimension Regulations. Accessory dwelling units shall comply with
the same dimension requirements as applicable to the principal dwelling in
Section
11-6-7 of this title. Notwithstanding the foregoing, detached accessory
dwelling units may be constructed in conformance with all of the requirements
in this title applicable to an accessory building.
      C.   Density. Accessory dwelling units shall not be counted in density
calculations or limits on total dwelling units.
      D.   Accessory Dwelling Unit Floor Area. The floor area of an accessory
dwelling unit shall not exceed 1,000 square feet or 50% of the above grade
total living area of the principal dwelling unit, whichever is larger.
      E.   Dwelling Occupant Load. The maximum permitted occupant load within
an accessory dwelling unit shall be calculated in conformance with Section
11-6-10(6)-(7) of this title.
      F.   Architectural Standards. Accessory dwelling units shall have the
same architectural standards as required for the principal dwelling on the same
lot.
      G.   Building Regulations. To ensure adequate consideration of life,
safety, and general welfare, accessory dwelling units shall meet the following
requirements:
         (1)   Detached accessory dwelling units shall be constructed in
conformance with all provisions of Section
10-1 Building Code applicable to a one-family dwelling.
         (2)   Attached accessory dwelling units shall be constructed in
conformance with all provisions of Section
10-1 Building Code to a two-family dwelling.
      H.   Flood Control. Accessory dwelling units shall be subject to the
requirements of Section
11-11 Flood Control.
(Section 11-4-21 – Ord. 1164 – Jul. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
 
11-5-1 Establishment of Districts 11-5-3 Interpretation and Conflict
11-5-2 Official Zoning Map         
                                  
 
11-5-1 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   In order to carry out the purpose and intent of this title, the area of the
City is hereby divided into zoning district classifications and overlay zoning
district classifications as follows:
Abbreviation District Name
Abbreviation District Name
RE           Residential Estate District
R-1          Single-Family Residence District
R-2          Single-Family and Duplex Family Residence District
R-3          Multiple-Family Residence District
R-4          Townhome Residence District
R-5          Single-Family Residence District
C-1          Convenience Commercial District
C-2          Community Commercial District
C-3          Planned Office Park Commercial District
C-4          Planned Shopping Center Commercial District
C-5          Highway Commercial District
TC-1         Town Center - North End Development Area District
TC-2         Town Center - Alice/Summit Residential Development Area District
TC-3         Town Center - Harbach Commercial Development Area District
TC-4         Town Center - South End Development Area District
PUD          Planned Unit Development District
M-1          Light Industrial District
M-2          Heavy Industrial District
FW           Floodway Overlay District
FF           Floodway Fringe Overlay District
FP-G         General Floodplain Overlay District
 
11-5-2 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The boundaries of the districts listed in Section
11-5-1 of this chapter are indicated upon the Official Zoning Map of the City,
which map is made a part of this title and incorporated herein by this
reference. The Official Zoning Map and all the notations, references, and other
matters shown thereon shall be as much a part of this title as if the
notations, references, and other matters set forth by said map were all fully
described herein. The Official Zoning Map shall be on file in the office of the
Clerk, and shall bear the signature of the Mayor, attested by the Clerk, under
the certification that this is the Official Map referred to in this section.
If, in accordance with the provisions of this title, changes are made in the
district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, the
ordinance number and date of said change shall be recorded by the Clerk on the
Official Map. In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of use, the Council may
correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map;
provided, however, that any such adoption shall not have the effect of amending
the original zoning ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof.
EDITOR’S NOTE
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 876 entitled Clive Zoning Code adopted January 17, 2008, and
amendments thereto are contained in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances
and are in full force and effect. The following ordinances have been adopted
amending the Official Zoning Map of the City and have not been codified
herein, but are specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and
effect.
ORDINANCE ADOPTED            ORDINANCE ADOPTED
876       January 17, 2008             
909       January 19, 2009             
942       January 20, 2011             
951       September 15, 2011           
952       September 15, 2011           
953       September 15, 2011           
955       February 2, 2012             
958       March 1, 2012                
974       May 16, 2013                 
975       May 16, 2013                 
976       May 2, 2013                  
986       May 1, 2014                  
990       June 19, 2014                
999       March 12, 2015               
1003      June 11, 2015                
1014      June 23, 2016                
1020      August 25, 2016              
1021      November 3, 2016             
1022      November 10, 2016            
1043      July 27, 2017                
1044      July 27, 2017                
1047      October 12, 2017             
1087      March 12, 2020               
1088      March 12, 2020               
1111      January 27, 2022             
1112      February 10, 2022            
1118      April 14, 2022               
1121      July 28, 2022                
1135      June 22, 2023                
1136      August 10, 2023              
1140      September 14, 2023           
1141      December 14, 2023            
 
11-5-3 INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT.
   1.   Rules for Determining Boundaries. In cases where the exact location of
the district boundary is not clear as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the
following rules shall be used in determining the location of said district
boundary:
      A.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets or highways shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
      B.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
      C.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be
construed as following City limits.
      D.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed
to be midway between the main tracks.
      E.   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow such shorelines and, in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be
construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries as approximately
following centerlines of streams, creeks, lakes, or other bodies of water shall
be construed to follow such centerlines.
      F.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in Subsections 1A through 1E of this section shall be so construed.
The scale of the map shall determine distances not specifically indicated on
the Official Zoning Map.
      G.   Where physical features existing on the ground are at variance with
those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered
by Subsections 1A through 1F of this section, the Community Development
Director shall interpret the district boundaries.
   2.   Street Vacations. Vacation of public streets shall cause the land
vacated to automatically be placed in the same district as the abutting side.
Any land annexed to the City after the effective date hereof shall be zoned R-
1 Residential until rezoned in accordance with this title and the Comprehensive
Plan. Within six months of the annexation of any land into the City, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall study that area annexed and recommend to
the Council a zoning and land use plan for the area.
CHAPTER 5A
ZONING MAP AND TEXT AMENDMENTS
 
11-5A-1 Authority                11-5A-4 Rezoning Amendment
11-5A-2 Purpose                  11-5A-5 Official Action Required
11-5A-3 Initiation of Amendments  
 
11-5A-1 AUTHORITY.
   The Council may, from time to time on its own action or on petition, after
public notice and hearing as provided by law and after report by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, amend, supplement, or change the boundaries or
regulations herein or subsequently established. Such amendment shall not become
effective except by the favorable vote of the majority of all the members of
the Council.
11-5A-2 PURPOSE.
   The amendment procedure herein established is intended to provide a means
for making changes to the text of this chapter or the Official Zoning Map.
11-5A-3 INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS.
   1.   Text. An amendment of text may be initiated by a motion of the Council.
   2.   Rezoning. An amendment may be initiated by a motion of the Council, or
any person, firm, or corporation, with a demonstrable ownership interest in the
property in question by the filing of a petition meeting all the requirements
required by this chapter. The petitioner shall obtain a signed consent to the
zoning amendment from the owners of 50 percent or more of all area located
within 310 feet of the property proposed to be amended. Other public property
(i.e., parks, City utilities, etc.) is not included within the 50 percent
consent area.
11-5A-4 REZONING AMENDMENT.
   1.   Filing Petition; Review. A petition for an amendment to the zoning
district classification shall be filed with the Community Development Director.
Each rezoning request shall be reviewed by the Community Development Department
to ensure that it contains all the information required in this chapter.
   2.   Application Fee. A nonrefundable application fee in an amount
determined by resolution of the Council, from time to time, shall be paid to
the City with each rezoning request.
   3.   Accompanying Documents.
      A.   Each rezoning request shall be accompanied by a written request for
a change, a rezoning map, a master plan, or development plan as required
herein, all in accordance with the provisions outlined herein.
         (1)   Plans and Plats Required. The Community Development Director may
require a development plan, site plan, preliminary plat, or conceptual master
plan for any proposed rezoning.
         (2)   Notification of Surrounding Property Owners. After the Community
Development Director has set the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting date,
notice will be sent to the surrounding property owners within 310 feet of the
property to be rezoned. Notice shall be sent not less than seven days prior to
the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which the zoning amendment is
first considered. The notice shall contain the date, time, and location of the
Planning and Zoning Commission meeting and Council public hearing.
         (3)   Notification Signs. The City will post at least one rezoning
notification sign containing the time, date, location, and subject of the City
Planning and Zoning Commission meeting and Council public hearing on the
property for which a request has been made. Notification signs shall be posted
at least seven days before the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting and shall
remain until one day after the Council public hearing.
      B.   Any or all of the above-mentioned procedures may be waived by the
Community Development Director for certain minor rezoning matters, such as the
following: rezoning right-of-way, or minor adjustments to zoning boundaries
necessitated by minor adjustments to lots or right-of-way lines at the time of
approval on final plats of a subdivision.
   4.   Development Plans. Development plans are intended to present basic
development information in such a way as to empower area residents, interested
parties, City staff and Council to accurately and decisively formulate opinions
on the proposed development. Development plans shall be required for all
proposed rezoning of land within the City to a commercial or manufacturing
district. The Community Development Director may require a master plan for the
proposed rezoning to residential districts. Similar to development plans,
master plans indicate, on a more general scale, the limits and effect of
proposed development.
      A.   Development plans, as well as master plans, shall show, at a
minimum, proposed building footprint, utilities, access, parking, and open
space. Additionally, the plan shall demonstrate how the development enhances
the established neighborhood and the character of the City at large. The
Community Development Director may require additional information at their
discretion, which they feel will further the intent of the development plan.
      B.   The Community Development Director may suspend the requirement of a
development plan if:
         (1)   The Council initiates the rezoning.
         (2)   The actual development of the property is likely to be delayed
for a substantial time period, and the development plan is likely to
substantially change prior to actual development, and the rezoning is in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan.
         (3)   If the rezoning is not in accordance with the Comprehensive
Plan, the Community Development Director may require a Comprehensive Plan
amendment in addition to the development plan requirement. Such suspension is
not a waiver of the requirement.
11-5A-5 OFFICIAL ACTION REQUIRED.
   1.   Initial Action by Council. When a petition meeting the requirements of
this chapter is presented to the Council, or if the Council elects to initiate
an amendment, the Council shall receive and file said petition and refer it to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration of such amendment prior to
the date of the public hearing.
   2.   Action by Planning and Zoning Commission. After receiving the proposed
amendment from the Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the
proposed amendment, and report its recommendations within 60 days to the
Council for final action.
   3.   Action by Council.
      A.   After receiving the Planning and Zoning Commission recommendations,
the Council, at a public hearing, shall then take final action on the proposed
amendment, after public notice in accordance with applicable State law. The
amendment shall become effective by the favorable vote of a majority of all the
members of the Council. However, in the case of a proposed rezoning of property
if: a) the Planning and Zoning Commission disapproves of the amendment; or b) a
written protest against an amendment is filed with the Community Development
Department, the proposed amendment shall not become effective, except by the
favorable vote of at least four-fifths of all the members of the Council. Such
protest must be signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of the land included
in the proposed amendment, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the
property which is located within 310 feet of the exterior boundaries of the
proposed amendment (exclusive of public property and intervening right-of-way).
      B.   The Council may make approval of the development plan contingent
upon the completion of construction and improvements within a reasonable period
of time; provided, however, that in the determination of such period, the
Council shall consider the scope and magnitude of the development project and
any schedule of construction and improvements submitted by the developer.
Failure to complete all construction and improvements within said period of
time shall be deemed sufficient cause for the Council, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, to rezone the unimproved property to the
classification effective at the time of original submission of the development
plan, unless an extension is recommended by the Commission and approved by the
Council for due cause shown. For the purposes of this title, “unimproved”
property means all property situated within the development plan area upon
which the installation of improvements has not been commenced.
CHAPTER 6
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
 
11-6-1 General Description      11-6-7 Dimension Regulations
11-6-2 Purposes of Districts    11-6-8 Site Plans
11-6-3 Principal Permitted Uses 11-6-9 Buffer Requirements
11-6-4 Accessory Uses           11-6-10 Additional Requirements
11-6-5 Accessory Buildings and  11-6-11 Dwelling Unit Minimum Floor Area
Structures
11-6-6 Open Space Requirements   
 
11-6-1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   The RE, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 Residential Districts are intended and
designed to provide for residential areas of various densities to promote
neighborhood quality of life, and to provide for those areas consistent with
the Comprehensive Plan. It shall be generally recognized that the type of use
is not so important as the manner in which the use is accomplished. It is
intended that the district shall not be used indiscriminately to permit any use
that could potentially be detrimental to the public health, welfare, and safety
of the community. No temporary buildings, trailers, tents, portable, or
potentially portable structures shall be used for dwelling purposes.
11-6-2 PURPOSES OF DISTRICTS.
   1.   RE Residential Estate. RE Residential Estate District regulations are
provided to allow limited agricultural and estate single-family residential
development to occur on the fringe of the developed areas of the City in order
to promote the economic and efficient use of nonurbanized land and to prevent
the scattering of subdivisions and over extension of public facilities and
services.
   2.   R-1 Single-Family Residence. R-1 Single-Family Residence District
regulations are provided to allow for the development of single-family dwelling
units on individual platted lots with a minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet.
   3.   R-2 Single-Family and Duplex Family Residence. R-2 Single-Family and
Duplex Family Residence District regulations are provided to allow for the
development of a combination of single-family dwelling units and duplex
dwelling units on individual platted lots with a minimum lot area of 8,500
square feet for single-family dwelling units and a minimum lot area of 10,000
square feet for duplex dwelling units.
   4.   R-3 Multiple-Family Residence. R-3 Multiple-Family Residence District
regulations are provided to allow for the development of three or more dwelling
units within one building or two or more dwelling units attached horizontally,
on an individually platted lot with a maximum density of 16 units per acre,
where ownership of the general common elements associated with the building and
site are under common ownership.
   5.   R-4 Townhome Residence. R-4 Townhome Residence District regulations are
provided to allow for the development of horizontally attached or detached
dwelling units where the land or lot beneath each dwelling unit may be
individually owned or owned in common by a homeowners’ association. The maximum
density allowed within a townhome residence district shall be eight units per
acre.
   6.   R-5 Single-Family Residence. R-5 Single-family Residence District
regulations are provided to allow for the development of single-family dwelling
units on individual platted lots with a minimum lot area of 7,500 square feet.
11-6-3 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Principal permitted uses for residential (RE through R-5) districts are as
follows:
Permitted Uses - Residential
Use RE R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
Permitted Uses - Residential
Use                                             RE R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
Assisted living centers                                 P       
Attached dwellings, townhomes                           P   P    
Boarding house                                          P       
Community centers                               SP SP  SP  SP  SP  SP
Detached dwellings, townhomes                              P   P
Driving range in conjunction with a golf course SP SP  SP  SP  SP  SP
Duplexes                                               P
General farming1                                P
Golf courses                                    SP SP  SP  SP  SP  SP
Independent living facilities                              P
Libraries                                       SP SP  SP  SP  SP  SP
Lodging house                                   SP SP  SP  SP  SP  SP
Multiple-family dwellings                                  P
Nursing homes                                              SP  SP
Parks, open space                               P  P   P   P   P   P
Religious institutions                          SP SP  SP  SP  SP  SP
Schools                                         SP SP  SP  SP  SP  SP
Single-family residences                        P  P   P   P       P
Utility substations                             SP SP  SP  SP  SP  SP
Notes:
P = Principal permitted use
SP = Permitted following Board of Adjustment Approval
1“General farming use” shall be defined for the purpose of this chapter as
the growing of crops and raising of livestock and excluding confined animal
feeding operations. “Livestock” means less than 20 of any of the following
combination of animals: cattle, sheep, swine, poultry, and other animals or
fowl, which are being produced primarily for use as food or food products
for human consumption. A “confined animal feeding operation” means using a
building for 45 or more days in any 12-month period to confine cattle,
swine, or poultry to areas which are totally roofed for the purpose of
feeding and growth prior to slaughter or, for poultry, for the additional
purpose of egg production.
(Section 11-6-3 – Ord. 1173 – Dec. 25 Supp.)
11-6-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses are permitted in residential zoned districts:
   1.   Accessory buildings and structures to house agricultural equipment or
permitted livestock, excluding buildings and structures used for animal
confinement or animal feeding operations, may be permitted in RE Residential
Estate Districts subject to the following:
      A.   Minimum setback for any agricultural accessory building or structure
shall be at least 25 feet from all property lines.
      B.   Maximum height for any such agricultural accessory building or
structure shall be 25 feet.
      C.   Metal panels may be used in the construction of accessory buildings.
   2.   Clubhouses within a residential subdivision where ownership is
maintained under a homeowners’ association. Clubhouses shall be constructed of
materials similar to the principal structures within the development and shall
meet all setback requirements as specified later in this chapter. Parking shall
be provided at a rate of five stalls per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
   3.   Home occupations as permitted in Section
11-4-12 of this title.
   4.   In R-3 residential zones, developed as a senior care, congregate care
facility, condominium, apartment complex, an accessory management office,
retail convenience or service shop may be permitted, provided that such complex
be self-governed or under similar control, contains more than 30 permanent
dwelling units, provided that:
      A.   Such shops are located on the first floor or lower and there is no
entrance to such place of business except from the inside of the building or
internal courtyard.
      B.   Display of any stock, goods, or advertising is so arranged that it
cannot be viewed from outside the building.
      C.   No advertising sign shall be permitted that exceeds one square foot
in area.
      D.   Private garages which may include living quarters of domestic
servants employed on the premises.
      E.   Private stables or other similar recreational uses may be permitted
within the RE Residential Estate District.
      F.   Any other accessory use as determined by the Community Development
Director as a use that is not detrimental to the health, safety, and general
welfare of the surrounding properties.
11-6-5 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   1.   Accessory buildings may be constructed in residential lots as permitted
in Section
11-4-7 of this title.
   2.   Accessory structures may be constructed in residential lots as
permitted in Section
11-4-8 of this title.
11-6-6 OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   Open space requirements shall be provided consistent with the provisions
outlined in Chapter 14 of this title.
11-6-7 DIMENSION REGULATIONS.
 
Dimension Requirements - Residential
SF Single-family
DP Duplex
MF Multi-family
SU Single unit
TU Two unit
MU Multi-unit
 
 RE R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
           RE      R-1         R-2         R-3         R-4         R-5
Density                                 16 units    8 units per  
                                           per acre    acre
                               8,500
                               square feet
Lot area   4 acres 10,000      for SF,                           7,500 square
                   square feet 10,000                              feet
                               square feet
                               for DP
Lot width  80 feet 80 feet     70 feet, 75                       60 feet
                               feet DP
Minimum
front yard 35 feet 35 feet     30 feet     30 feet     30 feet     30 feet
depth
Minimum
rear yard  35 feet 35 feet     35 feet     35 feet2    30 feet1,2  35 feet
depth
                   8 feet,     8 feet,     8 feet
                   See         See         TU1,2       6 feet SU2,
Side yard  8 feet  Subsection  Subsection  12.5 feet   8 feet      8 feet
                   11-6-10(2)  11-6-10(2)  MU1,2       TU1,2
                   of this     of this     20 feet MF2 12.5 MU1,2
                   chapter     chapter
Maximum    35 feet 35 feet     35 feet     45 feet     35 feet     35 feet
height
Notes:
1Except where rear or side wall is a common wall.
2Internal Setback Dimensions: In the case of zero lot line layouts, an open
space shall be provided between the buildings/units such that the required
front, rear, or side yard depth for each building/unit is provided (example: In
an R-4 development, the required open space between the rear elevations of two
single units shall be 60 feet).
 
11-6-8 SITE PLANS.
   Site plans shall be required for all uses except single-family and duplex
family residential buildings.
11-6-9 BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   Buffer requirements shall be consistent with the requirements set forth in
Chapter 14 of this title.
11-6-10 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   Open Space. Each principal building of a residential complex shall be
separated from other principal buildings in the complex by an open space of not
less than 25 feet in width.
   2.   Side Yard Reduction. On R-1, R-2, and R-3 residential lots of record
platted on or before January 3, 1963, having a width less than required by this
title, the side yard may be reduced as follows:
      A.   One side yard may be reduced to not less than 10 percent of the lot
width.
      B.   The sum of both side yards may be reduced to not less than 23
percent of the lot width.
      C.   On corner lots, only the interior side yard may be reduced below
eight feet.
   3.   Issuance of Permits and Certificates. On any lots of record platted on
or before September 7, 2000, under a community unit plan as approved by the
Council, building permits and certificates of zoning compliance may be issued
even though the use of land, building setbacks, lot areas, and building height
do not conform in all respects to the district regulations as required in this
title. Bulk regulations for the individual platted lots of record shall comply
with the specific requirements within the approved community unit plan.
   4.   Attached Garage. Each dwelling unit located within an R-1, R-2, R-4, or
R-5 District shall have a minimum two car attached garage.
   5.   Enclosed Parking Area. Each dwelling unit located within an R-
3 District shall have a minimum one car enclosed (detached, attached,
underground) area per unit. Carports shall not be considered as an acceptable
covered area.
   6.   Dwelling Occupant Load. The maximum permitted occupant load within a
dwelling unit in any residential district shall not exceed the following:
 
Room Type         Room Area                     Maximum Occupant Load
Bedroom room      At least 70 square feet, but  1 per room
                  less than 120 square feet
Bedroom room      120 square feet to 180 square 2 per room
                  feet
Bedroom room      180 square feet or more       3 per room
Multipurpose room At least 70 square feet       1 per room, not more than 2 per
                                                dwelling unit
 
   7.   For the purposes of this section, a “bedroom” is defined as a space
primarily designed and intended for use as a sleeping room, which shall include
all of the following characteristics:
      A.   A room with a minimum floor area of 70 square feet of area that is
capable of being secured by a door.
      B.   A room with an enclosed closet space of a minimum floor area of six
square feet.
      C.   A room with the provisions for emergency escape and natural light in
accordance with the adopted version of the International Residential Code or
International Building Code, as applicable for the dwelling type.
For the purposes of this section, a multipurpose room may include a living
room, den, study, or other similar room that, by design or layout, is not
primarily intended to be used as a bedroom, but that is otherwise habitable and
provides accommodations for sleeping such as a bed, daybed, couch, futon, or
other similar multipurpose sleeping furniture.
11-6-11 DWELLING UNIT MINIMUM FLOOR AREA.
   1.   Multiple-family dwellings shall, in addition to the requirements of
this section, have a minimum of 600 square feet of livable space in each
dwelling unit.
(Subsection 1 – Ord. 1164 – Jul. 25 Supp.)
   2.   Townhome units constructed within the R-3 District shall meet the
minimum dwelling unit floor area requirements of the R-4 District.
 
        RE       R-1      R-2      R-4      R-5
        1,250    1,250    1,000    1,250
        square   square   square   square
1 Story feet on  feet on  feet on  feet on  900 square feet on 1st floor
        1st      1st      1st      1st
        floor    floor    floor    floor
        1st or            1st or            1st or        1st or        1st or
        2nd      Total    2nd      Total    2nd    Total  2nd    Total  2nd    Total
1½     floor    square   floor    square   floor  square floor  square floor  square
stories 750      feet     750 sq.  feet     750    feet   750    feet   750    feet
        square   1,400    ft       1,400    square 1,200  square 1,400  square 1,200
        feet                                feet          feet          feet
        1st or            1st or            1st or        1st or        1st or
        2nd      Total    2nd      Total    2nd    Total  2nd    Total  2nd    Total
2       floor    square   floor    square   floor  square floor  square floor  square
stories 750      feet     750      feet     750    feet   750    feet   750    feet
        square   1,400    square   1,400    sq. ft 1,200  square 1,400  square 1,200
        feet              feet                            feet          feet
        1,250    1,250    1,000    1,250
        square   square   square   square
Split-  feet,    feet,    feet,    feet,    850 square feet, any 2 adjacent levels
level   any 2    any 2    any 2    any 2
        adjacent adjacent adjacent adjacent
        levels   levels   levels   levels
Note:  
All floor areas indicated do not include utility rooms or cellars, unless noted.
 
CHAPTER 7
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
 
11-7-1 General Description                 11-7-7 Parking Requirements
11-7-2 Purposes of Districts               11-7-8 Site Plans
11-7-3 Auxiliary Uses                      11-7-9 Open Space Requirements
11-7-4 Principal Permitted Uses            11-7-10 Dimension Requirements
11-7-5 Bakeries                             
11-7-6 Accessory Buildings and Structures;  
Outdoor Storage Areas
 
11-7-1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   The C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, and C-5 Commercially Zoned Districts are intended
and designed to provide for high quality areas of various densities and
intensities needed to promote quality of life, health, and general welfare of
citizens and visitors, while providing a large variety of recreation, services,
and shopping needed to support the citizens of the City, all consistent with
the Comprehensive Plan. The developments will incorporate high quality
materials in unique designs with substantial planting of trees, shrubs, and
other plant materials. It shall be generally recognized that the type of use is
not as important as the manner in which the use is accomplished. It is intended
that the district shall not be used indiscriminately to permit any use that
could potentially be detrimental to the intent of the zoning ordinance.
11-7-2 PURPOSES OF DISTRICTS.
   1.   C-1 Convenience Commercial. The Convenience Commercial Zoning
Classification is designed to provide for the development of ground that
routinely assists the daily needs of the local traveling public.
   2.   C-2 Community Commercial. The Community Commercial Zoning
Classification is designed to accommodate developments that, by nature of
business, provide services and commodities that benefit the community at large.
   3.   C-3 Planned Office Park Commercial. The Planned Office Park Commercial
District is intended to provide certain areas of the City for the development
of business, professional, and public service offices, and office buildings as
a planned and integrated commercial unit. The C-3 District is designed to be a
planned commercial area under single ownership, management, or control,
characterized by a grouping of offices and office buildings with various
facilities designed to be used in common, such as access drives, parking,
loading, lighting, signs, and walks. Any enterprise which cannot wholly enclose
its operations within the principal structure shall not be permitted.
   4.   C-4 Planned Shopping Center. The purpose of the Planned Shopping Center
District is to provide land for the orderly and logical development of a
complete and intensive shopping center with a broad range of retail and
permitted office use, which exhibits a high quality of architectural and design
quality. The development will incorporate high quality materials in unique
architectural designs and substantial plantings of trees, shrubs, and other
plant materials.
   5.   C-5 Highway Commercial.
      A.   Purpose. The Highway Commercial District is intended to provide for
major business and commercial districts to serve the highway traveling
population.
      B.   Automobile and Travel Plaza. Automobile and truck travel plazas
shall be under single ownership, management, or control and may be
characterized by a concentrated group of structures and compatible uses.
Various facilities shall be designed to be used in common, such as access
roads, parking, and loading areas, lighting, signs, and walks. For automobile
and truck travel plazas, the following regulations shall apply, except as
otherwise provided herein:
         (1)   Minimum lot area is 25 acres. No minimum lot area shall be
required for individual lots or tracts with the same area, provided that all
such development shall be in accordance with the site plan and development of
such individual lots or tracts and all common facilities within such area shall
remain under single management or control.
         (2)   The Community Development Director or the Council may also
require a statement of financial responsibility to assure construction of the
development in accordance with the submitted site plan and the requirements of
this chapter.
11-7-3 AUXILIARY USES.
   An “auxiliary use” shall mean a conditional use consisting of certain low
intensity commercial establishments which are primarily intended, designed, and
utilized to serve the proven needs within the C-3 and C-4 Districts of the
principal permitted uses that are in existence or that will be constructed at
or about the same time as the auxiliary use. Possible auxiliary uses are listed
in Section
11-7-4 of this chapter and noted with an “A.” In C-3 Zoning Districts, any
enterprise that cannot wholly enclose its functions within the principal
structure shall be prohibited. The Council may permit an auxiliary use within a
C-3 or C-4 District as part of a development plan, provided that the following
conditions are satisfied:
   1.   The auxiliary use shall primarily serve the needs within the C-3 or C-
4 District of the principal permitted uses that are then in existence or that
will be constructed at or about the same time as the auxiliary use.
   2.   The design, aesthetics, location, and character of the auxiliary
structure or use shall be compatible with the principal permitted uses within
the C-3 or C-4 District and abutting or nearby properties in adjoining zoning
districts.
   3.   The auxiliary use shall not adversely affect the setting and quality of
development for the principal permitted uses within the C-3 or C-4 District due
to over concentration or over saturation within the C-3 or C-4 District.
   4.   The auxiliary use shall not generate substantial additional traffic nor
create traffic congestion beyond that which would occur if any principal
permitted use were to locate on the same site.
   5.   The auxiliary use shall not be hazardous, detrimental, or disturbing to
principal permitted uses, nor to adjoining or abutting properties due to dust,
glare, noises, smoke, odor, fumes, vibration, or other effects not consistent
with the principal permitted uses within the C-3 or C-4 District.
   6.   The auxiliary uses shall incorporate the site's natural and scenic
features into the development design.
11-7-4 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Principal permitted uses for commercially zoned property are listed in the
following table. Where a use is not expressly listed below, the Community
Development Director shall have authority to determine if the use is compatible
and consistent with the surrounding environment.
Permitted Uses - Commercial
Use C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
Permitted Uses - Commercial
Use                                                      C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
Auditoriums                                              P   P      A    
Automobile and truck travel plaza                                    P
Automobile sales and display                                P          
Automobile supply (retail)                               P   P      P    
Automotive repair                                        P   P      P    
Automotive wash                                          P   P      P   P
Bakeries                                                 P   P      C    
Banks                                                    P   P   P   P   P
Building material sales yard, lumberyard                    P         P
Childcare, including daycare                             P   P   A   A    
Commercial entertainment                                 P   P      P   P
Consumer fireworks sales                                 P   P   P   P   P
Convenience stores/gas stations                          P   P      P   P
Dance studio                                             P   P      P    
Domesticated animal boarding/kennels                     P   P      A    
Drinking places                                          P   P   A   A    
Farm machinery and mobile home sales and repair             P         P
Fitness center                                           P   P   A   P    
Funeral homes and mortuaries                             P   P      P    
Grocery store                                            P   P      P    
Hair salon                                               P   P   A   P   P
Hospitals                                                SP  SP  P       
Hotel, motel or motor lodge                              P   P   P   P    
Launderette and similar business using only nonflammable P   P         P
solvents
Laundry, repair, dry cleaning and pick up                P   P   A   P    
Libraries                                                P   P   P   P    
Medical office, clinic                                   P   P   P   P    
Millwork                                                    P          
Ministorage                                                 P          
Monument sales and engraving                                P          
Movie theater                                            P   P      P    
Museums                                                  P   P   A   P    
Nurseries and greenhouses                                P   P          
Nursing homes                                            SP  SP         
Photographic studios                                     P   P      P    
Printing and/or publishing house                            P          
Professional offices                                     P   P   P   P   P
Religious institutions                                   P   P      SP   
Restaurant, fast food                                    P   P   P   P   P
Restaurant, fast food drive-through                      P   P      P    
Restaurant, full service sit down                        P   P   P   P   P
Retail                                                   P   P      P    
Schools, elementary and secondary                        SP  SP  SP  SP   
Schools, post-secondary                                  P   P   P   P    
Sheet metal shop                                            P          
Small engine/lawn mower repair shop                      P   P          
Storage warehouse, provided no outside storage shall be     P          
permitted
Utility substations                                      SP  SP     SP  SP
Veterinary clinic and hospital                           P   P      P    
Key:
P = Permitted
C = Conditional
A = Auxiliary
SP = Special Permitted Use
 
(Section 11-7-4 – Ord. 1166 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
11-7-5 BAKERIES.
   Bakeries, including, but not limited to, other organic food processing uses,
shall be permitted, provided that the retail sales area shall be within 100
feet of the premises on which the bakery is located, where all products
produced in the bakery are available for sale fresh daily, and provided the
product preparation and storage area does not exceed 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area. Distribution of products to other premises is permitted; however,
no semitrailer trucks shall be used for distribution purposes.
11-7-6 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; OUTDOOR STORAGE AREAS.
   1.   Accessory buildings may be constructed in commercial lots as permitted
in Section
11-4-7 of this title.
   2.   Accessory structures may be constructed in commercial lots as permitted
in Section
11-4-8 of this title.
   3.   Outdoor storage areas may be utilized in C-1, C-2, C-4, and C-
5 Districts, provided such storage area is accessory to the principal building,
as permitted in Section
11-4-9 of this title.
11-7-7 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Parking requirements may be found in
Chapter 13 of this title.
11-7-8 SITE PLANS.
   Site plans shall be required for all uses.
11-7-9 OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   Open space requirements shall be provided consistent with the provisions
outlined in
Chapter 14 of this title.
11-7-10 DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS.
Dimension Requirements - Commercial
 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
Dimension Requirements - Commercial
               C-1           C-2           C-3        C-4        C-5
Maximum height 40 feet or 3  60 feet       None       None       60 feet
               stories
Minimum lot    None          None          None       None       12,000 square
area                                                             feet
Minimum lot    None          None          None       None       100 feet
width
Minimum front  25 feet       25 feet       60 feet1   60 feet1   30 feet
yard depth
Minimum rear   35 feet1      35 feet2,3    35 feet1   35 feet1,4 40 feet2
yard
               None, except  None, except                        None, except
Minimum side   10 feet where 10 feet where 25 feet1,5 25 feet1,4 25 feet where
yard           adjacent to R adjacent to R                       adjacent to R
               District      District                            District
Notes:
1A minimum yard of 75 feet shall be required for such yards in C-1, C-3, C-4,
C-5 Districts adjacent to or across from any R District.
2Where rear lot line is adjacent to a railroad ROW, there is no yard
requirement.
3For each foot that the front yard is increased over 25 feet, the rear yard
may be decreased proportionately, except that where the rear yard adjoins the
side lot line of a lot in an R District, there shall be a minimum rear yard of
75 feet required adjacent to said side lot line.
4Where the side or rear of a building within a C-4 Planned Shopping District
is adjacent to another building within a C-4 Planned Shopping District, the
internal yard requirement may be either zero feet or 12.5 feet.
5The internal side yard requirement may be reduced to 12.5 feet within a C-
3 Planned Office Park District if adjacent to another building within a C-
3 Planned Office Park District.
 
CHAPTER 8
TOWN CENTER DISTRICTS
 
11-8-1 General Description                11-8-5 Parking Requirements
11-8-2 Purposes of Districts              11-8-6 Site Plans
11-8-3 Principal Permitted Uses           11-8-7 Open Space Requirements
11-8-3-1 Auxiliary Uses                   11-8-8 Dimension Requirements
11-8-4 Accessory Buildings and Structures  
 
11-8-1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   The TC-1, TC-2, TC-3, and TC-4 Town Center Zoned Districts are intended and
designed to provide for an economically viable, diverse place, located within
and adjacent to the NW 86th Street corridor, with quality residential,
commercial, service, employment, and recreational uses of various densities and
intensities needed to promote quality of life, health, and general welfare of
citizens and visitors within the City and which draws citizens and visitors to
the corridor. It shall be generally recognized that the type of use is not as
important as the manner in which the use is accomplished. It is intended that
the district shall not be used indiscriminately to permit any use that could
potentially be detrimental to the intent of the zoning ordinance. For the
purposes of this chapter, other than the principal permitted uses table, the
regulations contained here within shall only apply to the redevelopment, or
substantial expansion of the existing development, of the properties currently
zoned TC-1, TC-2, TC-3, and TC-4. The term “substantial expansion of the
existing development” shall mean the cumulative set of site improvements that
result in the expansion of the impervious surface area of the site by more than
15 percent of the surface area of the property at the time of adoption hereof.
If the proposed site improvements result in less than a 15 percent expansion of
the impervious surface area of the site, the zoning district regulations and
design standards for that property that existed prior to the rezoning of the
property to TC-1, TC-2, TC-3, or TC-4 shall be applicable with respect to the
proposed site improvements. The principal permitted uses table in this chapter
shall continue to be enforced in accordance with the current zoning district of
each property.
11-8-2 PURPOSES OF DISTRICTS.
   1.   TC-1 North End Development Area. The North End Development Area
District is designed to provide land for the orderly and logical development of
a complete and intensive community shopping center with a broad range of retail
and professional office use which exhibits a high quality of architectural and
design elements. The district will incorporate high quality materials in unique
architectural designs and substantial plantings of trees, shrubs, and other
plant materials. The district will be developed with a network of connecting
parking lots with minimal street openings to NW 86th Street and Hickman Road.
   2.   TC-2 Residential Development Area. The Residential Development Area
District is primarily intended to provide opportunities for medium density
condo/townhome residential development preserving the integrity and value of
the existing single-family neighborhoods. The district will be designed so that
the residential structures engage the street, providing the massing and
building form that helps define the block. The district will incorporate high
quality materials and unique architectural designs. Open space will be used to
accent the architectural and natural features of the residential development
within the district.
   3.   TC-3 Mixed Use Development Area. The Mixed Use Development Area
District is designed to provide land for mixed use development incorporating
retail commercial and office uses with residential and recreational
opportunities. The district will be primarily developed with ground level
retail commercial and upper-level office or residential uses. Pedestrian
traffic is considered a priority and shall be well planned for throughout the
district. The district will incorporate high quality materials and unique
architectural designs. Public and private plaza and courtyard open space are
encouraged.
   4.   TC-4 Entertainment Development Area. The Entertainment Development Area
District is intended to provide for an office and regional commercial
entertainment center and will be designed in consideration of public plazas or
courtyards, Clive Greenbelt Park, historical amenities, and other urban open
space that can serve as a focal point for community activities. The area will
include retail/commercial, office, entertainment, residential, institutional,
and open space uses. The buildings within the district will be constructed with
high quality materials and will be designed to form part of a larger
composition rather than being designed in isolation of one another.
11-8-3 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Principal permitted uses for Town Center zoned property may be found below.
Where a use is not expressly listed below, the Community Development Director
shall have authority to determine if the use is compatible and consistent with
the surrounding environment. If it is determined by the Community Development
Director that the proposed use is not compatible and consistent with the
surrounding environment, the property owner shall have the right to appeal the
decision to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to the regulations and
requirements as expressed in
Chapter 3 of this title.
Permitted Uses - Town Center
Use TC-1 TC-2 TC-3 TC-4
Permitted Uses - Town Center
Use                                                  TC-1 TC-2 TC-3 TC-4
Attached dwellings, townhomes                            P         
Auditoriums                                                      P
Automobile repair (see Subsection
11-8-3-1(7)(A) of this Section                       A        A     
11-8-3)
Automobile supply (see Subsection
11-8-3-1(7)(A) of this Section                       A        A     
11-8-3)
Bakeries (see Subsection
11-8-3-1(7)(B) of this Section                       P        A    A
11-8-3)
Banks                                                P        P    P
Car wash (see Subsection
11-8-3-1(7)(C) of this Section                       P        A    A
11-8-3)
Childcare, including daycare                         P        P     
Commercial entertainment                             P        P    P
Consumer fireworks sales                             P        P    P
Convenience stores/gas stations (see Subsection
11-8-3-1(7)(D) of this Section                       A        A    A
11-8-3)
Dance studio                                         P        P    P
Domesticated animal boarding/kennels                 A        A    A
Drinking establishments                                          P
Fitness center                                       P        P    P
Funeral homes and mortuaries                         P             
Grocery store                                        P        P    P
Hair salon                                           P        P    P
Hotel, motel, or motor lodge                         P            P
Laundry, repair, dry cleaning, and pick up           P        P     
Libraries                                            P    P    P    P
Medical office, clinic                               P        P    P
Movie theater                                        P            P
Multiple-family dwellings                            P    P    P    P
Museum                                                           P
Photographic studios                                 P        P    P
Professional offices                                 P        P    P
Religious institutions                               SP   SP   SP   SP
Restaurant, fast food                                P        P    P
Restaurant, fast food drive-through (see Subsection
11-8-3-1(7)(E) of this Section                       A        A    A
11-8-3)
Restaurant, full service sit down                    P        P    P
Retail                                               P        P    P
Veterinary clinic and hospital                       P        P    P
Key:
P = Permitted
A = Auxiliary
SP = Special Use Permit
 
11-8-3-1 AUXILIARY USES.
   An “auxiliary use” shall mean a conditional use consisting of certain low
intensity commercial establishments which are primarily intended, designed, and
utilized to serve the proven needs within the TC-1, TC-3, or TC-4 District of
the principal permitted uses that are in existence or that will be constructed
at or about the same time as the auxiliary use. Possible auxiliary uses are
listed in Section
11-8-3 of this chapter and noted with an “A.” In TC-1, TC-3, or TC-4 Zoning
Districts, any enterprise that cannot wholly enclose its functions within the
principal structure shall be prohibited. The Council may permit an auxiliary
use within a TC-1, TC-3, or TC-4 District as part of a development plan,
provided that the following conditions are satisfied:
   1.   The auxiliary use shall primarily serve the needs within the TC-1, TC-
3, or TC-4 District of the principal permitted uses that are then in existence
or that will be constructed at or about the same time as the auxiliary use.
   2.   The design, aesthetics, location, and character of the auxiliary
structure or use shall be compatible with the principal permitted uses within
the TC-1, TC-3, or TC-4 District and abutting or nearby properties in adjoining
zoning districts.
   3.   The auxiliary use shall not adversely affect the setting and quality of
development for the principal permitted uses within the TC-1, TC-3, or TC-
4 District due to over concentration or over saturation within the TC-1, TC-3,
or TC-4 District.
   4.   The auxiliary use shall not generate substantial additional traffic nor
create traffic congestion beyond that which would occur if any principal
permitted use were to locate on the same site.
   5.   The auxiliary use shall not be hazardous, detrimental, or disturbing to
principal permitted uses, nor to adjoining or abutting properties due to dust,
glare, noises, smoke, odor, fumes, vibration, or other effects not consistent
with the principal permitted uses within the TC-1, TC-3, or TC-4 District.
   6.   The auxiliary uses shall incorporate the site's natural and scenic
features into the development design.
   7.   In addition to the conditions above, the following special conditions
shall be met for specific uses within the TC-1, TC-3, or TC-4 Districts:
      A.   Automobile supply and repair businesses shall be permitted provided
that all overhead doors (if applicable) be oriented away from NW 86th Street,
and provided that the retail square footage of the building be at least 1,800
square feet or 25 percent of the total gross floor area of the building,
whichever is greater. All functions of the business must be entirely contained
within the confines of the building and no outdoor storage of vehicles or parts
is allowed.
      B.   Bakeries, including, but not limited to, other organic food
processing uses, shall be permitted, provided that the retail sales area shall
be within 100 feet of the premises on which the bakery is located where all
products produced in the bakery are available for sale fresh daily, and
provided the product preparation and storage area does not exceed 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area. Distribution of products to other premises is
permitted; however, no semitrailer trucks shall be used for distribution
purposes.
      C.   Car wash facilities shall be permitted provided that all overhead
doors be oriented away from NW 86th Street. Additionally, all exterior
detailing stations shall be designed in accordance with the principal
structure, and located away from NW 86th Street and any adjoining side street.
      D.   Convenience stores shall be permitted provided that the fuel canopy
is architecturally detailed and integrated into the design of the principal
building. Specifically, elements of brick, stone, or masonry must be imported
into the support columns, the canopy structure itself shall be clad in a
material that is consistent with the principal structure in both type and
color. Additionally, the perimeter of the parking areas surrounding the fueling
areas shall be heavily landscaped with elements of the required streetscape
incorporated throughout.
      E.   Fast food restaurants which include a drive-through shall be
permitted provided that all circulation and queuing areas necessary to support
the drive-through are located away from NW 86th Street.
11-8-4 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   1.   Accessory buildings may be constructed in Town Center zoned lots as
permitted in Section
11-4-7 of this title.
   2.   Accessory structures may be constructed in Town Center zoned lots as
permitted in Section
11-4-8 of this title. Where the Town Center district is not specifically
mentioned, the requirements shall be consistent with the commercial district
regulations.
11-8-5 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Parking requirements shall be provided consistent with the provisions
outlined in Chapter 13 of this title. Where the Town Center district is not
specifically mentioned, the requirements shall be consistent with the C-1 and
C-2 Commercial District regulations. In addition to the parking requirements in
Chapter 13 of this title, the following regulations shall apply to property
located within the Town Center Zoning Districts:
   1.   TC-1, TC-3, or TC-4. No single parking block shall have more than 100
parking spaces in the TC-1, TC-3, or TC-4 Zoning District.
   2.   Parking Blocks Defined. “Parking blocks” shall be defined on all sides
by any of the following in the TC-1, TC-3, or TC-4 Zoning District:
      A.   The front building facade containing a minimum 10-foot wide sidewalk
along the entire length of the facade.
      B.   A side or rear building facade containing a minimum six-foot wide
sidewalk along the entire length of the facade.
      C.   A public street, provided that a 10-foot parking lot and driveway
setback is accommodated.
      D.   A 20-foot landscape buffer meeting the requirements of Subsection
11-8-7(3) of this chapter.
      E.   A 20-foot wide landscaped median containing a minimum six-foot wide
sidewalk.
   3.   Shared Parking. Shared parking shall be strongly encouraged for mixed
use developments located within the TC-1, TC-3, and TC-4 Zoning Districts and
shall be allowed based upon the following requirements:
      A.   A written agreement shall be required between property owners
sharing parking facilities and shall include any necessary easements,
maintenance agreements, and projected parking projections for each party. The
agreement shall be approved by the Council and filed with the County Recorder.
      B.   The following table shall be used to determine the required parking
based on the shared parking agreement. Whichever time period requires the
highest total parking spaces among the various uses subject to the shared
parking agreement should be the amount of parking provided.
Shared Parking Standards
Category of Use Percentage of Required Parking Spaces by Time Period
Sharing Parking
Weekday Daytime Weekend Daytime Nighttime
And Evening     And Evening
6:00 a.m. to 5: 5:00 p.m. to 1: 6:00 a.m. to 5: 5:00 p.m. to 1: 1:00 a.m. to 6:
00 p.m.         00 a.m.         00 p.m.         00 a.m.         00 a.m.
Shared Parking Standards
Category of
Use Sharing    Percentage of Required Parking Spaces by Time Period
Parking
Weekday        Weekend
Daytime And    Daytime And  Nighttime
Evening        Evening
6:00 a.m. to   5:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. to 5: 5:00 p.m. to 1: 1:00 a.m. to 6:00
5:00 p.m.      1:00 a.m.    00 p.m.         00 a.m.         a.m.
Church         5%           25%             100%            50%  5%
Entertainment  30%          100%            75%             100% 5%
and recreation
Lodging        50%          90%             75%             100% 100%
Office         100%         10%             5%              5%   5%
Residential    25%          90%             50%             90%  100%
Restaurant     50%          100%            75%             100% 25%
Retail         75%          75%             100%            90%  5%
School         100%         10%             10%             10%  5%
 
   4.   Bicycle Parking. On-site bicycle parking racks shall be provided at a
rate of 0.5 rack spaces per 1,000 square feet of building area to a maximum of
20 rack spaces required for all commercial uses and one rack per five units to
a maximum of 20 rack spaces required for all residential uses.
11-8-6 SITE PLANS.
   Site plans, consistent with the requirements as outlined in the NW 86th
Street Corridor Design Guidelines shall be required for all uses.
11-8-7 OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   Open space requirements shall be provided consistent with the provisions
outlined in Chapter 14 of this title. In addition to the open space
requirements in Chapter 14 of this title, the following regulations shall apply
to property located within the Town Center Zoning Districts:
   1.   Minimum Quantity. The minimum number of plantings per site within the
Town Center Districts shall be one and a half trees per 1,000 square feet of
required open space. This shall be in addition to plantings required within a
landscape buffer.
   2.   Open Space Requirements. Open space shall be provided for each site in
each district in accordance to the following table. Values are in percentage of
total site.
 
Open Space Requirements
TC-1 TC-2                      TC-3 TC-4
25   10 (6 - 8 units per acre) 15   20
15 (9 - 13 units per acre)
20 (14 - 17 units per acre)
25 (18 - 20 units per acre)
 
   3.   Buffers. Buffers shall be provided for each site in each district in
accordance with the following table. Values are in feet.
Buffer Requirements
 R-1, R-2, R-5 R-3 R-4 C Districts TC-1 TC-2 TC-3 TC-4 M Districts
Buffer Requirements
             R-1, R-2, R-5 R-3 R-4 C Districts TC-1 TC-2 TC-3 TC-4 M Districts
R-1, R-2, R-              30  30  50          30       20   30   65
5 Districts
R-3          30               30  50          30       20       65
R-4          30            30     50          30       20       65
C Districts  50            50  50                 30           30
TC-1         30            30  30                 20           30
TC-2                            30          20               30
TC-3         20            20  20                             30
TC-4         30                                             30
M districts  65            65  65  30          30   30   30   30    
 
   4.   Buffer Material Requirements. The following shall be the minimum
requirement. All buffers shall provide the plantings as prescribed below.
 
Buffer Material Requirements
Buffer Material Requirements Per 30 Linear Feet Of Buffer
20 feet 1 overstory 1 evergreen 1 ornamental 9 shrubs
30 feet 1 overstory 2 evergreen 1 ornamental
50 feet 1 overstory 3 evergreen 2 ornamental
65 feet 2 overstory 4 evergreen 2 ornamental
 
11-8-8 DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   Table of Requirements.
Dimension Requirements - Town Center
 TC-1 TC-2 TC-3 TC-4
Dimension Requirements - Town Center
               TC-1          TC-2          TC-3              TC-4
Density        20 units per  20 units per
(residential   acre          acre          20 units per acre 20 units per acre
uses only)
Maximum height 45 feet or 3- 45 feet or 3- 50 feet or 4-     50 feet or 4-
               story         story         story             story
Minimum front  60 feet       15 feet       0 feet            0 feet
yard depth
Maximum front  None          50 feet       85 feet           85 feet
yard depth
Minimum rear   35 feet1,2    25 feet       35 feet1          35 feet1,2
yard
Minimum side   25 feet1,2    6 feet3       25 feet1,2        25 feet1,2
yard
Notes:
1A minimum yard of 75 feet shall be required for such yards adjacent to or
across from any R District.
2Where the side or rear of a building within the TC-1, TC-3, or TC-4 District
is adjacent to another building within the TC-1, TC-3, or TC-4 District, the
internal yard requirement may be either zero feet or 12.5 feet.
3Except where rear or side wall is a common wall.
 
   2.   Parking Requirements. In addition to the requirements of this chapter,
each dwelling unit located within the TC-2 District shall have a minimum one
car enclosed (detached, attached, underground) area per unit. Carports shall
not be considered as an acceptable covered area. Detached garages shall not
exceed 450 square feet per dwelling unit and shall not be taller than 12 feet
in total height. In no case shall more than six detached garages be attached in
a row.
CHAPTER 9
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
 
11-9-1 General Description      11-9-6 Parking Requirements
11-9-2 Criteria                 11-9-7 Open Space Requirements
11-9-3 Principal Permitted Uses 11-9-8 Architectural Requirements
11-9-4 Accessory Buildings and  11-9-9 Bulk Regulations
Structures
11-9-5 Signage Requirements     11-9-10 Development Plan and Development
                                Agreement
 
11-9-1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   The Planned Unit Development District is intended and designed to promote
and encourage development or redevelopment of tracts of land on a planned,
unified basis by allowing greater flexibility for those developments that
propose a creative and innovative design whose layout is not achievable under
the standards of other zoning districts. A planned unit development shall
consist of an arrangement and selection of land uses in groupings that are
organized and designed as an integrated unit rather than a collection of
independent building and sites. The integrated design shall include a holistic
presentation of elements such as building orientation and materials, utilities,
parking areas, traffic and pedestrian circulation, landscaping and open spaces
that satisfy the individual site needs while achieving greater value for the
entire development area.
11-9-2 CRITERIA.
   The Planned Unit Development District shall be reserved for only those
developments, which meet one or more of the following criteria:
   1.   Developments that provide for varying land uses to coexist within the
same development so that the growing demands of the population may be met by
greater variety in type, design, and layout.
   2.   Developments which encourage a more efficient use of land through the
incorporation of public/private spaces or uses which enhance the community at
large.
   3.   Developments that provide both public and private open spaces that
accent and enhance both the architectural and natural features of the
development and provide for the protection and preservation of existing
vegetative and water resources.
   4.   Developments that present a common and unified theme through the use of
architecturally compatible detailing to form a part of a larger composition
rather than separate land uses designed in isolation of one another.
11-9-3 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Principal permitted uses for planned unit development zoned property shall
consist of residential uses, neighborhood commercial uses, and neighborhood
office uses. If it is determined by the Council that a proposed use is not
compatible and consistent with the proposed planned unit development, the
property owner shall have the right to appeal the decision to the Board of
Adjustment pursuant to the regulations and requirements as expressed in
Chapter 3 of this title.
   1.   “Residential uses” shall be defined as single-family residential,
attached dwellings, multiple-family residential, assisted, and independent
living facilities and nursing homes.
   2.   “Neighborhood commercial uses” shall be defined as those uses which
normally and customarily service the surrounding residential properties.
Neighborhood commercial uses shall include, but not be limited to, dry
cleaners, delis, coffee shops, markets, convenience stores, and small retail
establishments.
   3.   “Neighborhood office uses” shall be defined as those office uses which
normally and customarily service the surrounding residential properties.
Neighborhood commercial uses shall include, but not be limited to, small
medical clinics, veterinarians, and banks.
11-9-4 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   1.   Accessory buildings may be constructed in planned unit development
zoned lots as permitted in Section
11-4-7 of this title.
   2.   Accessory structures may be constructed in planned unit development
zoned lots as permitted in Section
11-4-8 of this title. Where the planned unit development is not specifically
mentioned, the requirements shall be consistent with the commercial district
regulations.
11-9-5 SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   Signage within a planned unit development shall serve as a unifying element
while creating measured and consistent identification of the various land uses
within the planned unit development.
11-9-6 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Adequate parking shall be provided within the planned unit development based
upon the proposed uses. Shared parking for varying uses shall be strongly
encouraged.
11-9-7 OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   Open space requirements within a planned unit development shall consist of
both public and private landscape areas, natural areas, plazas, and courtyards
designed to enhance the architectural and natural features of the development.
11-9-8 ARCHITECTURAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Buildings within a planned unit development shall be designed to be
architecturally compatible with each other and should be seen as a larger
composition as opposed to individual buildings. Buildings shall be designed to
promote quality architecture and design elements along all four building
elevations. The use of colors, materials, facade projections and recesses,
articulated rooflines, enhanced entrances, lighting, windows, or awnings shall
be used to make the development architecturally compatible as a whole.
11-9-9 BULK REGULATIONS.
   Density, setbacks, and height requirements shall be clearly specified within
the development plan and development agreement.
11-9-10 DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
   A development plan and development agreement shall be required for all
Planned Unit Development Districts. The development plan shall include a
narrative section that identifies the primary objectives of the development, as
well as providing specific guidelines and design standards related to the
development including, but not limited to, size, location, and uses of
buildings, bulk regulations, parking configurations and requirements,
architectural standards, landscaping, open space design, signage design and
location, pedestrian access, and utilities. In addition to the development
plan, a development agreement shall be required of the developer, which shall
acknowledge the developer’s commitment to develop the property in accordance
with the development plan.
CHAPTER 10
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
 
11-10-1 General Description                11-10-5 Additional Requirements
11-10-2 Principal Permitted Uses           11-10-6 Open Space Requirements
11-10-3 Accessory Buildings and Structures 11-10-7 Site Plans
11-10-4 Dimension Requirements             11-10-8 Outdoor Storage Areas
 
11-10-1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   The M-1 and M-2 Industrially Zoned Districts are intended and designed to
provide for areas within the City deemed appropriate for value added and
manufacturing processes of various intensities needed by the business and
technology population of a local, State, and national level while promoting the
quality of life, health, and general welfare desired by the citizens of the
City, all consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. The development will
incorporate high quality materials in unique designs with substantial buffering
and the incorporation of trees, shrubs, and other plant materials. It shall be
generally recognized that the type of use is not so important as the manner in
which the use is accomplished. It is intended that the district shall not be
used indiscriminately to permit any use that could potentially be detrimental
to the intent of this chapter. No use shall be permitted to be established or
maintained which, by reason of its nature or manner of operation, is or may
become hazardous, noxious, or offensive owing to the emission of odor, dust,
smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, vibrations, refuse matter, or waste. The best
practical means known for disposal of refuse material, the abatement of
obnoxious or offensive odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, or similar nuisance shall
be employed.
11-10-2 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   1.   M-1 Light Industrial Park. Principal permitted uses as listed in
Subsection 3 of this section.
   2.   M-2 Heavy Industrial Park.
      A.   Principal permitted uses as listed in Subsection 3 of this section.
      B.   Any other use which is not objectionable by reason of emission of
odor, dust, smoke, gas, light, vibration, noise, or similar nuisance.
   3.   Permitted Uses.
Permitted Uses - Industrial
Use M-1 M-2
Permitted Uses - Industrial
Use                                                                           M- M-
                                                                              1  2
Abattoirs and slaughterhouses                                                   SP
Acid manufacture or wholesale storage of acids                                  SP
Adult uses subject to the provisions ofSection                                P  P
11-4-16 of this title
Animal boarding/kennels                                                       P  P
Animal hospitals                                                              P  P
Auditoriums                                                                   P  P
Automobile assembly and repair                                                P  P
Automobile sales and display                                                  P  P
Automobile supply                                                             P  P
Automobile, tractor, or machinery wrecking and used parts yards, provided the
operations are conducted wholly within an enclosed fence not less than eight    SP
feet in height and completely obscuring the activity
Automotive wash/drive-through only                                            P  P
Automotive wash self-service                                                  P  P
Bag/rug/carpet cleaning                                                       P  P
Bakeries                                                                      P  P
Bookbinding                                                                   P  P
Building material sales yard, lumberyard                                      P  P
Candy or confections manufacturing                                            P  P
Cement products, cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacture          SP
Collection office of public utility                                           P  P
Commercial entertainment                                                      P  P
Commercial parking lots                                                       P  P
Communication towers                                                          P  P
Community centers                                                             P  P
Consumer fireworks sales                                                      P  P
Contractor’s equipment storage yard or plant storage yard for vehicles of a P  P
delivery or driving service
Convenience stores/gas stations                                               P  P
Creamery, bottling, ice manufacturing, and cold storage plant                 P  P
Crematory, if located not less than 200 feet from any R District              P  P
Dance studio                                                                  P  P
Display fireworks sales                                                         P
Distillation of bones, coal tar, petroleum, refuse, grain, or wood              SP
Drinking places                                                               P  P
Driving range in conjunction with a golf course                               P  P
Enameling, lacquering                                                         P  P
Equipment sales and display                                                   P  P
Farm machinery and mobile home sales and repair                               P  P
Fat rendering                                                                   SP
Fertilizer manufacture                                                          SP
Fitness center                                                                P  P
Foundry - casting lightweight nonferrous metals, or electric foundry, not       SP
causing noxious fumes or odors
Funeral homes and mortuaries                                                  P  P
Furniture manufacturing                                                       P  P
Gas manufacture and cylinder recharging                                         SP
Glue or gelatin manufacture                                                     SP
Grocery store                                                                 P  P
Hair salon                                                                    P  P
Hospitals                                                                     P  P
Hotel, motel, or motor lodge                                                  P  P
Ice storage and distribution station of not more than five tons capacity      P  P
Junk, iron, or rag storage or bailing, and wastepaper yards; provided such
activity is conducted wholly within an enclosed building or within an           SP
enclosed fence at least eight feet high and completely obscuring the activity
Laboratories, film, or testing                                                P  P
Launderette and similar business using only nonflammable solvents             P  P
Laundry, repair, dry cleaning and pick up                                     P  P
Libraries                                                                     P  P
Manufacture and repair of electric signs, advertising structures, light sheet P  P
metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment
Manufacture of musical instruments, novelties, and molded rubber products     P  P
Manufacture of pottery or other similar ceramic products, using only          P  P
previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas
Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, instruments, and devices    P  P
Manufacturing, compounding, assembling, or treatment of article or
merchandise from previously prepared materials such as bone or cloth, cork,   P  P
fiber, leather, paper, plastics, metals, precious stones, tobacco, wax,
yarns, and wood
Manufacturing, compounding, processing, treating, and packaging of food
products other than fish and meat (except as permitted below) and other than  P  P
sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, fats, and oils
Medical office, clinics                                                       P  P
Millwork                                                                      P  P
Mineral extraction, including sand and gravel pits                              SP
Mini-storage                                                                  P  P
Monument sales and engraving                                                  P  P
Motorcycle sales and repair                                                   P  P
Museums                                                                       P  P
Nurseries and greenhouses                                                     P  P
Petroleum or its products, refining or wholesale storage of, and asphalt        SP
plants
Post office substation                                                        P  P
Printing or publishing house                                                  P  P
Printing facilities                                                           P  P
Processing and packaging of boxed or frozen fish and meat for human
consumption. (Provided, however, this provision does not allow the rendering,
boiling, cooking [other than final roasting or broiling for immediate
restaurant or delicatessen use], smoking, pickling, curing, or chemical       P  P
preserving of fish or meat or any activity which would create or result in a
nuisance under State statute or common law. The boiling/precooking of food in
a bag, such that smells and juices are completely contained, shall be
acceptable.)
Professional offices                                                          P  P
Religious institutions                                                        P  P
Restaurant, fast food                                                         P  P
Restaurant, fast food drive-through                                           P  P
Restaurant, full service sit down                                             P  P
Retail                                                                        P  P
Rubber goods manufacture                                                        SP
Sanitary landfill or transfer station                                           SP
Sawmill, planing mill; including manufacture of wood products not involving   P  P
chemical treatment
Sheet metal shop                                                              P  P
Sign painting                                                                 P  P
Small engine/lawn mower repair shop                                           P  P
Smelting of ores                                                                SP
Storage warehouse, provided no outside storage shall be permitted             P  P
Tannery                                                                         SP
Tavern                                                                        P  P
Tire repair shops                                                             P  P
Travel agencies                                                               P  P
Truck terminal or yard, including repair                                      P  P
Utility substations                                                           P  P
Wholesale storage of coal                                                       SP
Wholesale storage of liquid fertilizer                                          SP
Key:
P = Permitted
SP = Special Use
 
11-10-3 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   1.   Accessory buildings may be constructed in industrial lots as permitted
in Section
11-4-7 of this title.
   2.   Accessory structures may be constructed in industrial lots as permitted
in Section
11-4-8 of this title. Uses permitted shall provide screening from adjacent
streets and properties with a fence, berm, or combination of at least eight
feet in height for all outside storage of all products or materials.
11-10-4 DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS.
Dimension Requirements - Industrial Districts
 M-1 M-2
Dimension Requirements - Industrial Districts
                         M-1                M-2
Maximum height           60 feet            60 feet
Minimum lot area         10,000 square feet 1 acre
Minimum lot width        70 feet            150 feet
Minimum front yard depth 30 feet            30 feet
Minimum side yard        None1              None2
Minimum rear yard        40 feet3           40 feet3
Notes:
1Minimum side yard adjacent to residential for M-1 Districts shall be 75
feet.
2Minimum side yard adjacent to residential for M-2 Districts shall be 200
feet and 50 feet from a Commercial District.
3Where rear lot line is adjacent to a railroad ROW, there is no minimum yard
requirement.
 
11-10-5 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Each principal building of a manufacturing complex shall be separated from
other principal buildings in the complex by an open space of not less than 25
feet in width.
11-10-6 OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   Open space requirements shall be provided consistent with the provisions
outlined in Chapter 14 of this title.
11-10-7 SITE PLANS.
   Site plans shall be required for all uses in accordance with Chapter 15 of
this title and the Clive Development Standards Manual.
11-10-8 OUTDOOR STORAGE AREAS.
   Outdoor storage areas are permitted, following site plan approval. Enclosure
area shall be constructed as required in Section
11-4-9 of this title.
CHAPTER 11
FLOOD CONTROL
 
11-11-1 Statutory Authority, Findings 11-11-5 Floodway Fringe Overlay District – FF
of Fact, and Purpose
11-11-2 General Provisions            11-11-6 General Floodplain Overlay District – FP-G
11-11-3 Administration                11-11-7 Board of Adjustment; Appeals; Variances
11-11-4 Floodway Overlay District – 11-11-8 Amendments
FW
 
11-11-1 STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT, AND PURPOSE.
   1.   Authority. The Legislature of the State has in Chapter 414 of the Code
of Iowa, as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations
to secure safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.
   2.   Findings of Fact.
      A.   The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic
inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health, and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community.
      B.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused
by:
         (1)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood
damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately
elevated or otherwise protected from flooding; and
         (2)   The cumulative effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing
increases in flood heights and velocities.
      C.   This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood
hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Department of
Natural Resources.
   3.   Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City and its residents and
to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and
convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses described in
Subsection 2(A) of this section with provisions designed to:
      A.   Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows
so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
      B.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
      C.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
      D.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
      E.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
11-11-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   1.   Lands to Which Chapter Apply. The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City shown on the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map as being within the boundaries of the Floodway Overlay,
Floodway Fringe Overlay, and General Floodplain Overlay Districts, as
established in Section
11-5-1 of this title.
   2.   Establishment of Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) for Polk County and Incorporated Areas, City, panels
19153C0165F, 0305F, 0310F, 0326F, 0327F dated February 1, 2019, which were
prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Polk County, is (are) hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The
flood profiles and all explanatory material contained with the Flood Insurance
Study are also declared to be a part of this chapter.
   3.   Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries. The boundaries of the
zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of a boundary, the Community Development Director shall make the
necessary interpretation.
   4.   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.
   5.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The standards required by this
chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside the designated Floodplain District areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on
the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
   6.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   7.   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
11-11-3 ADMINISTRATION.
   1.   Appointment, Duties, and Responsibilities of Local Official.
      A.   The Community Development Director is hereby appointed to implement
and administer the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as
the Administrator.
      B.   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but
not necessarily be limited to, the following:
         (1)   Review all floodplain development applications to assure that
the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
         (2)   Review floodplain development applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from federal, State, and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of
Natural Resources for floodplain construction.
         (3)   Record and maintain a record of:
            a.   The elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum
1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures or
            b.   The elevation to which new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed.
         (4)   Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of
Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
         (5)   Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other
transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this
chapter.
         (6)   Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations
or modifications to the community's boundaries.
         (7)   Review subdivision proposals to insure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Planning and Zoning
Commission of potential conflict.
         (8)   Maintain the accuracy of the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Maps when;
            a.   Development placed within the Floodway Overlay District
results in any of the following:
               i.   An increase in the base flood elevations, or
               ii.   Alteration to the floodway boundary;
            b.   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not
include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base elevation; or
            c.   Development relocates or alters the channel.
         Within six months of the completion of the development, the applicant
shall submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for a Letter
of Map Revision.
         (9)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the standards
of this chapter.
         (10)   Forward all requests for variances to the Board of Adjustment
for consideration.
   2.   Floodplain Development Permit.
      A.   Permit Required. A Floodplain Development Permit issued by the
Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development.
      B.   Application for Permit. Application shall be made on forms furnished
by the Administrator and shall include the following:
         (1)   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
         (2)   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
that will readily identify and locate the work to be done.
         (3)   Location and dimensions of all buildings and building additions.
         (4)   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work
is intended.
         (5)   Elevation of the base flood.
         (6)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including the basement, of
buildings or of the level to which a building is to be floodproofed.
         (7)   For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
         (8)   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary for the purpose of this chapter.
      C.   Action on Permit Application. The Administrator shall, within a
reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or
disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed,
in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The Administrator shall not issue
permits for variances except as directed by the Board of Adjustment.
      D.   Construction and Use to be as Provided In Application and Plans.
Floodplain Development Permits based on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement, or
construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction in conflict with that
approved permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant
shall be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land
surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the State, that the finished fill,
building floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures
were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to
the use or occupancy of any structure.
11-11-4 FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT – FW.
   1.   Permitted Uses. The following uses, having a low flood damage potential
and not obstructing flood flow, shall be permitted within the Floodway Overlay
District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or
statute, and provided they do not require structures, fill, fences, or storage
of materials or equipment, excavation, or alteration of a watercourse. In
addition, no use shall adversely affect the capacity or flow of Walnut Creek or
North Walnut Creek or the channels or floodways of any tributary to Walnut
Creek or North Walnut Creek or any other drainage facility or system. All other
uses permitted within the underlying zoning district shall be expressly
prohibited unless otherwise noted herein.
      A.   Agricultural uses such as, but not limited to, general farming,
nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, and sod farming.
      B.   Private and public recreational uses such as, but not limited to:
golf courses, archery ranges, parks, picnic grounds, tennis courts, hiking, and
biking trails.
      C.   Parks and public recreational uses, and structures accessory to such
uses, by the City.
      D.   Such other open space uses similar in nature to the above uses, as
determined by the Community Development Director.
      E.   Utility transmission lines, including poles and towers.
   2.   Performance Standards. All Floodway Overlay District uses allowed as a
permitted use shall meet the following standards:
      A.   No use shall be permitted in the Floodway Overlay District that
would result in any increase in the base flood elevation. Consideration of the
effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption
that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated
lands.
      B.   All uses within the Floodway Overlay District shall:
         (1)   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
         (2)   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
         (3)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage.
      C.   No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or
floodway of any tributary to the mainstream, drainage ditch, or any other
drainage facility or system.
      D.   Structures, buildings, and sanitary and utility systems, if
permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the Floodway
Fringe Overlay District, and shall be constructed or aligned to present the
minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
      E.   Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and
shall not be for human habitation.
      F.   Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of
other material may be allowed if readily removable from the Floodway Overlay
District within the time available after flood warning.
      G.   Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and
modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within
the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations
must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
      H.   Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some
beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
      I.   Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed
and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows.
11-11-5 FLOODWAY FRINGE OVERLAY DISTRICT – FF.
   1.   Permitted Uses. All uses within the Floodway Fringe Overlay District
shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other
chapter (or underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable
performance standards of the Floodway Fringe Overlay District.
   2.   Performance Standards. All uses must be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable performance standards.
Where base flood data has not been provided on the Flood Insurance Rate Map,
the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to compute such
data. The applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural
Resources with sufficient technical information to make such determination.
      A.   All Structures. All structures shall:
         (1)   Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure.
         (2)   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
         (3)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage.
      B.   Residential Structures.
         (1)   Residential Structures without Basements. All new or
substantially improved residential structures shall have the lowest floor
elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation. Construction
shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one
foot above the base flood elevation and extend at such elevation at least 18
feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon. Subject to approval by
the Administrator, alternate methods of elevating may be allowed where existing
topography, street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such
cases, the methods used must be adequate to support the structure as well as
withstand the various forces and hazards associated with flooding.
         (2)   Residential Structures with Basements.
            a.   All new or substantially improved residential structures with
basements shall have the basement, together with attendant utility and
sanitation systems, floodproofed to a level at least one foot above the base
flood elevation. Construction of floodproofed basements shall:
               i.   Take place within a compacted fill berm which shall, at all
points, be no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation and extend at
such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected
thereon;
               ii.   Be constructed such that the lowest part of all basement
external openings, such as doors and windows, are placed at least one foot
above the base flood elevation;
               iii.   Be designed and constructed so that the structure, below
one foot above the base flood elevation, is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, and with the capability to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy associated with
the base flood; and
               iv.   Be designed so that minimal structural damage will occur
if this design is exceeded.
            b.   A professional engineer registered in the State shall certify
that the floodproofed basement has been designed in accordance with the above
provisions. A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in
relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Community Development Director. All
basements constructed in accordance with these provisions shall not be used for
sleeping purposes and shall require the approval and recording of an agreement
that indicates the restriction.
            c.   All new residential structures located in areas that would
become isolated due to flooding of surrounding ground shall be provided with a
means of access that will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the base
flood. However, this criterion shall not apply where the Administrator
determines there is sufficient flood warning time for the protection of life
and property. When estimating flood warning time, consideration shall be given
to the criteria listed in 567-75.2(3), Iowa Administrative Code.
   3.   Non-Residential Structures. All new or substantially improved non-
residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with
attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When
floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State
shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the
flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact, and uplift forces and other
factors associated with the base flood; and that the structure, below the base
flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
   4.   New and Substantially Improved Structures.
      A.   Fully enclosed areas below the “lowest floor” (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
         (1)   A minimum of two openings, with positioning on at least two
walls, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
         (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
         (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
Where the distance between the floor and ceiling of the fully enclosed area
below the “lowest floor” is five feet or more, the applicant shall be required
to sign and record with the County Recorder a Non-Conversion Agreement that
ensures the lower enclosed area remains compliant with the criteria outlined in
this subsection.
      B.   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
      C.   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, duct
work, and other service facilities elevated or floodproofed to a minimum of one
foot above the base flood elevation.
   5.   Factory-Built Homes.
      A.   All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-
built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one foot above the
base flood elevation.
      B.   All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-
built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors as required by
the State Building Code.
   6.   Utility and Sanitary Systems:
      A.   On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or
designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
      B.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into floodwaters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood elevation.
      C.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. Water supply
treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a
level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood
elevation.
      D.   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
      E.   The utilization of septic sanitary sewer systems shall be prohibited
within the Floodway Fringe Overlay District.
   7.   Hazardous Material. Storage of materials and equipment that are
flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal, or plant life is
prohibited unless elevated or protected to a minimum of one foot above the 500-
year flood elevation.
   8.   Flood Control Structures. Structural works such as levees, flood walls,
etc., shall provide, at a minimum, protection from the base flood with a
minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate
interior drainage. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources shall
approve structural flood control works.
   9.   Changes in Watercourse. Alterations or relocations to the watercourse
must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources must
approve such alterations or relocations.
   10.   Subdivisions. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation
of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this
chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all
lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during
the base flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots
(whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those areas
located within the Floodplain District.
   11.   Accessory Structures to Residential Uses.
      A.   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are incidental
to a residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation requirements
where the following criteria are satisfied.
         (1)   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential. Its size shall not exceed 600 square feet in size. Those portions of
the structure located less than one foot above the BFE must be constructed of
flood- resistant materials.
         (2)   The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage
potential purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure
shall not be used for human habitation.
         (3)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
         (4)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
         (5)   The structure’s service facilities such as electrical and
heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation.
         (6)   The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of Subsection 4(A) of this section.
      B.   Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a
structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of
the structure and its contents.
   12.   Recreational Vehicles.
      A.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of Subsection
5 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when
the following criteria are satisfied.
         (1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less
than 180 consecutive days, and,
         (2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
      B.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180
consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy the requirements
of Subsection 5 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-
built homes.
   13.   River and Stream Crossings. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall
be buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to
prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
   14.   Maximum Damage Potential Uses. All new or substantially improved
maximum damage potential uses shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the elevation of the 500-year flood, or
together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a
level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in
the State shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact, and uplift forces
and other factors associated with the 0.2 percent annual chance flood; and that
the structure, below the 0.2 percent annual chance flood elevation is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A
record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to
North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are floodproofed
shall be maintained by the Administrator. Where 0.2 percent chance flood
elevation data has not been provided in the Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to compute such data. The
applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources
with sufficient technical information to make such determinations.
   15.   Outdoor Storage. The storage of goods, materials, equipment, or any
other products outside of an approved structure shall be prohibited within the
Floodway Fringe Overlay District.
11-11-6 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT – FP-G.
   1.   Permitted Uses.
      A.   All uses within the General Floodplain Overlay District shall be
permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other chapter (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they meet the applicable performance
standards of the General Floodplain Overlay District.
      B.   Any uses which involve placement of structures, factory-built homes,
fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment, excavation or
alteration of a watercourse shall be reviewed by the Department of Natural
Resources to determine:
         (1)   Whether the land involved is either wholly or partly within the
Floodway Overlay or Floodway Fringe Overlay; and
         (2)   The base flood elevation. The applicant shall be responsible for
providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical
information to make the determination.
      C.   Review by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources is not required
for the proposed construction of new or replacement bridges or culverts where:
         (1)   The bridge or culvert is located on a stream that drains less
than 100 square miles, and
         (2)   The bridge or culvert is not associated with a channel
modification that constitutes a channel change as specified in 567-71.2(1)b,
Iowa Administrative Code.
   2.   Performance Standards.
      A.   All uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway as
determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the applicable
provisions and standards of the Floodway Overlay District,Section
11-11-4 of this chapter.
      B.   All uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the Floodway Fringe
Overlay as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the
applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway Fringe Overlay
District,Section
11-11-5 of this chapter.
11-11-7 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; APPEALS; VARIANCES.
   1.   Decisions of the Board of Adjustment. The Board shall arrive at a
decision on an appeal or variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon an
appeal, the Board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the
order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and it shall make
its decision, in writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons
for its decision. In granting a variance, the Board shall consider such factors
as contained in this section and all other relevant sections of this chapter
and may prescribe such conditions as contained in Subsection (1)(B) of this
section.
      A.   Factors Upon which the Decision of the Board of Adjustment Shall be
Based. In passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall consider all
relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
         (1)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments.
         (2)   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
         (3)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
         (4)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
         (5)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the City.
         (6)   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
         (7)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use.
         (8)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
         (9)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program for the area.
         (10)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
         (11)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwater expected at the site.
         (12)   The cost of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.
         (13)   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
      B.   Conditions Attached to Variances. Upon consideration of the factors
listed above, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this
chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
         (1)   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
         (2)   Limitation of periods of use and operation.
         (3)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.
         (4)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
         (5)   Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the
flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated
with the regulatory flood. The Board of Adjustment shall require that the
applicant submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional
engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory
flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular
area. Such floodproofing measures may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
            a.   Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement.
            b.   Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads, shutters, or
similar methods of construction.
            c.   Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures.
            d.   Use of paints, membranes, or mortars to reduce the seepage of
water through walls.
            e.   Addition of mass or weight structures to resist flotation.
            f.   Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures.
            g.   Pumping facilities or comparable practices for subsurface
drainage systems for buildings to relieve external foundation wall and basement
flood pressures.
            h.   Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as
to prevent the entrance of floodwaters.
            i.   Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water
pressure or floating debris.
            j.   Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm
drains which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of sewage
and stormwater into buildings or structures.
            k.   Location of all electrical equipment, including circuits and
installed electrical appliances, in a manner that will assure they are not
subject to flooding.
   2.   Variances. No variance shall be granted for any development within the
Floodway Overlay District that would result in any increase in floods during
the occurrence of the base flood. Consideration of the effects of any
development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal
degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands. All
variances granted affecting the Floodway Overlay or Floodway Fringe Overlay
Districts shall have approval of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
11-11-8 AMENDMENTS.
   The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may, from time to
time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
CHAPTER 12
SIGNS
11-12-1 Title                           11-12-14 Electronic Changeable Copy
11-12-2 Purpose and Scope               11-12-15 Neon Lights, Murals
11-12-3 Jurisdiction                    11-12-16 Addresses
11-12-4 Prohibited Signs and Conditions 11-12-17 Flags
11-12-5 Design Standards                11-12-18 Authority of Director to
                                        Classify
11-12-6 Building-Mounted Signs          11-12-19 Sign Area Formula
11-12-7 Ground-Mounted Signs            11-12-20 Commercial Temporary Signs
11-12-8 Interstate Ground-Mounted Signs 11-12-21 Non-Commercial Temporary Signs
11-12-9 Subdivision Signs               11-12-22 Signs On Public Property
11-12-10 Ground-Mounted Signs for       11-12-23 Permit Requirements; Fees;
Churches and Schools                    Exceptions
11-12-11 Public Facility Signs          11-12-24 Inspections
11-12-12 Drive-Through Signs            11-12-25 Maintenance
11-12-13 Fuel Island Signs              11-12-26 Commercial Abandoned Signs
                                       11-12-27 Substitution
 
11-12-1 TITLE.
   This chapter, providing for the administration and enforcement of sign
regulations, shall be known, and may be cited and referred to as the “Sign
Ordinance of the City of Clive, Iowa.”
11-12-2 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote and preserve the public health,
safety, and general welfare, to maintain and enhance the visual environment of
the City, improvement of pedestrian and traffic safety, and the minimization of
possible adverse effects on public and private property. The provisions of this
chapter are intended to permit signs that will not, by reason of their size,
location, construction, or manner of display, endanger life and limb, confuse
or mislead traffic, obstruct vision necessary for traffic safety, or otherwise
endanger the public health, safety, and welfare; and further, to regulate such
permitted signs in a way to promote development that is not detrimental to the
property values and aesthetics of the City. No sign shall be erected or
maintained in the City’s jurisdiction, except those specifically allowed by
this chapter. All signs, as permitted by the applicable zoning district
regulations in all zoning districts in the City, shall comply with the
regulations of this chapter.
11-12-3 JURISDICTION.
   The lawful use of a sign existing at the time of the enactment of this
chapter may be continued, although such use may not conform to the regulations
herein. For those signs permitted before the adoption of these regulations,
such signs shall be classified as “permitted nonconforming” structures. No sign
permit shall be issued for any lot, tenant, or development after the effective
date hereof and not in substantial conformity with the provisions of this
chapter. Nor shall any sign, except as hereinafter specified, be erected,
substantially improved, converted, enlarged, moved, or structurally altered
without conforming with the provisions of this chapter.
11-12-4 PROHIBITED SIGNS AND CONDITIONS.
   The following signs shall not be permitted, erected, or maintained on any
property within the City:
   1.   Banners, pennants, spinners, streamers, except as permitted elsewhere
in this chapter.
   2.   Billboards.
   3.   Neon lights or signs, not intended to add to the overall architectural
theme of the site, except as permitted elsewhere in this chapter, or expressly
permitted by Council.
   4.   Building panel signs.
   5.   Hazardous signs, any sign or sign structure which is structurally
unsafe, is not kept in good repair, or is capable of causing electrical shock
to persons likely to come in contact.
   6.   Signs which incorporate, in any manner, any flashing or moving lights
unless expressly permitted by Council.
   7.   Signs which include visible moving parts, changeable copy, or
description by electrical or nonelectrical means, or by action of wind
currents, except as permitted in this chapter.
   8.   Spotlights or strobe lights, whether stationary or moving, intended to
draw attention to a location of a property and not primarily intended to accent
the signage or building form, except as expressly permitted by Council.
   9.   Pole signs.
   10.   Portable or temporary signs, except as permitted elsewhere in this
chapter.
   11.   String lights or other displays used in connection with commercial
premises for commercial purposes, other than temporary decorations displayed
between October 15 and January 15.
   12.   Any sign unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained in violation of
this chapter.
   13.   Any sign displaying any obscene, indecent, or immoral matter, as
defined by this chapter.
   14.   Roof signs, unless expressly permitted by Council.
   15.   Any vehicle sign, not normally used in the day to day operations of a
business, parked in such a way to draw attention of people from a public place
or street.
   16.   Ground-mounted signs in any residential land use, except as permitted
elsewhere in this chapter, or expressly permitted by Council.
   17.   Building-mounted signs in any residential land use, except as
permitted elsewhere in this chapter, or expressly permitted by Council.
   18.   Manual changeable copy signs.
   19.   Video message boards.
   20.   Any signs, except permitted nonconforming signs, not specifically
permitted within this chapter.
   21.   Any sign in conflict with the vision clearance requirements ofSection
11-4-5 of this chapter.
11-12-5 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   1.   Sign Face Extension. No sign face shall extend horizontally beyond the
supporting structure a distance greater than 12 inches.
   2.   Electric Signs. All electric signs shall be manufactured to meet UL
specifications and be approved by the Building Official in accordance with the
City Electrical Code. An alternate equivalent may be accepted as approved by
the Building Official.
      A.   Electric signs shall be watertight, with service holes to provide
access to each compartment with fitted waterproof covers.
      B.   Any electrical equipment or apparatus of a sign, which causes
interference with radio or television reception, shall not be allowed.
   3.   Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirements. All signs and sign structures
shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure as regulated by
the Building Code of the City, and shall be constructed to receive dead loads
as required in the Building Code or other ordinances of the City. Temporary
signs shall be excluded from dead load requirements as required above.
   4.   Clearance from Electric Lines. A clearance of not less than eight feet
horizontally and 12 feet vertically shall be maintained between any sign and
any overhead electrical transmission line.
   5.   Number of Faces. No sign shall have more than two faces. Sign faces
shall be parallel, unless determined to be consistent with the architectural
character of the building, and expressly permitted by Council.
   6.   Lighting of Signs. Signs, if illuminated, must be lit by internal
fixtures unless determined to be consistent with the architectural character of
the building, and is approved by the Community Development Director. A constant
level of light must be maintained, provided that this shall not be construed to
prohibit use of an automatic dimmer to reduce garish effects at night. Lighting
shall not flash or move unless approved by Council.
   7.   Emissions Prohibited. No sign shall emit audible sound, noticeable
odor, or smoke or other visible matter.
   8.   Obstruction of Fire Exits, Light, or Ventilation. No sign shall be
permitted to obstruct or interfere in any way with free use of any door,
window, fire escape, nor to obstruct or impair operation of any opening
required for light or ventilation.
   9.   Traffic Hazards. It is illegal for any sign to interfere with, obstruct
the view of, or be of such design which may be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal, or device; no sign shall imitate an official traffic sign
or include the words “stop,” “look,” “caution,” or any other word, phrase,
symbol, or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse
motorists.
11-12-6 BUILDING-MOUNTED SIGNS.
   1.   Sign Area Allowed. The following sign areas shall be allowed. For a
demonstration on how these provisions are applied, please see Figures 11-12-6A
and 11-12-6B of this section.
      A.   Public Street Facing Tenant.
         (1)   One and a half square feet of sign area may be erected for every
linear foot of tenant frontage to a maximum of 100 square feet.
         (2)   In the case that the tenant sign has a setback of greater than
250 feet from the nearest public street right-of-way, two square feet of sign
area may be erected per linear foot of tenant frontage to a maximum sign area
of 200 square feet.
         (3)   In the case that a tenant has frontage along more than one
public street, the total sign area shall be calculated off of no more than two
public street frontages, up to a maximum of 200 square feet. A maximum sign
area up to 400 square feet is allowed when also meeting the setback
requirements of Subsection 11-12-6(1)(A)(2). No individual building sign shall
exceed 200 square feet in sign area.
      B.   Nonpublic Street Facing Tenant.
         (1)   One and a half square feet of sign area may be erected for every
linear foot of tenant frontage to a maximum of 100 square feet.
         (2)   In the case that the tenant(s) sign has a setback of greater
than 250 feet from the nearest private street, two square feet of sign area may
be erected per linear foot of tenant frontage to a maximum sign area of 200
square feet.
         (3)   In the case that a tenant has frontage along both a non-public
street and a public street, the sign area shall be calculated off of the public
street facing frontage.
         (4)   In the case that a tenant is not oriented towards a street
frontage and desires to place a sign on the elevation that faces a street
frontage, the maximum allowable sign area allowed to be displayed by all
tenants on the public street facing frontage shall be limited to the total
building sign area allowed per this subsection.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3037.png]
Figure 11-12-6A
                        Figure 11-12-6B
Tenant Space Orientation Special Remarks Frontage (Linear Area (Square Feet)
                                         Feet)
Tenant Space Orientation       Special Remarks   Frontage (Linear Area (Square
                                                 Feet)            Feet)
                               Only calculated
1            Public street     off public street 60               90
                               frontage
2            Public street     n/a               35               52.5
3            Public street     n/a               25               37.5
4            Public street     n/a               25               37.5
5            Non-public street n/a               85               127.5
6            Public street     n/a               55               82.5
7            Public street     2 public street   80 and 50        195
                               frontages
                               Only calculated
8            Public street     off public street 50               75
                               frontage
                               Only calculated
9            Public street     off public street 50               75
                               frontage
10           Public street     n/a               50               75
11           Non-public street n/a               50               75
12           Non-public street n/a               40               60
13           Public street     Exceeds 250-foot  100              200
                               setback
14           Non-public street n/a               50               75
 
   2.   Multi-Story Buildings. In the event that a tenant occupies more than
one story, sign area shall be calculated using the tenant frontage on only one
story.
   3.   Letters, Symbols, and Logos. Under no circumstances will a letter,
symbol, or logo dimension greater than six feet be allowed. All building signs
shall be principally comprised of individual channel letters or similar solid
construction letters, at least one inch in thickness. Push through, routed
letters, and dimensional letters on backer boards, provided they are internally
illuminated, shall be permitted. For the purpose of displaying letters,
symbols, or logos, no more than 25 percent of the total sign area may be
allotted to an awning or capsule sign.
11-12-7 GROUND-MOUNTED SIGNS.
   1.   Cutout Letters or Figures; Copy Area Limited. All letters, figures,
characters, or representations in cutout or irregular form maintained in
conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed on a ground-mounted sign shall
be safely and securely built to or attached to the sign structure and shall
comply with all requirements of the “design” and “maintenance” subsections of
this chapter. The copy area shall be limited to a single geometric shape unless
it emulates the building form or feature.
   2.   Sign Bases and Surround. All sign bases and surrounds shall be designed
and constructed of materials that are similar to those used on the principal
building. Sign bases and surrounds shall be dominated with materials of
permanency and strength, such as brick, stone, block, other masonry or concrete
materials, or architectural paneling, and shall be compatible with other
structures and signs in the development. No exposed sign cabinetry shall be
visible from either side of the sign. Metal skirting around a supporting pole
shall not be considered an acceptable sign base and surround material. All sign
bases shall be at least 12 inches in height, while all sign surrounds shall be
at least six inches in thickness. Signs without a continuous surround may be
approved when incorporating architectural elements or substantial materials
meeting the intent of high-quality sign design on all sides, bottom, and top to
frame the sign area. See
Figure 11-12-7B1 and
Figure 11-12-7B2 of this subsection for additional details.
Figure 11-12-7B1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3035.png]
 
Figure 11-12-7B2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3033.png]
 
   3.   Sign Area. No more than 75 square feet of ground-mounted sign area
shall be permitted on each lot of record; provided however, if the frontage(s)
of such lot exceeds 500 feet, then 150 square feet of ground-mounted sign area
shall be permitted. The maximum sign area for any individual sign shall not
exceed 75 square feet. The total area of a sign shall be the actual square
footage of one sign face. Double -aced signs may be permitted with the maximum
square footage permitted on each side. The maximum sign area of a ground-
mounted sign shall not exceed 25 square feet; provided, however, the maximum
sign area may be increased five square feet for each additional one foot of
setback over the minimum required setback to a maximum sign area of 75 square
feet. See section
11-12-7(8) “Ground Mounted Sign Regulations Table” of this chapter for more
information.
   4.   Setback Requirement. The minimum setback required for ground-mounted
signs shall be five feet. All signs shall have a side setback not less than the
height of the sign. See section
11-12-7(8) “Ground-Mounted Sign Regulations Table” of this chapter for more
information. A minimum distance of 50 feet shall separate any two ground
mounted signs on the same property.
   5.   Height. The maximum height of a ground mounted sign shall be five feet;
provided, however, the maximum height may be increased one foot for each
additional one foot of setback over the minimum required setback to a maximum
sign height of 15 feet. See section
11-12-7(8) “Ground-Mounted Sign Regulations Table” of this chapter for more
information. For the purpose of measuring the height of the sign when the sign
is placed on a slope, the ground surface at the midpoint between the elevation
of the leading and trailing edge shall be considered the point of measurement.
Where the street is substantially higher or lower than the proposed sign
location, the Council may provide variations on the height requirement as
described in this chapter. “Substantially” is defined, in this case, as a
change in vertical distance greater than five feet. In
Figure 11-12-7(E) of this subsection, the sign height would be calculated at
eight feet in height.
Figure 11-12-7E
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3031.png]
 
   6.   Monolithic or Columnar Line. Ground-mounted signs shall have a
monolithic or columnar line that maintains essentially the same profile from
grade to top.
   7.   Design Standards. All ground-mounted signs that display more than one
tenant shall utilize a consistent field color or pattern for the copy area of
the sign.
   8.   Ground-Mounted Sign Regulations Table.
Ground-Mounted Sign Regulations Table
Minimum Setback (Feet) Maximum Height (Feet) Maximum Area (Square Feet)
Ground-Mounted Sign Regulations Table
Minimum Setback (Feet) Maximum Height (Feet) Maximum Area (Square Feet)
5                      5                     25
6                      6                     30
7                      7                     35
8                      8                     40
9                      9                     45
10                     10                    50
11                     11                    55
12                     12                    60
13                     13                    65
14                     14                    70
15                     15                    75
 
11-12-8 INTERSTATE GROUND-MOUNTED SIGNS.
   In addition to ground-mounted signs as permitted under this chapter, one
interstate ground mounted sign shall be allowed on lots or tracts under single
ownership, management, or control, provided the following conditions are met:
   1.   Monolithic or Columnar Line. Interstate signs shall have a monolithic
or columnar line that maintains essentially the same profile from grade to top.
   2.   Sign Area. The total area of a sign shall be actual square footage of
one sign face. Double-face signs may be permitted with the maximum square
footage permitted on each side. The area of one sign face shall equal one
square foot per linear foot of interstate ROW frontage. The maximum size of an
interstate sign shall be 150 square feet.
   3.   Tract Frontage. The tract must have frontage abutting the interstate
ROW, or be within 300 feet of the interstate ROW.
   See
Figure 11-12-8A of this subsection for a graphic representation of the
properties granted an interstate ground-mounted sign.
Figure 11-12-8A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3029.png]
 
   4.   Height. The maximum height of an interstate sign shall be 30 feet above
the interstate road grade. See
Figure 11-12-8B of this subsection.
Figure 11-12-8B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96b704be0f7b6b40405523bd48aa5ac083b51419/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3027.png]
 
   5.   Location. An interstate ground mounted sign must be located within 50
feet of the interstate or interstate ramp ROW, or in the event that the
interstate ground-mounted sign is located on a parcel that does not have direct
interstate frontage, the interstate ground-mounted sign must be positioned
adjacent to the nearest interstate ROW abutting property line.
   6.   Setback. Minimum interstate sign setback shall be five feet. In the
event that the interstate ground-mounted sign is located on a parcel that does
not have direct interstate frontage, the interstate ground-mounted sign must be
set back at least equal to the overall height of the sign.
   7.   Distance from Other Signs. An interstate ground-mounted sign must be at
least 100 feet from any other such interstate ground-mounted sign, or other
ground mounted sign.
   8.   Permits. In addition to the permitting requirements of this chapter,
all applicable interstate ground-mounted signs must obtain any necessary
permits or licenses from the Iowa Department of Transportation.
11-12-9 SUBDIVISION SIGNS.
   In the case of a commercial or residential subdivision, when there exists an
owners’ association that provides for the maintenance of the sign or
structures, 70 square feet of sign area shall be granted to the subdivision.
All sign dimensions shall be regulated in accordance with the ground-mounted
sign regulations table as provided in section
11-12-7(8) of this chapter; however, the maximum area for each sign shall be 35
square feet. The minimum setback required is five feet, and each sign must be
separated by at least 60 feet. Such signs shall be extensively landscaped with
trees, plantings, and natural features. Such signs may incorporate fountains,
fences, or similar features. In the case of a commercial or residential
subdivision that is actively under development/construction, 35 square feet of
sign area shall be permitted for the display of signage.
11-12-10 GROUND-MOUNTED SIGNS FOR CHURCHES AND SCHOOLS.
   Ground mounted signs for churches, schools, and other public uses shall be
regulated in accordance with the ground mounted sign regulations table as
provided in Section
11-12-7(8) of this chapter. The maximum sign area of said signs in residential
districts shall be 35 square feet.
11-12-11 PUBLIC FACILITY SIGNS.
   Public facility signs shall be permitted, provided they are considered to
advance the goals and vision established within the City Wide Signage Master
Plan, as approved by the Council. Public facility signs shall be reviewed by
the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by Council.
11-12-12 DRIVE-THROUGH SIGNS.
   1.   Sign Area. No more than 60 square feet of drive-through sign area shall
be permitted for each drive-through lane or similar service area. The total
sign area of a drive-through sign shall be the actual square footage of one
sign face. Double-faced signs shall not be permitted. Sign area installed in
excess of the 60 square feet shall be counted toward the total allowed sign
area for building-mounted or ground-mounted signs based on installation type.
   2.   Setback Requirement. The minimum setback required for drive-through
signs shall be 20 feet. All signs shall have a side setback not less than the
height of the sign.
   3.   Location. Drive-through signs shall be located internal to the site and
oriented toward a drive-through or similar service area.
   4.   Height. Drive-through signs shall not be installed at a height greater
than eight feet.
11-12-13 FUEL ISLAND SIGNS.
   1.   Sign Area. No more than 15 square feet of fuel island sign area shall
be permitted per pump located within the fuel island. For example, a fuel
island with six pumps would be allowed 90 square feet of sign area within the
fuel island. The total sign area of a fuel island sign shall be the actual
square footage of one sign face. Sign area installed in excess of the 15 square
feet per pump shall be counted toward the total allowed sign area for building-
mounted or ground-mounted signs based on installation type. Signs meeting the
requirements ofSection
11-12-23(3)(I) of this chapter shall not count toward the permitted fuel island
sign area.
   2.   Setback Requirement. The minimum setback required for fuel island signs
shall be the same as required for the fuel island canopy on that lot.
   3.   Location. Fuel island signs shall be located internal to the site and
oriented toward a fuel island.
   4.   Height. Fuel island signs shall not be installed at a height greater
than eight feet.
11-12-14 ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE COPY.
   Electronic changeable copy shall be allowed on ground-mounted signs for
events centers, convenience stores, schools, churches, and other public uses. A
maximum of 35 square feet or 50 percent of the maximum sign area, whichever is
less, may be dedicated to electronic changeable copy, provided the following
conditions are met:
   1.   Electronic changeable message copy may change no more than one time in
a five-minute period and shall not include any flashing, flowing, alternating,
or blinking lights.
   2.   Electronic changeable message copy shall be integral to and a part of
an approved ground-mounted sign.
11-12-15 NEON LIGHTS, MURALS.
   Neon lights, murals, or similar architecture details, subsequent to Planning
and Zoning Commission and Council approval, may be permitted as part of the
theme of the site if it is determined that the architecture detail proposed is
intended to create an identifiable theme and will not be detrimental to the
surrounding environment.
11-12-16 ADDRESSES.
   Address letters on residential, commercial, and manufacturing developments
shall be required and not have a dimension less than four inches. Address
letters may be less than one inch in depth.
11-12-17 FLAGS.
   Flags of the United States, the State, the City, foreign nations having
diplomatic relations with the United States, and other flags adopted or
sanctioned by an elected legislative body of competent jurisdiction, must be
flown in accordance with protocol established by the Congress of the United
States for the Stars and Stripes. Notwithstanding the above, the following
flags shall not be prohibited by this chapter:
   1.   Number of Flagpoles.
      A.   All commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential properties
shall be permitted two flag poles.
      B.   All residential properties shall be permitted one flagpole.
   2.   Commercial Flags.
      A.   In commercial districts, all properties shall be permitted to
display no more than 30 square feet of commercial flag area on any one
flagpole.
      B.   In residential districts, all properties shall be permitted to
display no more than 15 square feet of commercial flag area on any one
flagpole.
      C.   Flag poles shall not exceed 35 feet in height. Minimum setback from
property line shall be the height of the flagpole.
   3.   Noncommercial Flags.
      A.   In commercial districts, all properties shall be permitted to
display no more than 60 square feet of non-commercial flag area on any one
flagpole.
      B.   In residential districts, all properties shall be permitted to
display no more than 15 square feet of non-commercial flag area on any one
flagpole.
      C.   Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height. Minimum setback from
property line shall be the height of the flagpole.
   4.   Flagpoles. Flags shall be displayed on flagpoles only. Flags displayed
on light poles, utility poles, etc., except for City sponsored events, shall be
prohibited.
11-12-18 AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR TO CLASSIFY.
   The Community Development Director has the authority to classify a proposed
sign as incompatible with the already existing environment.
11-12-19 SIGN AREA FORMULA.
   The area of a sign is determined by the Community Development Director using
actual dimensions where practical, or approximate dimensions when irregularity
of a sign shape warrants. The sign area shall be the sum of the area of all
rectangles or squares that enclose the extreme points or edges of all copy,
logos, and symbols of said sign.
11-12-20 COMMERCIAL TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   The purpose of this section is to allow temporary signs featuring commercial
speech. Under no circumstances shall any temporary sign be illuminated. Under
no circumstances shall any temporary sign be located on public property without
authorization required underSection
11-12-22 of this chapter.
   1.   Residential Properties. Signs in this section shall be permitted in all
residential districts. Residential properties shall not display more than six
square feet of temporary commercial sign area. Temporary signs shall be
displayed for no more than 90 days. Temporary signs must be separated by at
least five feet in distance. The maximum height of any temporary sign on
residential property shall be six feet. The minimum setback of temporary signs
on residential property shall be five feet from property line. During the
period of time that a property is actively listed for sale, or for lease, an
additional six square feet of sign area shall be permitted for display. The
following signs are allowed:
      A.   Yard signs.
      B.   Detached rigid signs.
      C.   Banners, detached or attached.
   2.   Commercial or Industrial Properties. Signs in this section shall be
permitted in all Commercial and Industrial Districts and require a temporary
sign permit. Such signs shall be limited to six periods per year for any one
business or tenant space. Each commercial temporary sign event shall last for a
period of not more than 14 days. In conjunction with a temporary site plan, the
Council may permit the display of temporary signs for a greater period of time.
Commercial properties shall not display more than 35 square feet of temporary
sign area during the permitted period. Temporary signs must be separated by at
least 10 feet in distance. The maximum height of any commercial temporary sign
shall be six feet. The minimum setback of a commercial temporary sign shall be
five feet from property line. During the period of time that a property is
actively listed for sale, or for lease, an additional 35 square feet of sign
area shall be permitted. The following signs are allowed:
      A.   Yard signs;
      B.   Detached rigid signs;
      C.   Banners, detached or attached;
      D.   Air animated displays, limited to eight feet in height;
      E.   A-frame style signs;
      F.   Bag Signs. Such signs shall be permitted for businesses wishing to
cover existing signage until the replacement sign is manufactured. Bag signs
shall be made of a canvas or cloth material and may be displayed for a period
no longer than 45 days. Under special circumstances, the Community Development
Director may authorize to extend this period by an additional 30 days. The
square footage of all bag signs shall not exceed the area necessary to cover
the existing sign.
11-12-21 NON-COMMERCIAL TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   In addition to any permitted commercial speech temporary sign on property in
any zoning district, all properties shall be granted additional sign area for
the display of non-commercial temporary signage. Non-commercial temporary signs
shall be displayed for no more than 90 days. Under no circumstances shall any
non-commercial temporary sign be illuminated or be located on public property
without authorization required underSection
11-12-22 of this chapter. Permissible sign types shall be the same as stated in
Section
11-12-20 of this chapter.
   1.   Residential Properties. A maximum of 70 square feet of sign area for
the display of non-commercial temporary signage is permitted; however, no
individual sign shall exceed 35 square feet in sign area. The minimum setback
of a non-commercial temporary sign shall be five feet from property line;
however, this requirement shall not be interpreted to prohibit signs on
existing permitted structures with a property line setback less than five feet.
The maximum height of any non-commercial temporary sign shall be six feet.
   2.   Commercial or Industrial Properties. A maximum of 35 square feet of
sign area for the display of non-commercial temporary signage. The minimum
setback of a non-commercial temporary sign shall be five feet from property
line; however, this requirement shall not be interpreted to prohibit signs on
existing permitted structures with a property line setback less than five feet.
The maximum height of any non-commercial temporary sign shall be six feet.
11-12-22 SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to paint, print, or, in any way, affix any
picture, bill, sign, signboard, poster, or advertising material on any post,
utility pole, fire escape, hydrant, curb, sidewalk, tree, lamppost, or other
structure of any kind on, or as to overhang or protrude over any property owned
by the City or any easement of the City. No sign shall be located on or allowed
to extend over public property, except by permission of the Council. The
Community Development Director is hereby authorized and empowered to remove any
such sign at the expense of the parties responsible for erection of such signs.
11-12-23 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEES; EXCEPTIONS.
   1.   Permit Required; Payment of Fee. It is unlawful for any person to
erect, alter, or relocate within the City any sign without first obtaining a
permit from the Community Development Department and paying the fee required
herein unless provided elsewhere. The Community Development Director may
require persons failing to hold such permit to pay double the permit fee. No
person shall erect, construct, or maintain any sign upon any property or
building without the consent of the owner or person entitled to possession of
the property or building. Application for permits shall be made upon forms
provided by the Community Development Department.
   2.   Permit Fees. Every applicant, before being granted a permit hereunder,
shall pay to the City a permit fee in an amount determined by resolution of the
Council, from time to time.
   3.   Signs Not Needing a Permit. The following signs do not require a
permit:
      A.   Residential temporary signs.
      B.   Traffic or other municipal signs, public facility signs, civic or
service organizations, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger, and such
temporary, emergency, and non-advertising signs as may be approved by Council.
      C.   Non-commercial signs.
      D.   Flagpoles and flags.
      E.   Private ground-mounted traffic control signs.
      F.   Private building-mounted traffic control signs. Such signs shall not
exceed two square feet in sign area.
      G.   Window signs.
      H.   Fuel island signs meeting the requirements ofSection
11-12-13 of this chapter.
      I.   Signs integrated into the structure for Product Display and Vending,
as permitted bySection
11-4-9 of this chapter. The cumulative sign area of all such signs on any
property shall not exceed 75 square feet, and no individual sign shall exceed
10 square feet.
11-12-24 INSPECTIONS.
   All construction work for which a permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by the Building Official. All such construction or work, including
footings and foundations (structural and location), electrical connections,
etc., shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection until approved.
Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval
of a violation of the provisions of this Code. Inspections presuming to give
authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code shall not be valid.
It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain
accessible and exposed for inspection purposes and to schedule and be present
for the required inspections. Neither the Building Official nor the City shall
be liable for the expense entailed in the removal of any material required to
allow inspection.
11-12-25 MAINTENANCE.
   All signs and parts thereof, including, but not limited to, electrical
wiring and fixtures, supports, faces, lighting, and braces, shall be kept in
good repair at all times, and shall be kept neatly painted or otherwise treated
to prevent rust and similar unsightly deterioration and weathering. The
Community Development Director, after 30 days’ written notice to the sign
owner, may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance
with the provisions of this section and the cost assessed against the property
where said sign is located. However, in the case a sign structure becomes a
safety hazard as defined in the City Building Code, the Building Official shall
require owner of said sign structure to immediately abate the safety hazard as
provided in the City Building Code. The Community Development Director may
cause to be inspected, from time to time as he deems necessary, any sign
regulated by this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same is
secure, and whether it is in need of removal or repair to be in compliance with
this chapter.
11-12-26 COMMERCIAL ABANDONED SIGNS.
   Any commercial abandoned sign now or hereafter existing shall be taken down
and removed by the owner, agent, or person having beneficial use of the
building or land upon which the sign may be found within 30 days after written
notification from the Community Development Director and, upon failure to
comply with such notice within the time specified in such order, the Community
Development Director is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign, and
any expense thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building, structure, or
property to which the sign is attached.
11-12-27 SUBSTITUTION.
   The owner of any sign which is otherwise permitted under this chapter may
substitute non-commercial copy in lieu of any other commercial copy. The
purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial
speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular non-
commercial message over any other commercial message. This provision prevails
over any more specific provision to the contrary. This provision does not
create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel.
CHAPTER 13
OFF-STREET PARKING AND CIRCULATION
 
11-13-1 Title             11-13-5 Off Street Parking Regulations
11-13-2 Purpose and Scope 11-13-6 Handicapped Parking Regulations
11-13-3 Jurisdiction      11-13-7 Dimensional Requirements
11-13-4 Applicability     11-13-8 Number of Parking Spaces Required
 
11-13-1 TITLE.
   This chapter, providing for the administration and enforcement of parking
regulations, shall be known, and may be cited and referred to as the “City of
Clive Parking and Circulation Requirements.”
11-13-2 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens, prevent traffic congestion and hazards, provide for
proper traffic safety by preserving the public thoroughfares for the unimpaired
movement of pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic, provide for attractive,
secure, properly lighted, and well screened off-street parking facilities,
assure the mobility and access of emergency vehicles, provide for appropriately
designed parking facilities in proportion to the needs generated by the varying
types of land use, and minimize the negative visual impacts of large expanses
of parking by reducing glare from parking lots through open space and
landscaping around the parking areas.
11-13-3 JURISDICTION.
   The lawful use of parking facilities existing at the time of the enactment
of this chapter (January 17, 2008) may be continued although such use may not
conform to the regulations herein. For those parking facilities permitted
before the adoption of these regulations, such facilities shall be classified
as “permitted nonconforming” facilities. No permit shall be issued for any lot,
tenant, or development after the effective date hereof and not in substantial
conformity with the provisions of these regulations. Nor shall any parking
facility, except as herein specified, be substantially improved, converted,
enlarged, or otherwise altered without conforming to the provisions of this
chapter.
11-13-4 APPLICABILITY.
   In all districts, in connection with every industrial, commercial, business,
recreational, or dwelling use, and all other uses, space for off-street parking
and storage of vehicles shall be provided in accordance with all of the
following regulations, except as elsewhere provided herein.
11-13-5 OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS.
   All of the following standards shall apply to all off street parking:
   1.   Spaces Required. No structure or use shall be permitted or constructed
unless off-street parking spaces are provided in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
   2.   Parking Area Arrangement and Markings. All parking areas shall be so
arranged and marked so as to provide for orderly and safe loading or unloading,
parking and storage of self-propelled vehicles.
   3.   Fractional Spaces. Fractional space requirements shall be rounded up to
the next whole space.
   4.   Uses with Differing Business Hours. The number of required parking
spaces for uses with differing business hours that share a parking lot may be
reduced by 25 percent of the total required for each use, if it is determined
by the Community Development Director that such reduction will not have a
negative impact on the congestion or safety of the development. Special
regulations for Town Center (TC) District: All town center district parking
requirements are subject to Section
11-8-5.
   5.   Principal Building Enlargement. When any principal building is
enlarged, increased in capacity, or when a change in use creates an increase in
the amount of off-street parking space required, additional off street parking
spaces shall be required, in conformity with this chapter.
   6.   Mixed Use Building. For a building where a single tenant has multiple
uses, parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the parking
requirements of each use. An example of a mixed use building is one containing
a combination of both office and manufacturing uses. The area dedicated to each
use can be calculated at its individual requirement, at the discretion of the
Community Development Director. The tenant may need to demonstrate that the
parking can meet the more restrictive standard if the uses are changed. Special
regulations for Town Center (TC) District: All Town Center district parking
requirements are subject to Section
11-8-5.
   7.   Flexible Space Buildings. Buildings developed as “flexible space” shall
be designed to accommodate six spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross building
area. In the case that a big box retailer is a tenant within a “flexible space”
building, the minimum parking requirements shall be provided in accordance with
the parking requirements of each use. “Big box retailers” shall be defined as a
single tenant user with a minimum square footage of 25,000 square feet in gross
floor area.
   8.   Outdoor Patron Use or Assembly Areas. Outdoor patron use areas or areas
used for assembly shall be included in the gross floor area (GFA) for
calculating parking requirements. Outdoor dining or drinking areas shall be
included in the GFA for bars, restaurants, and taverns when calculating parking
requirements.
   9.   Parking Spaces Displaced by Building Expansion. Any required parking
spaces displaced by building expansion shall be provided elsewhere on the site.
No required off-street parking facility shall be reduced in capacity below the
minimum requirements of this chapter.
   10.   Use of Parking Spaces Restricted. Required parking spaces shall be
used only for parking of vehicles for property owners, guests, renters,
patrons, or employees of the site. Parking spaces shall not be used for the
commercial sale, display, rental, or repair of other motor vehicles, unless
that is the principal use of the site.
   11.   Long Term Storage Prohibited. No outdoor parking spaces or drives
shall be used as long term storage for the following, including, but not
limited to, vehicles, supplies, construction materials, portable sheds. “Long
term,” in this case, shall be defined as a period of time greater than 10 days.
   12.   Parking Areas for Storage or Display of Vehicles.
      A.   All parking of vehicles, including automobiles, vans, campers,
trucks, trailers, tractors, recreational vehicles, boats, construction
equipment, and any other mobile vehicle equipped for street and highway travel
shall occur on permanent impervious surface (concrete or asphalt) areas and on
private property only, except for the special limited uses in this subsection.
Those commercial uses associated with the leasing or selling of vehicles shall
be permitted to temporarily display vehicles on nonpaved surfaces at a rate of
one vehicle per 100 linear feet of street frontage to a maximum of seven
vehicles per street frontage.
      B.   A minimum setback of 10 feet from the property line shall be
required. No vehicle shall be located within a 100-foot vision clearance
triangle at any public street intersection (or private street/driveway with any
public street intersection). At no time shall City ROW between the property
line and the street be used for the parking or display of vehicles.
   13.   Maneuvering and Circulation. Off-street parking facilities shall
accommodate the maneuvering and circulation of all vehicles on-site, so as not
to impair the movement of vehicles on public streets. Except for single-family
and attached dwellings, there shall be no backing of vehicles from an off-
street parking facility into the public street.
   14.   Striping. All parking spaces, except parking spaces for single-family
and attached dwellings, shall be striped in accordance with approved site plan.
The striping shall be maintained in a clear and visible manner.
   15.   Curbs and Gutters. All off-street parking areas and associated
driveways, access roadways, and frontage roads, except driveways for single-
family attached and detached residences, shall be constructed with permanent,
PCC curb and gutter of at least six inches high and 24 inches wide or of
alternate height and width approved by the City. Prefabricated portable curb or
wheel stops shall not be considered an acceptable alternative, unless otherwise
approved by the Council during review of a development request.
   16.   Construction and Maintenance. All parking facilities shall be
designed, constructed, and maintained with security as a priority to protect
the safety of the users. All required parking facilities shall be permanently
maintained, free of litter and debris, potholes, broken curb, etc.
   17.   Auto Repair Shops. For auto repair, car wash, oil change shops, or
other similar uses, lift racks shall not be considered as a required parking
space.
   18.   Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything else contained herein, the
provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following uses:
      A.   Temporary parking areas that have been approved by the City.
      B.   Parking areas and access roadways located within a public park or
recreational area.
11-13-6 HANDICAPPED PARKING REGULATIONS.
   With respect to handicapped parking, all of the following shall apply:
   1.   The owner, contractor, and developer shall comply with all federal,
State, and local laws regarding handicapped parking including, but not limited
to, Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa and the Americans with Disabilities Act.
   2.   Handicapped parking spaces required by federal, State, and local laws
shall count toward meeting the requirements of this chapter.
11-13-7 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   Driveways. With respect to driveways, all of the following shall apply:
      A.   There shall be provided an access drive not less than 10 feet in
width in the case of a single-family and attached dwelling.
      B.   Except for single-family or attached dwellings, the minimum width of
a one-way driveway shall be 16 feet. The minimum width of a two-way driveway
shall be 24 feet.
      C.   For those commercial uses that require the need for a drive-through
lane, commonly associated with banks, fast food restaurants, and dry cleaners,
the minimum drive-through lane width shall be 12 feet. In the case that a
drive-through lane is in combination with a drive-by lane, the minimum lane
width shall be 24 feet.
   2.   Parking Spaces. With respect to parking spaces, all of the following
shall apply:
      A.   A parking space reserved for the parking of vehicles shall have a
dimension of not less than 10 feet in stall width and 19 feet in length for 90
degree parking without front end overhang.
      B.   Any parking space proposed at any angle other than specified above
shall have a length and depth sufficient to allow a 10-foot by 19-foot
rectangle parking area.
      C.   Any parking space located parallel to a wall or other solid barrier
shall be widened by an additional two feet.
      D.   When the front of a parking space abuts a sidewalk, the minimum
width of the sidewalk shall be six feet. When the front of a parking space
abuts open space within the perimeter of the parking lot, the minimum width of
the open space shall be three feet.
      E.   When the front of a parking space provides space as defined in
Subsection 2(D) of this section, the stall length may be decreased two feet.
      F.   The dimensions of an automobile parking space may be reduced to not
less than nine feet x 19 feet, provided all of the following conditions are
satisfied:
         (1)   The parking spaces are intended for the use of employees working
in, or visitors to, an office building. An “office building” means a building
containing business and professional offices which do not provide more than
limited direct retail sales or services to the visiting public, such as the
following: law, engineering, architecture, real estate, insurance, accounting,
bookkeeping, finance, stock brokerage, management, research, design,
development, marketing, consulting, and uses of a like or similar nature.
         (2)   The “office building” at which the parking spaces are located
shall have at least 10 full-time employees who work at said building.
         (3)   The total land area devoted to open space and landscaping shall
be not less than the sum of: 1) any minimum requirement under the applicable
zoning regulation or 25 percent of the gross land area included in the site,
whichever is greater; plus 2) 29 additional square feet per each nine feet x 19
feet car space.
   3.   Parking Lot Setbacks. With respect to parking lot setbacks, all of the
following shall apply:
      A.   No part of any parking space in a C-1, C-2, M-1, or M-2 District
shall be closer than 10 feet to any established public street right-of-way or
public street easement. The minimum side and rear yard setback of parking
facilities in a C-1, C-2, M-1, or M-2 District shall be five feet.
      B.   No part of any parking space in a C-3, C-4, or C-5 District shall be
closer than 15 feet to any established public street right-of-way or public
street easement. The minimum side and rear yard setback of parking facilities
in a C-3, C-4, or C-5 District shall be five feet. In the case that the parking
facility is a part of a planned office development or planned shopping center,
located within a C-3 or C-4 District, no parking lot setbacks shall be required
internal to the development.
      C.   In case the parking lot is adjacent to an R District, it shall be
setback at least 15 feet from the R District boundary and shall be effectively
screened with plantings.
      D.   Driveways for individual single-family residences shall not be
located closer than two feet from an adjoining residential lot line, unless
such driveway is jointly used by adjoining property owners and a joint easement
has been recorded with the County Recorder.
      E.   Off street parking areas may be established in any R District that
immediately adjoins a C or M District, or is directly across an alley from a C
or M District provided that:
         (1)   Such parking shall be accessory to, and for use of, one or more
permitted uses in the adjoining C or M District and shall not include trucks.
         (2)   Such parking areas shall not extend more than 100 feet from the
boundary of the less restricted district. In no case shall said areas extend
closer than 30 feet to the street right-of-way line. The yard between said
parking areas and the adjoining streets shall be screen-planted and landscaped
as provided in Subsection 3(E)(3) of this section.
         (3)   A 30 foot buffer shall be maintained between said parking areas
and adjoining lots in Residential Districts. Said buffer shall be consistent
with the requirements set forth in this chapter. A masonry wall or other
suitable fence may be substituted for the wood fence.
         (4)   All entrances and exits for said parking areas shall be from
said adjoining alley or C or M District.
         (5)   No such parking area shall be located in any required front yard
in an R District or in front of the immediately adjoining permitted principal
structures.
11-13-8 NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED.
   In case of any building, structure, or premises, the use of which is not
specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use that is mentioned and
to which said use is similar shall apply, as determined by the Community
Development Director. All following requirements listed are the minimum that
must be met:
   1.   Development Applications. Development applications, which exceed the
minimum requirements up to 25 percent, shall be required to provide additional
open space and landscaping within the site, equal to or greater than the area
of parking in excess of the minimum required. For purposes of this chapter, a
parking stall shall be calculated as 290 square feet. This additional open
space shall be in addition to the minimum open space required for the site.
   2.   Request for Additional Parking. In the case of a request to exceed the
minimum parking requirements by more than 25 percent, the Council may approve,
or conditionally approve, the additional parking subject to demonstration of
need. In determining if the proposed parking is needed, the Council may request
a market analysis, estimated employee count, floor plans, or other similar
materials justifying the need. In no case shall the additional parking be
approved without providing additional open space within the site, equal to or
greater than the area of parking in excess of the minimum required. This
additional open space shall be in addition to the minimum open space required
for the site. Additionally, the Council may conditionally approve the
additional parking subject to a phased construction schedule, creative
surfacing for overflow parking areas or additional open space or landscaping.
Parking Requirements
Use Parking Spaces Required
Parking Requirements
Use                         Parking Spaces Required
Animal boarding/kennels     3.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Assisted living centers     1 space per 2 dwelling units, plus 1 per staff
Auditoriums and gymnasiums  1 space per 4 seats
                            3 spaces per service bay; 1 space per service
Automotive repair stations  vehicle; 2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
                            nonservice area
Automotive sales            1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1
                            per 5,000 square feet of developed area
Banks                       3.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
                            area
Barber, beauty shops        2 spaces per chair or beautician station
Boarding house              1 space per bedroom
                            3 spaces per lane; 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Bowling centers             of floor area for associated eating and drinking
                            places
Car wash, drive-through oil 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet; queuing capacity
change                      equal to 2 per service capacity
Car washes - self-service   5 spaces per wash bay, plus 2 queuing spaces per
                            bay
                            1 space per 6 students, 5 spaces minimum; 1 space
Childcare center            per each van or bus, plus 1 queue space per 6
                            students
Commercial entertainment    1 space per 1,000 square feet of outdoor area and
                            building combined
Consumer fireworks sales    10 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Convenience stores          5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Dance and assembly halls,   1 space per 4 fixed seats. In the case of no fixed
theaters, events centers,   seats, 20 spaces per 1,000 square feet
auditoriums and gymnasiums
Delicatessen/donut shop/    10 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
coffee bar
Display fireworks sales     1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area,
                            or 1 space per 2 employees, whichever is greater
Drinking establishments/    20 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
lounge
                            5 queuing spaces from the order board for food
Drive-through lane          related uses
                            3 queuing spaces from window for all other nonfood
                            related uses
Driving ranges              2 spaces per tee area; additional spaces as
                            required for accessory uses
Elementary and junior high  1 space per 2 employees, plus auditoriums and
schools                     gymnasiums - 1 space per 4 seats
Fitness centers/health      2.25 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
clubs                       area
                            1 space per 4 fixed seats. In cases of no fixed
Funeral homes/mortuary      seats, 10 spaces per 1,000 square feet of assembly
                            area
Furniture, carpet/appliance 2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
retail                      area
Golf courses                6 spaces per hole; additional spaces as required
                            for accessory uses
Grocery stores              4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Hotels and motels           1 space per guestroom; additional spaces as
                            required by accessory services
Independent living          1.25 spaces per dwelling unit, plus 1 visitor space
facilities                  per 5 dwelling units
Industrial or manufacturing 1.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
facility                    area
Lodging house               2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus 1 space per
                            guestroom
Medical office/clinic       3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Multi-family dwelling       2 spaces per dwelling unit; 1 visitor space per 5
                            dwelling units
Outdoor service area (refer to Section
11-4-9 of this title for additional requirements):
                           0 - 300 sq. ft.        0 spaces
                           301 square feet and up 10 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                   feet of gross floor area
Professional/business       3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
office
                            1 space per 4 fixed seats; in cases where an
Religious organizations     auditorium is not involved, 10 per 1,000 square
                            feet of gross floor area
Restaurant - fast food      15 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Restaurant - sit down, non- 15 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
fast food
Retail, general commercial  4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Secondary schools, colleges 1 space per classroom; 1 space per 4 student seats
and universities, and       at capacity
vocational schools
                            1 space per 20,000 square feet gross floor area; 1
Self-storage and mini-      space per 50,000 square feet of vehicle or boat
warehousing                 storage spaces; office space equal to office space
                            requirement
Single-family dwelling      2 spaces per dwelling unit
Townhomes                   2 spaces per dwelling unit; 1 visitor space per 5
                            dwelling units
Warehousing                 1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
                            or 1 space per 2 employees, whichever is greater
(Section 11-13-8 – Ord. 1173 – Dec. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 14
LANDSCAPE AND OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
 
11-14-1 Title                   11-14-4 Design Standards
11-14-2 Purpose and Scope       11-14-5 Maintenance Requirements
11-14-3 Landscaping Regulations  
 
11-14-1 TITLE.
   This chapter, providing for the administration and enforcement of
landscaping regulations, shall be known, and may be cited and referred to as
the “Landscaping Ordinance of the City of Clive, Iowa.”
11-14-2 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the
preservation, installation, and maintenance of landscape plantings and
landscaped open space in residential, commercial, and manufacturing districts,
to utilize landscaping and landscaping open space as an effective means of
energy conservation, to preserve open space, to improve property values, to
maintain aesthetic quality of the City, thereby promoting the health and
general welfare of the City.
11-14-3 LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS.
   All of the following standards shall apply to all required landscape
plantings:
   1.   Interference with Site Drainage. Landscape plantings shall not be
placed where they interfere with site drainage.
   2.   Plantings Shown on Approved Site Plan. Landscape plantings shall not be
placed in any public utility easement unless specifically permitted on the
approved site plan.
   3.   Interference with Public Utilities. Plantings shall not be placed where
they may interfere with maintenance of sanitary and storm structures, fire
hydrants, or water valves, or any other public utility.
   4.   Approved Plantings. Landscape planting shall not be placed in any
public street right-of-way unless previously approved by the Council.
   5.   Vision Clearance Triangle. Vision clearance triangle shall be
maintained at all times.
   6.   Restoration with Sod. All disturbed land shall be restored with sod,
unless specifically approved otherwise. In residential districts or uses, the
entire front yard, side yard, and rear yard to the building setback line shall
be sodded. In all cases, the adjacent ROW shall be sodded.
   7.   Survey of Larger Trees. A survey of trees larger than three-inch
caliper in diameter is required for sites with such existing trees. The tree
inventory shall include species, size, and a location map. Such plan shall be
included in the initial development submittal.
   8.   Saving or Replacing Larger Trees. All existing trees larger than three-
inch caliper shall be saved. In the case a tree or trees cannot be saved, trees
shall be replaced. If it is impractical to replace such trees with an equal
size, then several smaller sized plantings totaling, in aggregate, the size of
the removed landscaping, shall be required. The City may require that some of
the landscaping be planted on public property if it is impractical to place all
plantings on that particular site or plat. Replacement trees shall be similar
to those included in the original tree inventory.
   9.   Existing Landscaping Identified and Protected. All existing landscaping
which is not to be removed pursuant to the grading, landscape, or site plan,
shall be clearly identified and, prior to issuance of a grading permit, shall
be protected by fencing located around the dripline of the tree, maximizing the
protection of the root zone area. The Building Official may waive this
requirement if the landscaping to be saved is not located in the immediate area
where construction is to occur.
   10.   Preservation of Existing Landscaping. Whenever practical, existing
landscaping shall be preserved and incorporated into the overall design and
layout of the site.
   11.   Quantity of Trees Required. In sites where landscaping existed and was
retained during development, the minimum quantity of trees required may be
reduced by the total amount of caliper saved in the case of a deciduous tree or
the total height in the case of an evergreen tree. No more than 50 percent of
required plants may be waived in this manner.
11-14-4 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The provisions below represent the minimum standards required for compliance
of this chapter. These regulations are not intended to suppress creative design
concepts or the use of variety in the landscape plan.
   1.   Minimum Size. The minimum size for required plantings, other than those
in required buffers, shall be as follows:
      A.   Deciduous overstory trees shall be a minimum two and one-half inch
caliper.
      B.   Evergreen overstory trees shall be a minimum height of six feet.
      C.   Ornamental trees shall be a minimum one and one-half inch caliper in
size.
   2.   Minimum Quantity. The minimum number of plantings per site shall be as
follows:
      A.   A minimum of 50 percent of all required trees shall be overstory
shade trees.
      B.   For all uses, except single-family and duplex family residential
dwellings, a minimum of 25 percent of all required trees shall be evergreen
trees.
 
                    R-1, R-2, R-4, R-5        R-3, Commercial, Manufacturing
Planting requirement 2 trees per dwelling unit 1.5 trees per 1,000 square feet
                                               of required open space
 
      C.   Values expressed in the table above are in addition to plantings
required in buffer.
      D.   Based upon recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
approval by Council, the evergreen requirement may be modified, substituting a
different species of trees.
   3.   Off-Street Parking Areas. All of the following requirements shall apply
to off-street parking areas as follows:
      A.   All rows of parking spaces shall be provided a terminal landscaped
island, with a minimum width of 10 feet, to protect parked vehicles, provide
visibility, confine moving traffic to driveways, and provide space for
landscaping.
      B.   There shall be provided within each row of parking spaces,
landscaped islands, with a minimum width of 10 feet, located so as to prevent
more than 15 vehicles from being parked side by side in an abutting
configuration.
      C.   All landscaped islands required in Subsection 3(B) of this section
shall be planted with at least one ornamental or one deciduous overstory tree.
A minimum of 50 percent of the landscaped islands shall be provided with a
deciduous overstory tree. The entire landscaped island area shall be covered
with plant materials, lawn, or mulches.
      D.   The setback between the parking area and the public right-of-way
shall be landscaped with a minimum of one overstory deciduous tree per 40
linear feet of frontage. The frontage calculation shall be exclusive of the
driveways. The plantings may be planted individually or in clusters. This
requirement shall be included in the minimum number of trees required for the
site and is not in addition to.
   4.   Open Space Requirements.
      A.   It is recognized that the extensive use and excessive congestion of
land may become hazardous to the general health and welfare of the community.
Therefore, the intent of this chapter shall be to require not less than that
open space which is necessary to preserve the basic qualities and beauty of
nature. Open space shall be provided for each site in each district in
accordance with the table below. Values are in percentage of total site:
 
Open Space Requirements (Values in Percent)
R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 M-1 M-2
25  15  15  25  25  25  15  15
 
      B.   The calculation of required open space shall be the entire limits of
the lot, exclusive of the required buffer areas. The calculation shall not
include sidewalks or patios in the minimum required open space.
   5.   Maintenance of Open Space. All open space and common areas shall be
under single management or control, and shall be maintained and preserved in
accordance with the site plan requirements.
   6.   Buffers. It is recognized that the transition from one district to
another district of contrasting and conflicting uses is across a line in
theory, not in existence. Therefore, it is the intent of this chapter to
require the actual provision of a physical barrier so as to reduce possible
harmful or detrimental influence one zoning district’s use may have to an
abutting and contrasting or conflicting zoning district’s use. The following
are conditions for requiring a buffer:
      A.   Any lot in any R or M District platted after the effective date
hereof, having both its front and rear lines abutting a public thoroughfare (a
double frontage lot) shall require a 30-feet buffer from the thoroughfare
abutting its rear lot line.
      B.   Buffers shall be provided in accordance with the following table.
Values are in feet:
 
Buffer Requirements (Values in Feet)
                        R-1, R-2, R-5 Districts R-3 R-4 C Districts M Districts
R-1, R-2, R-5 districts                         30  30  50          65
R-3                     30                          30  50          65
R-4                     30                      30      50          65
C districts             50                      50  50              30
M districts             65                      65  65  30
 
      C.   The more intense use shall provide the buffer required above. In an
instance where adjacent property is down zoned, thereby requiring additional
buffer, the newly zoned property shall provide the additional required buffer.
   7.   Buffer Requirements. The following shall be the minimum requirement.
All buffers shall provide the plantings as prescribed below.
 
Buffer Material Requirements (Per 30 Linear Feet of Buffer)
30 feet 1 overstory 2 evergreen 1 ornamental
50 feet 1 overstory 3 evergreen 2 ornamental
65 feet 2 overstory 4 evergreen 2 ornamental
 
      A.   Deciduous overstory trees shall be a minimum two and one-half inch
caliper and evergreen overstory trees shall be a minimum height of six feet.
Ornamental trees shall be a minimum one and one-half inch caliper in size.
Whenever practical, existing trees and shrubs should be preserved and
incorporated into the overall design of the buffer and can be included to meet
the total number of required trees. A continuous earthen berm, minimum of three
feet in height, shall be provided in addition to the required plantings.
      B.   In addition to the required permanent landscape buffer, the Council
may require a fence or a heavily landscaped earth berm to provide additional
screening. Such fence shall be constructed of substantial support elements,
including, but not limited to, brick, poured concrete, and stone. Steel posts
shall not be considered appropriate.
      C.   Required yards shall be measured from the lot lines as prescribed in
this chapter. Buffer may be included in yards required by this chapter. No
building, parking, or structures shall be permitted within any buffer, unless
authorized by the Council.
      D.   In a residential subdivision, the developer of the subdivision shall
be required to install the buffer improvements as required by this section. The
owner of the adjacent private property shall maintain the buffer in perpetuity.
      E.   In a situation that has landscape requirements other than those
stated in the buffering requirements, the buffer requirements shall be in
addition to any other required landscaping.
      F.   The need to establish the buffer as an easement shall be reviewed
and identified during the development review process. Easements shall generally
be required between different zoning districts and for buffering requirements
of residential districts. It shall be assumed that the buffer will be
established by an easement unless noted otherwise during the development review
process and approved by the Council. Buffer easements shall be recorded with
the County at the time of establishment, prior to, or concurrent with the
recording of a final plat or the final approval of a site plan.
      G.   For single-family residential subdivisions, the landscape buffer
shall be submitted for review and approval as a public improvement, at the same
time as the preliminary plat. For any type of development that requires a site
plan review, the buffer plans shall be submitted as a part of the site plan
submittal.
   8.   Reduction in Required Buffer. The Council may, at its discretion,
reduce the required buffer under the following conditions:
      A.   In those areas where the boundary line abuts permanent natural
features which function as a buffer, including, but not limited to, ponds,
severe grades, or mature woodlands, requirements for a buffer area for that
portion of the boundary may be reduced by the Council in the proportions that
the permanent natural features fulfill the buffer requirements.
      B.   In those areas where the property abuts an undeveloped property that
is shown on the adopted land use plan as the same or a more intensive use.
      C.   The abutting property has provided a portion or the entire required
buffer.
      D.   On lots that can present evidence that the above buffer provisions
would render the property unbuildable, the Council may grant a waiver of the
buffer requirements and permit a fence of not less than six feet in height.
Provisions for landscaping to soften the visual appearance of the fence and
provide additional buffering may be required and will be reviewed on a case by
case basis.
      E.   In those areas that abut a public park, the buffer area for that
portion of the boundary may be reduced to 50 percent of the requirement.
11-14-5 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   Landscaping, as approved by a site plan, shall be maintained in good
condition so as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance at all
times. Landscaping shall be maintained to minimize property damage and public
safety hazards, including the removal/replacement of dead or decaying plant
material, removal of low hanging branches and those obstructing street lighting
and maintenance of sight distance standards as set forth herein. Landscaping
shall be maintained in accordance with the following standards:
      A.   Landscaping shall be kept visibly free of insects and disease.
      B.   Areas originally mulched shall be kept free from weeds and other
volunteer plants.
      C.   Irrigation systems shall be maintained so as to eliminate water loss
due to damaged, missing, or improperly operating sprinkler heads, emitters,
piping and valves. Irrigation shall not spray or otherwise allow water to go
into roads or other public pathways.
   2.   In the event a tree, shrub, or other plant causes damage to streets,
sidewalks, or other public improvements, the offending plant shall be removed
and replaced.
   3.   All dead or diseased landscape plantings shall be replaced with
equivalent material in a timely fashion, or within 30 days following notice
from the Community Development Director.
   4.   If any landscaping is removed in violation of an approved site plan or
plat, the property owner shall plant three times such amount, of equal quality
and size, on such site or plat. If it is impractical to replace such
landscaping with an equal size, then several smaller sized plantings, totaling,
in aggregate, the size of the improperly removed landscaping, shall be
required. The City may require that some of the landscaping be planted on
public property if it is impractical to place all plantings on that particular
site or plat. Failure to maintain landscaping in accordance with approved site
plan shall constitute a violation of the approved site plan.
CHAPTER 15
SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
 
11-15-1 Title             11-15-5 General Regulations
11-15-2 Purpose and Scope 11-15-6 Site Plan Information Required
11-15-3 Jurisdiction      11-15-7 Fees
11-15-4 Procedures        11-15-8 Maintenance Requirements
 
11-15-1 TITLE.
   This chapter, providing for the administration and enforcement of site
plans, shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Site Plan
Ordinance of the City of Clive, Iowa.”
11-15-2 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards to guide the
appropriate development of land, to ensure that provisions are made for
adequate traffic safety, emergency access, water supply, sewage disposal,
management of stormwater, erosion, and sedimentation, to minimize the adverse
effects on adjacent property values, to maintain aesthetic quality of the City,
thereby promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the City. Site
plan review and approval shall be required for any permitted, accessory, or
conditional uses, other than single-family and duplex family residential
dwellings, in any zoning district.
11-15-3 JURISDICTION.
   The lawful use of property in which a site plan has been approved at the
time of enactment of this chapter may be continued, although such use may not
conform to the regulations herein. For those properties approved before the
adoption of these regulations, such property shall be classified as “permitted
nonconforming.” No permit shall be issued for any site development after the
effective date hereof and not in substantial conformity with the provisions of
this chapter. Nor shall any development requiring an approved site plan, except
as herein specified, be substantially improved, converted, enlarged, or
otherwise altered without conforming to the provisions of this chapter.
11-15-4 PROCEDURES.
   1.   Preapplication. Prior to the submission of a site plan application, it
is recommended that a preapplication review meeting be scheduled with the
Community Development Director. The purpose of the preapplication review
meeting is to begin identifying issues, communicate development requirements,
and point out possible future difficulties. This evaluation is preliminary in
nature and shall not be considered an intention to approve or deny any
particular project and is not intended to be inclusive of the comments, but
only to identify major areas of concern. The City reserves the right to
supplement additional comments that may be generated during the formal review
of the application.
   2.   Application Submission.
      A.   At the time of submission, the applicant shall provide the following
items:
         (1)   Application form, signed by property owner.
         (2)   Proof of ownership such as deed, purchase agreement, owner
consent.
         (3)   Payment of required fees.
         (4)   Six folded copies of each plan set.
      B.   If all required submittal items are not provided, the application
will be deemed invalid and such submittal will be returned to the applicant as
incomplete. The City will retain no record of the submittal if returned to the
applicant.
   3.   Waive or Reduce Requirements. The Community Development Director may
find that unusual characteristics of an application make it unnecessary for the
applicant to submit all of the information for an application required by this
chapter. In such cases, the Community Development Director may waive or reduce
the requirements, if it is also found that the absence of such information will
not inhibit the City’s ability to evaluate the compliance of the proposed site
development with the standards of this chapter and any other requirements of
this Code.
   4.   Review by City Officials. The Community Development Director shall
immediately refer a copy of the site plan to the Public Works Director, Fire
Chief, Parks and Recreation Director, and City Engineer. Each department shall
review said site plan as to its compliance with the ordinances of the City, its
effect upon public utilities, streets, property, and safety, and submit their
findings as soon as possible to the Community Development Director. The
Community Development Director shall forward the site plan and City staff
report to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   5.   Notification Signs. The City will post at least one notification sign
for which a request has been made. Notification signs shall be posted once the
agenda has been set for the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting and shall
remain until one day after the Council review.
   6.   Review and Recommendation of Commission. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall, after receiving the site plan and City staff report, review
the site plan for conformity with the regulations and design standards
contained herein, and may confer with developer on changes deemed advisable in
such site plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its
recommendation either for approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of
the site plan to the Council.
   7.   Public Hearing. The Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission
may, solely as a matter of discretion, by written order, fix a date, time, and
place for a public hearing to be held by the Planning and Zoning Commission on
the site plan of the proposed development and prescribe the notice thereof and
to whom such notice shall be given. If the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
hold such hearing at such date, time, and place, at such hearing all affected
property owners shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
   8.   Council Decision. The Council shall, upon receipt of the
recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission, either approve, approve
with conditions, or disapprove the site plan of the proposed development.
   9.   Filing of Approved Site Plan. Upon final action by the Council on any
site plan, five copies consistent with the Council’s approval shall be provided
and stamped approved by the Clerk and filed with the Community Development
Director. One copy of the approved site plan shall be returned to the
applicant.
11-15-5 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   1.   Site Plan Required. A site plan, consistent with the requirements as
outlined in the Clive Development Standards Manual, shall be required for all
commercial, manufacturing, and non-single and duplex family dwellings in
residential zoning districts when new construction, expansion of existing
structures, or major modification of existing structures is proposed.
   2.   Certificate of Zoning Compliance. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance
shall be obtained prior to issuance of any building permit or occupancy of an
existing building. In the event a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is denied, a
variance may be requested from the Board of Adjustment. Such variance request
shall follow the same procedure as outlined in
Chapter 3 of this title. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall include, but
is not limited to:
      A.   Name and address of proposed business.
      B.   Name and address of building owner.
      C.   Zoning classification.
      D.   Legal description.
      E.   Use or parking restrictions.
      F.   Proposed use of business.
      G.   Number of parking stalls used, and required.
   3.   Building Permit Issuance. No building permit for any structure or
development within any district within which a site plan is required shall be
issued until said site plan has been approved by the Council and stamped
approved by the Clerk.
   4.   Expiration of Approvals. All site plan approvals shall expire and
terminate 90 days after the date of such approval unless a building permit has
been issued for the construction provided for in the site plan.
   5.   Extension of Time. Except as provided below, if the owner or developer
of property for which a site plan has been approved, determines that an
extension of time is necessary in the development schedule, or that a
significant modification of the site plan would provide for a more appropriate
or more practical development of the site, the owner or developer may apply for
an amendment of the site plan. Any such modifications or development schedule
extensions shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved
by the Council.
   6.   Minor Modifications. In the case of minor modifications of the site
plan or development schedule, the Community Development Director may give
approval if the decision does not modify the overall theme of the development,
affect public safety, or result in the reduction of any minimum standard as
provided in this zoning ordinance. Minor modifications shall include the
following:
      A.   Lighting location and fixture type.
      B.   Location, height, and style of fences and walls.
      C.   Location of trash enclosures.
      D.   Location and size of building and monument signs.
      E.   Location and construction of on-site sidewalks, except on City
rights-of-way.
      F.   Location, type, and size of plantings provided the modification
would have the same effective cover and screening.
      G.   Location and construction of accessory buildings of less than 400
square feet.
      H.   Location and construction of accessory structures.
      I.   Reconfiguration of architectural features, including colors, or
modification of finished materials that do not alter or compromise the
previously approved theme.
      J.   Minor relocation or addition of driveways or parking spaces.
   7.   Refer Minor Modifications to Commission. Nothing contained herein shall
be construed to allow the Community Development Director to vary the provisions
of any statute, ordinance, City policy, or previous directives of the Council.
The Director shall have the discretion to refer any minor modification requests
to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its review.
   8.   Site Plan Amendment. Any modification that is deemed by the Community
Development Director not to be minor modification shall be required to submit a
site plan amendment. Site plan amendments shall follow procedures prescribed in
this Chapter 15.
   9.   Suspension of Building Permit; Order Construction Stopped. If the
Community Development Director finds that any construction, or proposed
construction, or occupancy of a development on a property for which a site plan
has been approved will not substantially comply with the site plan as approved,
or that the construction and development of the property is not being carried
out in accordance with the development schedule filed with the site plan, the
Community Development Director shall suspend all building permits for the
development and order all construction stopped until such time as the owner of
the project, or the owner’s successors in interest, shall provide satisfactory
proof that the site plan and schedule of development will be complied with. In
no case will a zoning compliance certificate or Certificate of Occupancy be
issued for any structure within the development while the building permit or
the development has been suspended pursuant to this subsection. Any person
aggrieved by any decision or action of the Community Development Director under
this subsection may appeal such action or decision to the Council.
   10.   Granting of Certificates of Occupancy. A Certificate of Occupancy will
be granted upon completion of new construction or completion of alterations or
additions to existing structures. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued
until such time as all site improvements and building construction is completed
in substantial compliance with all provisions identified on the approved site
plan and within all applicable building codes.
   11.   Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. A temporary Certificate of
Occupancy may be issued prior to completion of the project if, in the opinion
of the Community Development Director, the remaining items could not be
completed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control and the issuance
of a temporary Certificate of Occupancy will not inhibit the completion of the
total project, nor have an adverse effect on persons in the immediate area or
nearby properties. The applicant will be required to sign an agreement to
complete and post a certified check with the Community Development Department
in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the remaining items to be
completed. The check will be returned to the applicant with the issuance of the
final Certificate of Occupancy. The agreement to complete will be accepted by
the Council.
11-15-6 SITE PLAN INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   All site plans shall provide the following information as prescribed in the
Clive Development Standards Manual. The information required shall include, but
is not limited to, access and circulation, parking, lighting, landscaping,
buffering, drainage, and architecture.
11-15-7 FEES.
   Said fee shall be in an amount determined by resolution of the Council from
time to time. In addition to the application fee, the applicant for site plan
review must also pay all cost incurred by the City for legal services,
engineering services, and services of other persons or entities employed by the
City for, or in any way involved in, the review and inspection of said site
plan and public utility extensions contemplated thereby, including, but not
limited to: street, sidewalks, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer
lines, streetlights, electric and gas lines, water retention areas, and all
other improvements intended for public use or benefit constructed, or caused to
be constructed by the owner, and under no condition shall said fee be refunded
for failure of the City to approve said site plan.
11-15-8 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   Failure to Maintain. Failure to maintain a site in accordance with an
approved site plan shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and a failure
to correct such a violation within 30 days following written notice of said
violation, shall render the site plan and any certificates of zoning compliance
and occupancy subject to cancellation.
   2.   Failure to Acquire Approval. Failure to acquire site plan/site plan
amendment approval where required, prior to construction, alteration, or other
modification of a building, sign, or structure, shall constitute a violation of
this chapter and a failure to correct such a violation within 30 days following
written notice of said violation shall render the site plan and any
certificates of zoning compliance and occupancy subject to cancellation. In
addition, the Building Official shall post a stop work order relating to work
in the process of completion outside the requirements of this chapter.
   3.   Penalties. Penalties for a violation of this title are outlined in
Section
11-1-7 of this title.
TITLE 12 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE, JURISDICTION, AND DEFINITIONS
 
12-1-1 Purpose      12-1-3 Definitions
12-1-2 Jurisdiction  
 
12-1-1 PURPOSE.
   It is deemed essential to establish minimum standards for the design and
development of all new subdivisions so that existing developments will be
protected and so that adequate provisions are made for public utilities and
other public requirements and to improve the health, safety, and general
welfare.
12-1-2 JURISDICTION.
   In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa, and
amendatory acts thereto, to the extent not inconsistent with this title, the
provisions of this title are hereby adopted by the City, governing the
subdivision of all lands within the corporate limits of the City and, as
provided in Section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa, governing the subdivision of all
lands outside the City but within two miles of the corporate limits.
12-1-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are hereby defined.
   1.   Words beginning with “A.”
      A.   “Auditor’s plat” means a plat prepared upon request of the Polk
County Auditor or the Dallas County Auditor pursuant to the applicable
provisions of the Code of Iowa, including, but not limited to, Sections 441.65
through 441.71 of the Code of Iowa.
   2.   Words beginning with “B.”
      A.   “Block” means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely
bounded by streets, highways, or ways, except alleys; and the exterior boundary
or boundaries of the subdivision.
      B.   “Building lines” means shown on all lots intended for residential
use of any character, and on commercial and industrial lots when required by
ordinance. Such building lines shall not be less than required by the zoning
ordinance. Where the subdivided area is not under zoning control, the
Commission shall require building lines in accordance with the needs of each
addition.
   3.   Words beginning with “C.”
      A.   “Collector streets” means those which carry traffic from minor
streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for
circulation within such a development.
      B.   “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      C.   “Cul-de-sac” means a short, minor street, having one end open to
motor traffic, the other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular
turnaround.
   4.   Words beginning with “D.”
   5.   Words beginning with “E.”
      A.   “Easement” means a grant by the property owner of the use, for a
specific purpose, of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation, or a
certain person or persons, and within the limits of which the owner of the fee
shall not erect any permanent structures, but shall have the right to make any
other use of the land subject to such easement which is not inconsistent with
the rights of the grantee. Public utilities shall have the right to trim or
remove trees which interfere with the use of such easements.
      B.   “Engineer” means a registered engineer authorized to practice civil
engineering, as defined by the registration act of the State.
   6.   Words beginning with “F.”
   7.   Words beginning with “G.”
   8.   Words beginning with “H.”
   9.   Words beginning with “I.”
   10.   Words beginning with “J.”
   11.   Words beginning with “K.”
   12.   Words beginning with “L.”
      A.   “Lot” means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership
or for building development.
   13.   Words beginning with “M.”
      A.   “Major thoroughfare” means a street used primarily for fast, large
volume traffic.
      B.   “Marginal access street” means a street that is parallel to and
adjacent to a major thoroughfare or highway, and which provides access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
      C.   “Minor street” means a street used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
   14.   Words beginning with “N.”
   15.   Words beginning with “O.”
   16.   Words beginning with “P.”
      A.   “Performance bond” means a surety bond or cash deposit made out to
the City in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements which are
required by this title, said cost being estimated by the City Engineer, and
said surety bond or cash deposit being legally sufficient to secure to the City
that said improvements will be constructed in accordance with this title.
      B.   “Plat” means a map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider’s plan
of the subdivision is presented and which the subdivider submits for approval
and intends in final form to record.
   17.   Words beginning with “Q.”
   18.   Words beginning with “R.”
      A.   “Roadway” means that portion of the street available for vehicular
traffic, and where curbs are laid, the portion from back-to-back of curbs.
   19.   Words beginning with “S.”
      A.   “Subdivision” means the division of land into three or more lots for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building
development; or, any change in existing street lines or public easement. The
term, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or
to the land subdivided or the resubdivision of land heretofore divided or
platted into lots or other divisions of land, or, if a new street is involved,
any division of land.
      B.   “Surveyor” means a registered surveyor authorized to practice
surveying, as defined by the registration act of the State.
   20.   Words beginning with “T.”
   21.   Words beginning with “U.”
   22.   Words beginning with “V.”
   23.   Words beginning with “W.”
   24.   Words beginning with “X.”
   25.   Words beginning with “Y.”
   26.   Words beginning with “Z.”
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
 
12-2-1 Variations and Exceptions 12-2-5 Building Permits
12-2-2 Recording of Plat         12-2-6 Auditor’s Plat
12-2-3 Expenditure of City Funds 12-2-7 Fees
12-2-4 Changes and Amendments     
 
12-2-1 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   Whenever the tract proposed to be subdivided is of such unusual topography,
size, or shape, or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that
the strict application of the requirements contained in this chapter would
result in substantial hardships or injustices, the Council, upon recommendation
of the Commission, may vary or modify such requirements so that the subdivider
is allowed to develop the property in a reasonable manner; but so, at the same
time, the public welfare and interest of the City and surrounding area are
protected and the general intent and the spirit of this chapter are preserved.
12-2-2 RECORDING OF PLAT.
   No plat or any subdivision shall be recorded in the County Recorder’s office
or have any validity until it has been approved in the manner prescribed in
this chapter.
12-2-3 EXPENDITURE OF CITY FUNDS.
   The Council shall not permit any public improvements over which it has
control to be made from funds, or any City money expended for improvements or
maintenance on any street in any area that has been subdivided after the date
of adoption of this chapter, unless such subdivision and streets have been
approved in accordance with the provisions contained herein and accepted by the
Council as a public street.
12-2-4 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
   Any provisions of this chapter may be changed and amended, from time to
time, by the Council; provided, however, that such changes and amendments shall
not become effective until after study and report by the Commission and until
after a public hearing has been held, public notice of which shall be given in
a newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days prior to such hearing.
12-2-5 BUILDING PERMITS.
   Not more than two building permits shall be issued for each separate tract
of land existing as of November 24, 1970, or for any lot which has been created
by platting or replatting since such date (except for those lots zoned C-3 or
C-4), unless such tract or lot has been platted or replatted in accordance with
this chapter; provided, however, this section does not limit the number of
permits that may be issued for accessory buildings or additions to buildings
already existing on such tract or lot.
12-2-6 AUDITOR’S PLAT.
   Whenever the Polk County Auditor or Dallas County Auditor requests an
auditor’s plat, all provisions of this Code governing subdivisions shall apply
to such auditor’s plat; provided, however, the Commission, subject to the
approval of the Council, shall have the right to waive any such provisions in
this Code governing subdivisions applicable thereto, if there is on file with
the Clerk a copy of the request for such plat by the Polk County Auditor or the
Dallas County Auditor, and a letter from said Auditor stating that the plat as
submitted meets the requirements for which they have ordered the plat.
12-2-7 FEES.
   The following fees are established in connection with the review and
approval of a subdivision filing:
   1.   Preliminary Plat Review Fees. Before a preliminary plat may be
considered for approval by the Commission, the owner shall deposit with the
City Treasurer a fee of $100.00 for the first 25 lots, or less, and $2.00 per
lot thereafter, plus an amount equal to all actual costs incurred by the City
for legal services, engineering services, and services of other persons or
entities employed by the City (other than City staff personnel) for, or in any
way involved in, the review and inspection of said plat and public utility
extensions contemplated thereby, including, but not limited to, streets,
sidewalks, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, streetlights,
electric lines, gas lines, cable television lines, telephone lines, water
retention areas, and all other improvements intended for public use or benefit
to be constructed or caused to be constructed by the owner.
   2.   Installation of Public Utilities. The owner, as a fee for the
installation of public utilities prior to acceptance of the public utilities by
the City, shall pay to the City Treasurer all actual costs incurred by the City
for engineering services, and services of other persons or entities employed by
the City (other than City staff personnel) for, or in any way involved in, the
inspection and testing of the materials, construction, and installation of all
public utilities, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, water
lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, streetlights, electric lines,
gas lines, cable television lines, telephone lines, water retention areas and
all improvements intended for public use or benefit constructed or caused to be
constructed in the subdivision by the owner. After the construction of all
public utilities, but prior to acceptance of the same by the City, all actual
costs incurred by the City for engineering services and City staff services in
the review of the as built construction drawings shall be paid to the City by
the owner.
   3.   Final Plat Review Fees. Before a final plat may be considered for
approval by the Commission or Council, the owner shall deposit with the City
Treasurer a fee of $100.00 for the first 25 lots, or less, and $2.00 per lot
thereafter, plus an amount equal to all actual costs incurred by the City for
legal services, engineering services, and services of other persons or entities
employed by the City (other than City staff personnel) for, or in any way
involved in, the review and inspection of said plat and public utility
extensions contemplated thereby, including, but not limited to, streets,
sidewalks, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, streetlights,
electric lines, gas lines, cable television lines, telephone lines, water
retention areas, and all other improvements intended for public use or benefit
to be constructed or caused to be constructed by the owner.
   4.   Auditor’s Plat Review Fees. Before an auditor’s plat may be considered
for approval by the Commission or Council, the owner shall deposit with the
City Treasurer a fee of $150.00, plus an amount equal to all actual costs
incurred by the City for legal services, engineering services, and services of
other persons or entities employed by the City (other than City staff
personnel) for, or in any way involved in, the review and inspection of said
plat and public utility extensions contemplated thereby, including, but not
limited to, streets, sidewalks, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer
lines, streetlights, electric lines, gas lines, cable television lines,
telephone lines, water retention areas, and all other improvements intended for
public use or benefit to be constructed or caused to be constructed by the
owner.
CHAPTER 3
PRELIMINARY PLAT
 
12-3-1 Purpose; Advance Consideration 12-3-7 Contents of Preliminary Plat
12-3-2 Filing of Plat                 12-3-8 Attorney’s Opinion
12-3-3 Referral to Commission and     12-3-9 Soil Percolation Test
Engineer
12-3-4 Action by Commission           12-3-10 Proposal of Residential Common
                                      Neighborhood Development Theme
12-3-5 Public Hearing                  
12-3-6 Scale of Map                    
 
12-3-1 PURPOSE; ADVANCE CONSIDERATION.
   The preliminary plat of a subdivision is not intended to serve as a record
plan. Its purpose is to show on a map all facts needed to enable the Commission
to determine whether the proposed layout of the land in question is
satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interest. The subdivider, owner,
or representative may call at the office of the Commission in advance of the
preliminary plat in order to discuss the proposed subdivision and in order to
obtain information as to the requirements necessary for the approval of the
plat.
12-3-2 FILING OF PLAT.
   Whenever the owner of any tract or parcel of land within the City wishes to
subdivide or plat the same, said owner shall cause to be prepared a preliminary
plat of said subdivision, and shall submit three copies of said preliminary
plat and other information to the Clerk. The preliminary plat shall contain
such information and data as is outlined in Section
12-3-7 of this chapter.
12-3-3 REFERRAL TO COMMISSION AND ENGINEER.
   The Clerk shall immediately refer copies of the preliminary plat to the
Commission and to the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall carefully examine
said plat as to its compliance with the ordinances of the City, the existing
street system, and good engineering practices, and shall, as soon as possible,
submit findings to the Commission.
12-3-4 ACTION BY COMMISSION.
   After receiving the Engineer’s report, the Commission shall study the
preliminary plat and other material for conformity thereof to these
regulations. The Commission may confer with the subdivider on changes deemed
advisable and the kind and extent of such improvements to be made by the
subdivider. The Commission shall approve or reject such plat within 45 days
after the date of submission thereof to the Commission. If the Commission does
not act within 45 days, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be approved;
provided, however, that the subdivider may agree to an extension of the time
for a period not to exceed 60 days. The approval of the preliminary plat by the
Commission shall be null and void unless the final plat is presented to the
Commission within 180 days after date of approval.
12-3-5 PUBLIC HEARING.
   Before approving a preliminary plat, the Commission may, in its discretion,
hold a public hearing on the proposed plat, notice of which shall be given by
publication in a local newspaper of general distribution, or by posting notices
on the tract, or by sending notices to affected property owners by mail. Such
notice shall be given within seven days prior to the public hearing.
12-3-6 SCALE OF MAP.
   The scale of the map shall be one inch equals 50 feet on small subdivisions,
and one inch equals 100 feet on large subdivisions, unless otherwise approved
by the Commission.
12-3-7 CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   The preliminary plat as filed shall contain the following:
   1.   Identification. Name of subdivision, date, point of compass, scale, and
official description of the property being platted.
   2.   Owner/Developer. Name and address of recorded owner or developer.
   3.   Engineer. Name and address of engineer.
   4.   Existing Features. Existing buildings, railroads, underground
utilities, and other rights-of-way.
   5.   Streets. Location, names and widths of all existing and proposed roads,
alleys, streets, and highways in or adjoining the area being subdivided.
   6.   Adjoining Property. Location and names of adjoining subdivisions, and
the names of the owners of adjoining acreage parcels.
   7.   Lot Lines. Proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and the
square foot area of nonrectangular lots.
   8.   Public Use Areas. Areas dedicated for public use, such as schools,
parks, and playgrounds.
   9.   Contours. Contour lines at intervals of not more than five feet.
   10.   Setbacks. Building setback lines.
   11.   Boundaries. Boundaries of the proposed subdivision shall be indicated
by a heavy line.
   12.   Zoning. Zoning classification of the area.
   13.   Utilities. Proposed utility service, including the source of water
supply and provision for sewage disposal, drainage, and flood control.
   14.   Vicinity Sketch. A vicinity sketch at a legible scale showing the
relationship of the plat to its general surroundings.
   15.   Numbers. Lot numbers.
   16.   Area for Water Detention. Area for water detention two-year release on
100-year storm frequency.
12-3-8 ATTORNEY’S OPINION.
   An attorney’s opinion, in duplicate, showing that the fee title to the
subdivision land is in the owner as shown on the plat and any encumbrances that
may exist against said land shall be filed with the preliminary plat.
12-3-9 SOIL PERCOLATION TEST.
   Any plat that cannot reasonably be served by public sewer shall show results
of soil percolation tests made by the engineer preparing the plat. Such tests
shall be made in accordance with specifications approved by the City Engineer.
12-3-10 PROPOSAL OF RESIDENTIAL COMMON NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT THEME.
   A plan for a common neighborhood development theme may be proposed as an
accessory use for subdivision land located in residential zoning districts. The
plan shall be filed with the preliminary plat and include provisions for an
owners’ association consisting of the owners of at least 50 lots within the
subdivision which, pursuant to covenant satisfactory to the City, will be bound
to provide for the maintenance of the proposed structures and uses. The
features to be included in the plan shall be indicated on the preliminary plat
filed pursuant toSection
12-3-2 of this chapter.
CHAPTER 4
FINAL PLAT
 
12-4-1 Filing of Plat         12-4-5 Deeds to City
12-4-2 Contents of Final Plat 12-4-6 Certificates to Accompany Final Plat
12-4-3 Plans and Profiles     12-4-7 Approval of Residential Common
                              Neighborhood Development Theme
12-4-4 Protective Covenants    
 
12-4-1 FILING OF PLAT.
   When, and if, the preliminary plat is approved, the subdivider shall submit
14 copies of the final plat for review by the Commission. The scale of the map
shall be one inch equals 50 feet on small subdivisions, and one inch equals 100
feet on large subdivisions, unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
12-4-2 CONTENTS OF FINAL PLAT.
   The final plat as submitted shall contain the following:
   1.   Name. Name of subdivision.
   2.   Scale. Scale.
   3.   Compass Point. Compass point.
   4.   Geometrics. Curve data including delta angle, length of arc, degree of
curve, tangent.
   5.   Boundaries. Boundary lines of subdivided area with accurate distances,
bearings, and boundary angles.
   6.   Streets. Exact name, location, width, lot designation, and centerline
of all streets within the subdivision.
   7.   Utility Easements. Easements for public utilities showing width and use
intended.
   8.   Setbacks. Building setback lines with dimensions.
   9.   Legal Description. Official legal description of the property being
subdivided.
   10.   Lot Numbers. Lot numbers.
   11.   Certification. Certification of registered engineer or land surveyor.
   12.   Survey Data. Description and location of all permanent monuments set
in the subdivision, including ties to original government corners.
   13.   Area for On-Site Detention. Area for on-site detention for two-year
release on 100-year storm frequency.
   14.   House Number. House numbers.
12-4-3 PLANS AND PROFILES.
   Plans and profiles of all streets and alleys at a 50-foot horizontal scale
and five-foot vertical scale. Profiles shall show location, size, and grade of
all conduits, sewers, pipelines, etc., to be placed under the streets and
alleys. Profiles of east and west streets shall be drawn so that the west end
of the profile shall be at the left side of the drawing. Profiles of north and
south streets shall be drawn so that the south end of the profile shall be at
the left side of the drawing.
12-4-4 PROTECTIVE COVENANTS.
   Any protective covenants or restrictions to be imposed upon the plat shall
be submitted for approval with the final plat.
12-4-5 DEEDS TO CITY.
   A deed to the City, properly executed, for all streets intended as public
streets, and for any other property intended for public use shall be submitted
with the final plat.
12-4-6 CERTIFICATES TO ACCOMPANY FINAL PLAT.
   The following certificates shall be submitted with the final plat:
   1.   Owner. A certificate by the owner and spouse, if any, that the
subdivision is with the free consent and is in accordance with the desire of
the owners. This certificate must be signed and acknowledged by the owner and
spouse before some officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of deeds.
   2.   County Treasurer. A certificate from the County Treasurer that the
subdivision land is free from certified taxes and certified special
assessments.
   3.   Opinion. An opinion by an attorney at law who has examined the abstract
of title of the land being platted. The opinion shall state the names of the
owners and holders of mortgages, liens, or other encumbrances on the land being
platted and shall note the encumbrances, along with any bonds securing the
encumbrances.
   4.   Resolution. A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council
and for signatures of the Mayor and Clerk.
   5.   Performance Bond. A copy of the performance bond, if any.
12-4-7 APPROVAL OF RESIDENTIAL COMMON NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT THEME.
   A plan for a common neighborhood development theme may be approved as a
matter of absolute discretion by the Council as an accessory use for
subdivision land located in residential zoning districts. The plan shall be
filed with the final plat required by Section
12-4-1 of this chapter and shall include provisions for an owners’ association
consisting of the owners of at least 50 lots within the subdivision which,
pursuant to covenant satisfactory to the City, will be bound to provide for the
maintenance of the proposed structures and uses. The features to be included in
the plan shall be indicated on the final plat and on the plans and profiles
required by Section
12-4-3 of this chapter.
CHAPTER 5
DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS
12-5-1 Purpose And Intent    12-5-9 Sidewalks
12-5-2 Streets               12-5-10 Water And Sewers
12-5-3 Blocks                12-5-11 Utility Lines
12-5-4 Lots                  12-5-12 Acceptance By Council
12-5-5 Improvements Required 12-5-13 Bond In Lieu Of Construction
12-5-6 Grading               12-5-14 Waiver Of Requirements
12-5-7 Curb And Gutter       12-5-15 Recreational Facilities
12-5-8 Surfacing             12-5-16 Datum Plane
 
12-5-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The standards and details of design herein contained are intended only as
minimum requirements so that the general arrangement and layout of a
subdivision may be adjusted to a wide variety of circumstances. However, in the
design and development of a plat, the subdivider should use standards
consistent with the current edition of the Des Moines Metropolitan Design
Standards Manual and the site conditions so as to assure an economical,
pleasant, and durable neighborhood.
12-5-2 STREETS.
   The design of streets, alleys, and other public ways shall conform to the
following minimum design standards:
   1.   Comprehensive Plan. All proposed plats and subdivisions shall conform
to the Comprehensive Plan of the City.
   2.   Continuation of Existing Streets. Proposed streets shall provide for
continuation or completion of any existing streets (constructed or recorded) in
adjoining property, at equal or greater width, but not less than 50 feet in
width, and in similar alignment, unless variations are recommended by the
Commission.
   3.   Circulation. The street pattern shall provide ease of circulation
within the subdivision as well as convenient access to adjoining streets,
thoroughfares, or unsubdivided land, as may be required by the Commission. In a
case where a street will eventually be extended beyond the plat, but is
temporarily dead-ended, an interim turnaround may be required.
   4.   Street Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right
angles as possible.
   5.   Cul-De-Sac. Whenever a cul-de-sac is permitted, such street shall be no
longer than 600 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround
having a street property line diameter of at least 100 feet in the case of
residential subdivisions. The right-of-way width of the street leading to the
turnaround shall be a minimum of 50 feet. The property line at the intersection
of the turnaround and the lead-in portion of the street shall be rounded at a
radius of not less than 25 feet. A turnaround diameter greater than 100 feet
may be required by the Commission in the case of commercial or industrial
subdivisions, if it is deemed necessary.
   6.   Street Names. All newly platted streets shall be named and in a manner
conforming to the prevailing street naming system. A proposed street that is
obviously in alignment with other existing streets, or with a street that may
logically be extended, although the various portions be at a considerable
distance from each other, shall bear the same name. Names of new streets shall
be subject to the approval of the Commission in order to avoid duplication or
close similarity of names.
   7.   Physical and Cultural Features. In general, streets shall be platted
with appropriate regard for topography, creeks, wooded areas, and other natural
features which would lend themselves to attractive treatment.
   8.   Half Streets. Dedication of half-streets will be discouraged. Where
there exists a dedicated or platted half-street or alley adjacent to the tract
to be subdivided, the other half shall be platted, if deemed necessary by the
Commission.
   9.   Alleys. Alleys may be required in business areas and industrial
districts for adequate access to block interiors and for off-street loading and
parking purposes. Except where justified by unusual conditions, alleys will not
be approved in residential districts. Dead-end alleys shall be provided with a
means of turning around at the dead-end thereof.
   10.   Easements. Easements for utilities shall be provided along rear or
side lot lines or along alleys, if needed. Whenever any stream or important
surface watercourse is located in an area that is being subdivided, the
subdivider shall, at the subdivider’s own expense, make adequate provision for
straightening or widening the channel so that it will properly carry the
surface water, and shall provide and dedicate to the City an easement along
each side of the stream, which easement shall be for the purpose of widening,
improving, or protecting the stream. The width of such easement shall be not
less than 20 feet and the total width of the easement shall be adequate to
provide for any necessary channel relocation or straightening.
   11.   Neighborhood Plan. If any overall plan has been made by the Commission
for the neighborhood in which the proposed subdivision is located, the street
system of the latter shall conform in general thereto.
   12.   Unsubdivided Portion of Plat. Where the plat to be submitted includes
only part of the tract owned by the subdivider, the Commission may require
topography and a sketch of a tentative future street system of the unsubdivided
portion.
   13.   Major Thoroughfares. Where a new subdivision, except where justified
by limiting conditions, involves frontage on a heavy trafficway, limited
accessway, freeway, or parkway, the street layout shall provide motor access to
such frontage by one of the following means:
      A.   A parallel street, supplying frontage for lots backing onto the
trafficway.
      B.   A series of cul-de-sacs or short loops entered from and planned at
right angles to such a parallel street, with their terminal lots backing onto
the highway.
      C.   An access drive separated by a planting strip from the highway to
which motor access from the drive is provided at points suitably spaced.
      D.   A service drive or alley at the rear of the lots.
   14.   Deed Covenants. Where any one of the above-mentioned arrangements is
used, deed covenants or other means should prevent any private residential
driveways from having direct access to the trafficway.
   15.   Dedication. A deed to the City shall be given for all streets before
the same will be accepted for maintenance.
   16.   Railroads. If a railroad is involved, the subdivision plan should:
      A.   Be so arranged as to permit, where necessary, future grade
separations at highway crossings of the railroad.
      B.   Border the railroad with a parallel street at a sufficient distance
from it to permit deep lots to back onto the railroad; or form a buffer strip
for park, commercial, or industrial use.
      C.   Provide cul-de-sacs at right angles to the railroad so as to permit
lots to back there onto.
   17.   Street Widths. Streets shall have a width and cross section as shown
in the Comprehensive Plan for the type of street involved.
   18.   Street Grades. Streets and alleys shall be completed to grades which
have been officially determined or approved by the City Engineer. All streets
shall be graded to the full width of the right-of-way and adjacent side slopes
graded to blend with the natural ground level. The maximum grade shall not
exceed six percent for main and secondary thoroughfares, or 10 percent for
minor or local service streets. All changes in grades on major roads or
highways shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent
to 20 times the algebraic difference between the rates of grades, expressed in
feet per hundred, or greater, if deemed necessary by the City Engineer; for
secondary and minor streets, 15 times. The grade alignment and resultant
visibility, especially at intersections, shall be worked out in detail to meet
the approval of the City Engineer.
12-5-3 BLOCKS.
   Blocks shall comply with the following minimum design standards:
   1.   Length. No block shall be longer than 1,320 feet.
   2.   Corners. At street intersections, block corners shall be rounded with a
radius of not less than 15 feet; where, at any one intersection a curve radius
has been previously established, such radius shall be used as standard.
12-5-4 LOTS. . Lots shall comply with the following minimum design standards:
   1.   Corner Lots. Corner lots shall have a minimum width of 75 feet, except
in districts where wider lots are required by the zoning ordinance, in order to
permit adequate building setbacks on both front and side streets.
   2.   Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage lots, other than corner lots,
shall be prohibited, except where such lots back onto a major street or
highway, or except in the case of large commercial or industrial lots.
   3.   Lot Sizes. For the purpose of complying with minimum health standards,
the following minimum lot sizes shall be observed:
      A.   Lots which cannot be reasonably served by an existing public
sanitary sewer system and public water mains shall have a minimum width of 100
feet, measured at the building line, and an area of not less than 20,000 square
feet.
      B.   Lots which are not within a reasonable distance of a public sanitary
sewer system, but are connected to a public water supply main, shall have a
minimum width of 80 feet and an area of 10,000 square feet; except where other
lot sizes are specified by the zoning ordinance.
   4.   Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles
to the street or radial to curved streets. On large size lots, and except when
indicated by topography, lot lines shall be straight.
12-5-5 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
   The subdivider shall install and construct all improvements required by this
chapter. All required improvements shall be installed and constructed in
accordance with approved specifications and under the supervision of the
Council and to its satisfaction.
12-5-6 GRADING.
   All streets and alleys within the platted area which are dedicated for
public use shall be brought to the grade approved by the Council after
receiving the report and recommendations of the City Engineer.
12-5-7 CURB AND GUTTER.
   Curb and gutter shall be installed on all roadways in the plat being
dedicated for public use and shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete
in accordance with designs and specifications approved by the Council and at
grades established by the City Engineer.
12-5-8 SURFACING.
   All roadways being dedicated for public use shall be surfaced from curb to
curb. Surfacing shall be Portland cement concrete and shall be constructed in
accordance with designs and specifications approved by the Council at grades
established by the City Engineer.
12-5-9 SIDEWALKS.
   Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all streets being dedicated
for public use. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet in width and shall be
constructed of Portland cement concrete in accordance with designs and
specifications approved by the Council and at grades established by the City
Engineer. The requirement ofSection
12-5-12 of this chapter, as it relates to the construction of sidewalks, may be
waived by the Council in its discretion; provided, however, that in no event
shall a Certificate of Occupancy be issued on a lot within a platted area until
all sidewalks on such lot that are required by the plat are constructed.
12-5-10 WATER AND SEWERS.
   Water mains, sanitary sewer lines, and storm sewers and their appurtenances
shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the plans and
specifications adopted by the Council. Water and sewer lines shall be made
accessible to each lot.
12-5-11 UTILITY LINES.
   All utility lines, except electric lines of nominal voltage in excess of
15,000 volts, shall be installed underground. The subdivider shall be
responsible for making the necessary arrangements with the utility companies
for installation of such facilities. Such utility lines shall be installed in
such a manner so as not to interfere with other underground utilities.
Incidental appurtenances, such as pad mounted electrical equipment and its
enclosures, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meters and meter cabinets may be
placed aboveground but shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous
to the public and, if located in City right-of-way, as approved by the Council.
All underground utility lines shall be installed in accordance with applicable
federal and State statutes and regulations, and the Electrical Code of the
City. The Council may waive all or any part of the requirements of this section
if the Council, in its sole discretion, finds that soil, topographical, or
other conditions make underground installation impracticable.
12-5-12 ACCEPTANCE BY COUNCIL.
   Before the Council approves the final plat, all of the foregoing
improvements shall be constructed and accepted by formal resolution of the
Council. Before passage of said resolution of acceptance, the City Engineer
shall report that said improvements meet all City specifications and ordinances
or other City requirements, and agreements between the subdivider and the City.
12-5-13 BOND IN LIEU OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The requirement of Section
12-5-12 of this chapter may be waived if the subdivider will post a performance
bond or certified check with the Council guaranteeing that said improvements
will be constructed within a period of one year from final acceptance of the
plat. However, if a performance bond is posted, final acceptance of the plat
will not constitute final acceptance by the City of any improvements to be
constructed. Improvements will be accepted only after their construction has
been completed, and no public funds will be expended in the subdivision until
such improvements have been completed and accepted by the City.
12-5-14 WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS.
   The Council may waive the requirements for the construction and installation
of some or all of the foregoing improvements in cases of resubdivisions where
only the size, shape, and arrangement of the lots is being changed and no new
streets are required, and in cases of dedications of land or rights-of-way to
public use where such dedication is in excess of the needs of the subdivision
and is desired by a public agency in lieu of a purchase or condemnation
proceeding.
12-5-15 RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.
   1.   Definition. For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
“development” or “developing” means any land subdivided under other ordinances
of the City or a tract of land otherwise developed, which is to be used for
residential purposes and which is more than one-half acre in size. The person
that is subdividing the land shall be referred to herein as the “developer.”
   2.   Design. In the design of the plat of a subdivision or preparation of
the site plan for development, consideration shall be given to adequate
provision of and correlation with public and private recreation areas.
   3.   Dedication of Land. Within the corporate limits of the City, the
developer shall provide and dedicate to the public adequate land to provide for
the recreational needs of the development. The dedication of land to the City
shall be accomplished by providing the City with a properly executed warranty
deed conveying the required land to the City without cost to the City.
   4.   Determination of Amount of Land.
      A.   The amount of land to be provided for recreational facilities shall
be determined based upon: a) the projected population of the residential land
shown on the preliminary plat or site plan; and b) the amount of park land
existing in the City per 1,000 residents. For purposes of this calculation, the
projected population of residential land shall be calculated as follows:
         (1)   For single-family residences: 2.7 persons per household.
         (2)   For multi-family residences: 1.25 persons per household.
         (3)   For townhome residences: 2 persons per household.
      B.   The amount of park land, excluding regional parks, existing in the
City per 1,000 residents shall be determined annually at the beginning of each
calendar year, and the Council shall, by resolution, establish the amount of
park land to be dedicated per resident (the “per resident park dedication
requirement.”) The per resident park dedication requirement shall be 8.36 acres
per 1,000 residents or 0.00836 acre per resident, until revised by resolution
of the Council. For purposes of illustration, if a development is projected to
contain 100 single-family residences, the projected population for the
development is 270 persons. The amount of land dedicated for park land would be
calculated as 0.00836 acre per resident times 270 projected residents equals
2.26 acres.
   5.   Alternative Means of Dedication of Land; Master Agreement. If the land
to be developed is a part of a larger area being developed by a single
developer or by a group of developers who enter into a single agreement with
the City, the developer or developers may enter into a written agreement with
the City providing for the dedication of the land relating to the present
development in a future subdivision plat, which land shall be dedicated for
recreational facilities serving the larger area under development by the
developer or developers. The written agreement between the City and the
developer or developers shall establish the timetable for the dedication of the
land by the developer. The amount of land dedicated and the method of
dedication shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   6.   Applicability to Existing Subdivisions or Developments. The
requirements of this section are not applicable to:
      A.   Existing developments which are presently constructed.
      B.   Parcels of land which have previously been developed with
residential units and are being redeveloped to permit construction of
additional residences.
      C.   Developments for which building permits have been issued.
   7.   Applicability to Land Zoned PUD.
   Land zoned PUD (Planned Unit Development) may include residential uses,
neighborhood commercial uses, and neighborhood office uses which encourage the
more efficient use of land through the incorporation of both public and private
open spaces to accent and enhance both the architectural and natural features
of a development and provide for natural stormwater management systems. A
development plan and development agreement are required for all Planned Unit
Development Districts. The City and the developer of land zoned PUD shall
address the private and public open space and recreation area requirements and
the means to satisfy such requirements in the development agreement. All PUD
Districts shall comply with the intent and purpose of Subsection 4 of this
section; however, the application of the standard to PUD Zoning Districts may
be more flexible in order to create equivalent recreational facilities while
accommodating the mixed uses present in such developments.
12-5-16 DATUM PLANE.
   The United States coast and geodetic survey datum plane is hereby
established and adopted as the City datum plane. The United States coast and
geodetic survey datum plane shall be used as the reference plane in
establishing all elevations and grades within the City.
 
