Code of Ordinances
of the
City of
DeWitt, Iowa
Prepared By:
Local Government Professional Services, Inc.
DBA Iowa Codification
P. O. Box 244
114 E 5th Street
Storm Lake, Iowa 50588
(641) 355-4072
www.sc-ic.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF THE
CITY OF DEWITT, IOWA
Adopted March 4, 2024, by Ordinance No.2024-02
SUPPLEMENT RECORD
SUPPLEMENT                        ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No. Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No. Date Subject
SUPPLEMENT                        ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No. Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No. Date     Subject
Mar-24    Ch.                     2024-01  1-15-24  Mobile Food Vendors
          48
                                  2024-02  3-4-24   Adopting Ordinance
Jun-24    92.02                   2024-03  5-7-24   Water Rates
          99.04                   2024-04  5-7-24   Sanitary Sewer Rates
Dec-24    Ch. 165                 2024-05  8-19-24  Zoning Map
          50.08                   2024-06  10-21-24 Adult Establishment
                                                    Nuisances
          5.02                    2024-07  10-21-24 Bond Requirements
          5.06                    2024-08  10-21-24 Electronic Meetings
          7.05(4)                 2024-09  10-21-24 Operating Budget
                                                    Preparation
          60.02;                  2024-10  10-21-24 Pedestrians' Right-of-Way
          60.05
          18.03                   2024-11  10-21-24 Publication of Minutes
          136.04(5)               2024-12  10-21-24 Sidewalk Liability
          Ch. 43                  2024-13  10-7-24  Camping Regulations
Jun-25    55.09                   2024-14  12-2-24  Vicious Dogs
          92.02                   2025-01  2-3-25   Water Rates
          Ch. 127                 2025-02  5-5-25   Mobile Food Vendors
Jul-25    41.14(3)                2025-03  6-16-25  Fireworks
Dec-25    Ch.                     2025-04  8-4-25   Animal Protection and
          55                                        Control
          Ch.                     2025-05  10-20-25 Zoning Map
          165
          Ch.                                       DeWitt Economic Develompent
          10                      2025-06  11-17-25 District (Deleting
                                                    Property)
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
 
1.01 Title                  1.08 Amendments
1.02 Definitions            1.09 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers            1.10 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity              1.11 Severability
1.05 Personal Injuries      1.12 Warrants
1.06 Rules of Construction  1.13 General Standards for Action
1.07 Extension of Authority 1.14 Standard Penalty
1.01   TITLE.
This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of DeWitt, Iowa.
1.02   DEFINITIONS.
Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined in the Code
of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council
or repugnant to the context of the provision. Other words and phrases used
herein have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in
another portion of this Code of Ordinances or unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the
context of the provision:
   1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.
   2.   “City” means the city of DeWitt, Iowa.
   3.   “Clerk” means the city clerk of DeWitt, Iowa.
   4.   “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a
specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the
Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
   5.   “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of
DeWitt, Iowa.
   6.   “Council” means the city council of DeWitt, Iowa.
   7.   “County” means Clinton County, Iowa.
   8.   “IAC” means the Iowa Administrative Code.
   9.   “May” confers a power.
   10.   “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution, or motion.
   11.   “Must” states a requirement.
   12.   “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   13.   “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of DeWitt, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance
adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
   14.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other
legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar
representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
   15.   “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
   16.   “Shall” imposes a duty.
   17.   “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge
of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
   18.   “State” means the State of Iowa.
   19.   “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
   20.   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa
have their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the
provision.
1.03   CITY POWERS.
The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if not
inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power and
perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges, and property of the City and of its residents, and to preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its
residents, and each and every provision of this Code of Ordinances shall be
deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance of the
foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04   INDEMNITY.
The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by
making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for any injury to or death
of any person or persons whomsoever, and any loss of or damage to property
whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising
from or related to, directly, indirectly, or remotely, the issuance of the
permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such
applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such applicant, to abide by
or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms
and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such
application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents, and
employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury, or death,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing.
The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or
license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the
City, whether expressly recited therein or not.
1.05   PERSONAL INJURIES.
When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to have
been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person by
whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the
pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the
court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from
which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is
liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person
to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any
action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the
defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City
to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage
or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified to
recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by
the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the rules of statutory
construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to
ascertain the intent of the Council, with the understanding that the term
“statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term
“ordinance” when applied to this Code of Ordinances.
1.07   EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY.
Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a
provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed as
authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate, or a duly
authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1.08   AMENDMENTS.
All ordinances that amend, repeal, or in any manner affect this Code of
Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection, or
paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09   CATCHLINES AND NOTES.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code of Ordinances, titles,
headings (chapter, section, and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references,
and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself,
contained in this Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law and
are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement, or clarify the contents
of a section.
1.10   ALTERING CODE.
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of this Code of Ordinances, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code of
Ordinances in any manner that will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented.
1.11   SEVERABILITY.
If any section, provision, or part of this Code of Ordinances is adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of
this Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof
not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
1.12   WARRANTS.
If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure, or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful
right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or
conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the
County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative
search warrant. No owner, operator or occupant, or any other person having
charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure,
building, or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search
warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.
1.13   GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION.
Whenever this Code of Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the Council
or any commission, board, or officer or employee of the City and does not
specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be
exercised in light of the following standard: The discretionary power to grant,
deny, or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and
circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due
consideration shall be given to the impact upon the public health, safety and
welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under
similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1.14   STANDARD PENALTY.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code of Ordinances for
violation of any particular provision, section, or chapter, any person failing
to perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise violating
any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted
herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of at least
$105.00 but not to exceed $855.00.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
 
2.01 Title                              2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government                 2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties of City Officers 2.06 Copies on File
2.01   TITLE.
This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of DeWitt, Iowa.† 1
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: An ordinance adopting a charter for the City was passed and
1 approved by the Council on June 30, 1975. A City election held on November 3,
  2009, approved the change of the Mayor’s term from two years to four years.
2.02   FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03   POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City.
2.04   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
The Council consists of three Council Members elected at large and one Council
Member from each of two wards as established by this Code of Ordinances,
elected for overlapping terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05   TERM OF MAYOR.
The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06   COPIES ON FILE.
The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the official
records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of the
charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1[3])
CHAPTER 3
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
 
3.01 Municipal Infraction    3.04 Civil Citations
3.02 Environmental Violation 3.05 Alternative Relief
3.03 Penalties               3.06 Alternative Penalties
3.01   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein adopted
by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by
the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically provided under
State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or
a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, is a
municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.† 2
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
 
Notes
2 † EDITOR’S NOTE: For criminal penalty for violations of this Code of
  Ordinances, see Section 1.14.
3.02   ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION.
A municipal infraction that is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa
or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the Department of
Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental violation.
However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable until the City
has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or
to the following specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
   1.   A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
   2.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial
production or manufacturing of grain products.
   3.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production
or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
3.03   PENALTIES.
A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
   1.   Standard Civil Penalties.
      A.   First offense – not to exceed $750.00.
      B.   Each repeat offense – not to exceed $1,000.00.
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat
offense.
   2.   Special Civil Penalties.
      A.   A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an
industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each
day a violation exists or continues.
      B.   A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is
punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence.
However, an environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of
the following conditions are satisfied:
         (1)   The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup,
cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a
shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to
reduce or eliminate the violation.
         (2)   The City is notified of the violation within 24 hours from the
time that the violation begins.
         (3)   The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight
hours.
3.04   CIVIL CITATIONS.
Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may issue
a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. A copy of the
citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil
Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s
last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the
manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the
conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be
retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the
Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a
civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])
   1.   The name and address of the defendant.
   2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer
issuing the citation.
   3.   The location and time of the infraction.
   4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief
sought, or both.
   5.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
   6.   The time and place of court appearance.
   7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
   8.   The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the
condition of the property, including a building code violation, a local housing
regulation violation, a housing code violation, or a public health or safety
violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of the District Court, the
City shall also file the citation in the office of the County Treasurer.
3.05   ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.
Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the
City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such
alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement
or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[9])
3.06   ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES.
This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal citation
for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal penalties
are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the
authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances by
criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[12])
CHAPTER 4
BOUNDARIES
 
4.01 Corporate Limits                  4.03 Boundaries of Wards and Precincts
4.02 Division Into Wards and Precincts
4.01   CORPORATE LIMITS.
The corporate limits of the City are described as follows:
Beginning at the NW corner of the NW ¼ of the SE ¼ of Section 01, Township
Eighty-one North, Range Three East of the 5th P.M. Continue east along north
boundary to NE corner of said section; thence south along east boundary to SE
corner of said section; thence east along north boundary of the SE ¼ of the SE
¼ of section 01 to the NE corner of said section; thence south along east
boundary to the SE corner of said section; thence west along south boundary to
the SW corner of said section; thence south along west boundary to the SW
corner of the NE ¼ of the NE ¼ of Section 12, Township Eighty-one North, Range
Three East of the 5th P.M.; thence east along the south boundary of said
section to the center of the 218th Street ROW; thence south and east along the
center of 218th Street ROW, to include west half of the ROW, to where it
intersects with the north boundary of the NW ¼ of the SW ¼ of Section 07,
Township Eighty-one North, Range Four East of the 5th P.M.; thence east along
north boundary of the South half of Section 07, Township Eighty-one North,
Range Four East of the 5th P.M. to the NE corner of said section; thence south
along the east boundary of the NE ¼ of the SE ¼ of Section 07 to the SE corner
of said section; thence east along the north boundary of the SW ¼ of the SW ¼
of Section 08, Township Eighty-one North, Range Four East of the 5th P.M.
extended to a point 327.88 ft. east of the NE corner of said section; thence S
1 degree 50 minutes 14 seconds E to point of intersection with the north
boundary of the NE ¼ of the NW ¼ of Section 17, Township Eighty-one North,
Range Four East of the 5th P.M.; thence east along said north boundary to the
NE corner of said section; thence south along east boundary of said section
956.14 ft.; thence S 88 degrees 2 minutes 26 seconds W for 200 ft.; thence S 1
degree 57 minutes 34 seconds E for 254.9 ft. to center of 245th St. / E. 11th
Street ROW; thence follow center of said ROW west for 556 ft.; thence S 1
degree 57 minutes 57 seconds E to point of intersection with north boundary of
the SE ¼ of the SW ¼ of Section 17, Township Eighty-one North, Range Four East
of the 5th P.M.; thence east along said north boundary to the NE corner of said
section; thence north along west boundary of the NW ¼ of the SE ¼ of Section
17, Township Eighty-one North, Range Four East of the 5th P.M. to the NW corner
of said section; thence east along north boundary of said section continuing to
the east boundary of 300th Avenue ROW; thence south along said ROW boundary
line to north boundary of 250th Street ROW; thence east along said ROW boundary
to east ROW boundary of 300th Ave; thence south along east ROW boundary of
300th Ave, continuing to a point of intersection with the south boundary of
Highway 30 ROW; thence west along south Highway 30 ROW boundary to a point of
intersection with the east boundary of the NW ¼ of the SE ¼ of Section 19,
Township Eighty-one North, Range Four East of the 5th P.M.; thence continue
south along said boundary to the SE corner of said section; thence west along
south boundary of said section continuing to the SW corner of the NE ¼ of the
SW ¼ of Section 19, Township Eighty-one North, Range Four East of the 5th P.M.;
thence north along west boundary of said section to a point of intersection
with the south boundary of Highway 30 ROW; thence west along said ROW boundary
to a point of intersection with the east boundary of Highway 61 ROW; thence
follow east boundary of Highway 61 ROW south to its intersection with the south
boundary of the SW ¼ of the SW ¼ of Section 24, Township Eighty-one North,
Range Three East of the 5th P.M.; thence west on said boundary continuing to
the intersection of the west boundary of Highway 61 ROW; thence north along
said ROW boundary to its intersection with the south boundary of the SE ¼ of
the NE ¼ of Section 14, Township Eighty-one North, Range Three East of the 5th
P.M.; thence west along said south boundary to the SW corner of said section;
thence north along the west boundary of said section for 954.8 ft.; thence
going west follow the south ROW boundary for Highway 30 but exclude the south
75 feet thereof, to the west boundary of the SW ¼ of the NW ¼ of Section 14,
Township Eighty-one North, Range Three East of the 5th P.M.; thence continue
north along said boundary to the intersection of the north boundary of Highway
30 ROW; thence continue east along said ROW boundary to the west boundary of NE
¼ of the NE ¼ of Section 14; thence north on said boundary to the NW corner of
said section; thence east on north boundary of said section to the intersection
of the west boundary of Highway 61 ROW; thence follow said boundary north to
the intersection of the north boundary of the NE ¼ of the SE ¼ of Section 11,
Township Eighty-one North, Range Three East of the 5th P.M.; thence east along
said boundary and adjacent boundaries to the intersection of the east line of
224th Street; thence follow east line of 224th St for 1,597.0 ft.; thence
continue straight north to the intersection of the north boundary of the SW ¼
of the NE ¼ of Section 12, Township Eight-one North, Range Three East of the
5th P.M.; thence west along said boundary for 39 ft.; thence S 8 degrees 19
minutes 36 seconds W for 256.30 ft.; thence S 36 degrees 22 minutes 29 seconds
W for 81.29 ft.; thence S 36 degrees 22 minutes 29 seconds W for 118.71 ft.;
thence S 40 degrees 27 minutes 29 seconds W for 156 ft.; thence S 35 degrees 26
minutes 33 seconds W for 118.16 ft.; thence S 28 degrees 35 minutes 32 seconds
W for 166.93 ft.; thence N 82 degrees 55 minutes 31 seconds W for 104 ft.;
thence N 15 degrees 40 minutes 00 seconds E for 501.04 ft.; thence N 36 degrees
22 minutes 29 seconds E for 20.55 ft.; thence N 16 degrees 50 minutes 00
seconds E approximately 268 ft. to the intersection of the north boundary of
the SW ¼ of the NE ¼ of Section 12, Township Eighty-one North, Range Three East
of the 5th P.M.; then follow said boundary west for 173.3 ft.; thence S 13
degrees 15 minutes 01 seconds W for 466.55 ft.; thence S 28 degrees 12 minutes
16 seconds W for 369.20 ft.; thence N 39 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds W for
51.69 ft.; thence N 47 degrees 09 minutes 00 seconds W to west boundary of said
section approximately 391 ft.; thence north on said boundary to NW corner of
said section; continue north on west boundary of NW ¼ of the NE ¼ of section 12
for 1,157.94 ft.; thence S 88 degrees 08 minutes 10 seconds W for 620.585 ft.;
thence N 0 degrees 20 minutes 28 seconds W for 112.9 ft.; thence N 75 degrees
46 minutes 34 seconds W for 184.06 ft.; thence N 89 degrees 10 minutes 43
seconds W to the NE corner of the NW ¼ of the NW ¼ of Section 12; thence follow
north boundary of said section for 1,152.4 ft.; thence N 1 degree 47 minutes 10
seconds W to north boundary of the SW ¼ of the SW ¼ of Section 01, Township
Eighty-one North, Range Three East of the 5th P.M.; thence east along said
boundary for 1,493.2 ft.; thence N 1 degree 35 minutes 09 seconds W for 648.21
ft.; thence N 88 degrees 41 minutes 17 seconds E to the intersection of the
west boundary of the NW ¼ of the SE ¼ of Section 01; thence N 1 degree 43
minutes 07 seconds W to point of beginning.
4.02   DIVISION INTO WARDS AND PRECINCTS.
The City is divided into two wards and two precincts, to be known as First
Ward, First Precinct and Second Ward, First Precinct.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 and 372.13[7])
4.03   BOUNDARIES OF WARDS AND PRECINCTS.
The division line between the 1st Ward, 1st Precinct and 2nd Ward, 1st Precinct
within the City begins at the point where the centerline of South 6th Avenue
meets the southern corporate limits, and thence north on said centerline to the
centerline of Lake Street, thence west on said centerline to the centerline of
South 9th Avenue, thence north on said centerline and continuing on said
centerline of 9th Avenue to the centerline of 3rd Street, thence west on said
centerline to the centerline of 10th Avenue, thence north on said centerline to
the centerline of 8th Street, thence east on said centerline to the centerline
of 9th Avenue, thence north on said centerline to the centerline of 12th
Street, thence east on said centerline to the centerline of 8th Avenue, thence
northerly along said centerline to the centerline of Northridge Road, then
northwesterly along said centerline to the north corporate limits. The area
lying east thereof is the 1st Ward, 1st Precinct; and the area lying west
thereof is the 2nd Ward, 1st Precinct.
[IMAGE][The next page is 31]
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
 
5.01 Oaths                 5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds                 5.08 Resignations
5.03 Powers and Duties     5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04 Books and Records     5.10 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.11 Gifts
5.06 Meetings
5.01   OATHS.
The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for
office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The
oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after such officer is certified as
elected but not later than noon of the first day that is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer
was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
   2.   Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear
that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best
of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in DeWitt
as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
   3.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to
administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the
business of their respective offices:
      A.   Mayor
      B.   City Clerk
      C.   Members of all boards, commissions, or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02   BONDS.
Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
   1.   Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or
blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk,
Treasurer, and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and
advisable except as allowed in Subsection 5.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
   2.   Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
   3.   Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be
filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23(6))
   4.   Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of
Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City
officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24(1)(a))
   5.   Insurance Policy in Lieu of Bond. In lieu of a bond, a public officer
required to obtain a bond pursuant to Chapter 64 of the Code of Iowa may obtain
an insurance policy in an amount not less than the amounts required of a bond.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.3)
(Section 5.02 – Ord. 2024-07 – Dec. 24 Supp.)
5.03   POWERS AND DUTIES.
Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by the
Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04   BOOKS AND RECORDS.
All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open to
examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law
expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.
Access to public records that are combined with data processing software shall
be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 and 22.3A)
5.05   TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.
Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all books,
papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06   MEETINGS.
All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held
in accordance with the following:
   1.   Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section.
      A.   “Closed session” means a meeting to which all members of the public
do not have access as allowed by Section 21.5 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   “Hybrid meeting” means a meeting involving both remote participation
and in-person participation by members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(a))
      C.   “Open session” means a meeting to which all members of the public
have access.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.2(3))
      D.   “Remote participation” means real-time participation by a remotely
located individual in a meeting which is being held in a different physical
location using integrated audio, video, and other digital tools.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(b))
      E.   “Reasonable notice” means advising the news media who have filed a
request for notice with the governmental body and posting the notice on a
bulletin board or other prominent place which is easily accessible to the
public and clearly designated for that purpose at the principal office of the
body holding the meeting, or if not such office exists, at the building in
which the meeting is to be held.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4(1))
      F.   “Teleconference participation” means participation using audio
conference tools involving multiple participants in at least two separate
locations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(c))
      G.   “Virtual meeting” means a meeting involving real-time interaction
using integrated audio, video, and other digital tools, in which participants
do not share a physical location.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(d))
   2.   Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice of the time, date, and place of
each meeting and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
   3.   Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
   4.   Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time,
and place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The
minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to
indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member present shall
be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to
public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
   5.   Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote
of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting
and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
   6.   Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices
at any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
   7.   Electronic Meetings. A governmental body shall provide for hybrid
meetings, teleconference participation, virtual meetings, remote participation,
and other hybrid options for the members of the governmental body to
participate in official meetings. A governmental body conducting a meeting
pursuant to this subsection shall comply with all of the provisions of Chapter
21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
(Section 5.06 – Ord. 2024-08 – Dec. 24 Supp.)
5.07   CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in
any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to
be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A
contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of
this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
   1.   Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City
officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding
of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3a])
   2.   Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3b])
   3.   City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as
Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3c])
   4.   Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an
interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind
described in Subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contracts are made
by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened, or if the
remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the
contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement
or preparation of any part of the contract. The competitive bid qualification
of this subsection does not apply to a contract for professional services not
customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3e])
   5.   Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3f])
   6.   Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has
an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee
was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3g])
   7.   Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil defense
volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3h])
   8.   Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five
percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate
family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3i])
   9.   Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3d])
   10.   Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this
section, for the purchase of goods or services that benefit a City officer or
employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a
cumulative total purchase price of $6,000.00 in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3j])
   11.   Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a
utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential
City utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3k])
   12.   Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other
obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from the City
but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may not be the
original underwriter, purchaser, or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3l])
5.08   RESIGNATIONS.
An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a resignation
in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and considered. A
person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to
the same office during the time for which the person was elected if, during
that time, the compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09   REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to
City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the
appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall
give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent
by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk
within 30 days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public
hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The
hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date the request is filed,
unless the person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10   VACANCIES.
A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled in
accordance with Section 372.13[2] of the Code of Iowa.
5.11   GIFTS.
Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series
of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted
donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or
more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a
public official, public employee, or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
 
6.01 Nominating Method to Be Used        6.05 Qualification
6.02 Candidacy                           6.06 Time Held
6.03 Run-Off Election in Lieu of Primary 6.07 Candidates Elected
6.04 Run-Off Election Procedure
6.01   NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.
All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the
provisions of Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02   CANDIDACY.
An eligible elector of the City may become a candidate for an elective City
office by filing with the County Commissioner of Elections a valid petition
requesting that the elector’s name be placed on the ballot for that office, or
by filing a valid petition with the designated City Clerk. The petition must be
signed by eligible electors equal in number to at least two percent of those
who voted to fill the same office at the last regular City election, but not
less than 10 persons.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
6.03   RUN-OFF ELECTION IN LIEU OF PRIMARY.
A run-off election shall be held in lieu of a primary election for the choosing
of persons for elective offices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.6)
6.04   RUN-OFF ELECTION PROCEDURE.
A run-off election shall be held only for positions unfilled because of failure
of a sufficient number of candidates to receive a majority vote in the regular
City election.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
6.05   QUALIFICATION.
Candidates who do not receive a majority of the votes cast for an office, but
who receive the highest number of votes cast for that office in the regular
City election, to the extent of twice the number of unfilled positions, are
candidates in the run-off elections.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
6.06   TIME HELD.
Run-off elections shall be held four weeks after the date of the regular City
election and shall be conducted in the same manner as regular City elections,
except that the County Board of Supervisors required to canvass the vote of the
runoff election pursuant to Section 50.24 of the Code of Iowa shall meet to
canvass the vote on the Thursday following the runoff election.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
6.07   CANDIDATES ELECTED.
Candidates in the run-off election who receive the highest number of votes cast
for each office on the ballot are elected to the extent necessary to fill the
positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
 
7.01 Purpose         7.05 Operating Budget Preparation
7.02 Finance Officer 7.06 Budget Amendments
7.03 Cash Control    7.07 Accounting
7.04 Fund Control    7.08 Financial Reports
7.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and
regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02   FINANCE OFFICER.
The Director of Finance is the finance and accounting officer of the City and
is responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
7.03   CASH CONTROL.
To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the following shall
apply:
   1.   Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any
City officer shall be deposited through the office of the finance officer. If
any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check
drawn by the finance officer and approved by the Council only upon such
officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law,
ordinance, or Council directive.
   2.   Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be
promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not
exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or
invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law,
including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, and 12C.1)
   3.   Petty Cash Fund. The finance officer shall be custodian of a petty cash
fund for the payment of small claims for minor purchases, collect-on-delivery
transportation charges, and small fees customarily paid at the time of
rendering a service, for which payments the finance officer shall obtain some
form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor or agent. At such
time as the petty cash fund is approaching depletion, the finance officer shall
draw a check for replenishment in the amount of the accumulated expenditures
and said check and supporting detail shall be submitted to the Council as a
claim in the usual manner for claims and charged to the proper funds and
accounts. It shall not be used for salary payments or other personal services
or personal expenses.
   4.   Change Fund. The finance officer is authorized to draw a check or
warrant on the General Fund for establishing a change fund for the purpose of
making change without commingling other funds to meet the requirements of the
office. Said change fund shall be the responsibility of the finance officer and
the finance officer shall maintain the integrity of the fund.
7.04   FUND CONTROL.
There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in
accordance with the following:
   1.   Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the
proper fund as required by law, ordinance, or resolution.
   2.   Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such
disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance, or resolution, was properly
budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
   3.   Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency
Fund.
(545 IAC 2.5[2])
   4.   Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to
meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by
the original budget or a budget amendment.
(545 IAC 2.5[3])
   5.   Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited
by State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital
Improvements Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original
budget or a budget amendment.
(545 IAC 2.5[4])
   6.   Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund
may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund, by
resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all required
transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in accordance with the
terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the
Utility or Enterprise Fund. A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the
operating account or the unrestricted net position calculated in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, after adding back the net
pension and other postemployment benefits, liabilities, and the related
deferred inflows of resources and deducting the related deferred outflows of
resources, in excess of:
      A.   The amount of the expenses of disbursements for operating and
maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three months; and
      B.   The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted
accounts for the succeeding three months.
(545 IAC 2.5[5])
   7.   Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of
each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05   OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION.
The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with
the following:
   1.   Proposal Prepared. The finance officer is responsible for preparation
of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption
by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
   2.   Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions, and other
administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and
administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the finance officer
for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such form as
required by the Council.
   3.   Submission to Council. The finance officer shall submit the completed
budget proposal to the Council each year at such time as directed by the
Council.
   4.   Annual Statement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 24.2A(2))
      A.   On or before 4:00 p.m. on March 5 of each year, the City shall file,
with the Department of Management, a report containing all necessary
information for the Department of Management to compile and calculate amounts
required to be included in the statement mailed under Paragraph B.
      B.   Not later than March 15, the County Auditor, using information
compiled and calculated by the Department of Management shall send to each
property owner or taxpayer within the County, by regular mail, an individual
statement containing all of the required information as provided under Section
24.2A(2)(b)(1-10) of the Code of Iowa.
      C.   The Department of Management shall prescribe the form for the report
required under Paragraph A, the statements to be mailed under Paragraph B, and
the public hearing notice required under Paragraph D.
      D.   The Council shall set a time and place for a public hearing on the
City’s proposed property tax amount for the budget year and the City’s
information included in the statements under Paragraph B. The proposed property
tax hearing shall be set on a date on or after March 20 of the budget year
immediately preceding the budget year for which the tax is being proposed. At
the hearing, the Council shall receive oral or written testimony from any
resident or property owner of the City. This public hearing shall be separate
from any other meeting of the Council, including any other meeting or public
hearing relating to the City’s budget, and other business of the City that is
not related to the proposed property tax amounts and the information in the
statements shall not be conducted at the public hearing. After all testimony
has been received and considered, the governing body may decrease, but not
increase, the proposed property tax amount to be included in the City’s budget.
         (1)   Notice of the public hearing shall be published not less than 10
nor more than 20 days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper published at least
once weekly and having general circulation in the City. However, if the City
has a population of 200 or less, publication may be made by posting in three
public places in the City.
         (2)   Notice of the hearing shall also be posted and clearly
identified on the City’s internet site for public viewing beginning on the date
of the newspaper publication and shall be maintained on the City’s internet
site with all such prior year notices.
         (3)   Additionally, if the City maintains a social media account on
one or more social media applications, the public hearing notice or an
electronic link to the public hearing notice shall be posted on each such
account on a date no later than the date of publication of the notice.
         (4)   Failure of a newspaper to publish a required notice under this
paragraph shall not be considered a failure of a political subdivision to
provide required notice under this paragraph if all of the following conditions
are met:
            a.   Notice of the public hearing was provided to each property
owner and each taxpayer within the political subdivision in statements required
under Section 24.2A(2)(b) of the Code of Iowa.
            b.   The political subdivision can demonstrate to the county
auditor that the political subdivision provided sufficient time for the
newspaper to publish the notice.
(Subsection 4 – Ord. 2024-09 – Dec. 24 Supp.)
   5.   Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may
make any adjustments it deems appropriate in the budget before accepting such
proposal for publication, hearing, and final adoption.
   6.   Notice of Hearing. Following, and not until the requirements, of
Subsection 4 of this section, are completed, the Council shall set a time and
place for public hearing on the budget to be held before April 30 and shall
publish notice of the hearing not less than 10 nor more than 20 days before the
hearing. A summary of the proposed budget and a description of the procedure
for protesting the City budget under Section 384.19 of the Code of Iowa, in the
form prescribed by the Director of the Department of Management, shall be
included in the notice.  Proof of publication of the notice under
this subsection must be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
   7.   Copies of Budget on File. Not less than 20 days before the date that
the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than 10 days
before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number
of copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and
organizations, and have them available for distribution at the offices of the
Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
   8.   Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt,
by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall
certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor
and the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than,
but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget submitted at the
final hearing, unless an additional tax levy is approved at a City election.
Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of the tax certificate
must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
7.06   BUDGET AMENDMENTS.
A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes effective
July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and purpose
specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
   1.   Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program
must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as the
original budget.
(545 IAC 2.2)
   2.   Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to
another must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as
the original budget.
(545 IAC 2.3)
   3.   Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to
another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the
Council.
(545 IAC 2.4)
   4.   Administrative Transfers. The finance officer shall have the authority
to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a
specific activity without prior Council approval.
(545 IAC 2.4)
7.07   ACCOUNTING.
The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:
   1.   Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained
books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and
disbursed.
   2.   General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general
ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording
unappropriated surpluses.
   3.   Checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by any two of the
following officers, Mayor, City Administrator, Clerk, Deputy Clerk, or Finance
Committee Chairperson, following Council approval, except as provided by
Subsection 5 hereof.
   4.   Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to
record receipts by source and expenditures by program and activity as will
provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and
approved by the Council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its
proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared
with revenue estimates and expenditures can be related to the authorizing
appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for
the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred.
   5.   Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution authorize
the Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if not
paid promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or
additional interest cost. Any such payments made shall be reported to the
Council for review and approval with and in the same manner as other claims at
the next meeting following such payment. The resolution authorizing immediate
payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized and may include (but is
not limited to) payment of utility bills, contractual obligations, payroll, and
bond principal and interest.
   6.   Utilities. The finance officer shall perform and be responsible for
accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities.
7.08   FINANCIAL REPORTS.
The finance officer shall prepare and file the following financial reports:
   1.   Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a
report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program, and
activity for the preceding month.
   2.   Annual Report. Not later than December 1 of each year there shall be
published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year
of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all
expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of
the City for the current fiscal year. The Annual Financial Report shall be
prepared on forms and pursuant to instructions prescribed by the Auditor of
State. Beginning with the Annual Financial Report published by December 1,
2025, each report shall include a list of bonds, notes, or other obligations
issued by the City during the most recently completed fiscal year, and the
applicable lists for other fiscal years beginning on or after July 1, 2024, for
which obligations remain unpaid, payable from any source, including the amount
of the issuance, the project or purpose of the issuance, whether the issuance
was approved at election, eligible to be subject to a petition for an election,
or was exempt from approval at election as the result of statutory exclusions
based on population of the City or amount of the issuance, and identification
of issuances from the fiscal year or prior fiscal years related to the same
project or purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
 
8.01 Purpose                        8.06 Applications
8.02 Definitions                    8.07 Approval
8.03 Period of Partial Exemption    8.08 Exemption Repealed
8.04 Amounts Eligible for Exemption 8.09 Dual Exemptions Prohibited
8.05 Limitations
 
8.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from property
taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new
construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities,
warehouses, and distribution centers.
8.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year
for which the exemption is received.
   2.   “Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for
the storage of goods that are intended for subsequent shipment to retail
outlets. Distribution center does not mean a building or structure used
primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer
to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the
storage of petroleum products, or used for the retail sale of goods.
   3.   “New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes new
buildings and structures that are constructed as additions to existing
buildings and structures. New construction does not include reconstruction of
an existing building or structure that does not constitute complete replacement
of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or
structure unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is
required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to
implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of
specific products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the
building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or process those
products, which determination shall receive prior approval from the Council.
   4.   “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings
devoted primarily to research and development activities, including (but not
limited to) the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for
experimental use and corporate research services that do not have a primary
purpose of providing on-site services to the public.
   5.   “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse
for the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of
Iowa, except that it does not mean a building or structure used primarily to
store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail.
8.03   PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION.
The actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of
industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, and
distribution centers is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation
for a period of five years. The exemption shall also apply to the acquisition
of or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant
to Section 427A.1[1e] of the Code of Iowa, unless the machinery or equipment is
part of the normal replacement or operating process to maintain or expand the
existing operational status.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.04   AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION.
The amount of actual value added, which is eligible to be exempt from taxation,
shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
   1.   For the first year, 75 percent.
   2.   For the second year, 60 percent.
   3.   For the third year, 45 percent.
   4.   For the fourth year, 30 percent.
   5.   For the fifth year, 15 percent.
8.05   LIMITATIONS.
The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new construction
constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall
not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced
below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of the
new construction added.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.06   APPLICATIONS.
An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value added
for which an exemption is claimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
   1.   The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the
property with the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which
the value added is first assessed for taxation.
   2.   Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the
Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of
the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the
Director of Revenue.
8.07   APPROVAL.
A person may submit a proposal to the Council to receive prior approval for
eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the Council resolves to
consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public hearing
thereon. Thereafter, at least 30 days after such hearing, the Council, by
ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction
if the new construction is in conformance with City zoning. Such prior approval
shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the new
construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
8.08   EXEMPTION REPEALED.
When in the opinion of the Council continuation of the exemption granted by
this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the Council may repeal this
chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)
8.09   DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED.
A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the
property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax
exemption authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)
CHAPTER 9
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION
 
9.01 Purpose     9.04 When Effective
9.02 Definitions 9.05 Application
9.03 Eligibility
 
9.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a property tax exemption for
shell buildings constructed by community development organizations for
speculative purposes in accordance with Section 427.1 of the Code of Iowa.
9.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Community development organization” means a City organization or a
multi-community group formed for one or more of the following purposes:
      A.   To promote, stimulate, develop, and advance the business prosperity
and economic welfare of the community, area, or region and its citizens.
      B.   To encourage and assist the location of new business and industry.
      C.   To rehabilitate and assist existing business and industry.
      D.   To stimulate and assist in the expansion of business activity.
For purposes of this definition, a community development organization must have
at least 15 members with representation from the government at the level or
levels corresponding to the community development organization’s area of
operation; a private sector lending institution; a community organization in
the area; business in the area; and private citizens in the community, area, or
region.
   2.   “New construction” means new buildings or structures and includes new
buildings or structures that are constructed as additions to existing buildings
or structures. “New construction” also includes reconstruction or renovation of
an existing building or structure that constitutes complete replacement of an
existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or
structure, if the reconstruction or renovation of the existing building or
structure is required due to economic obsolescence, if the reconstruction or
renovation is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the
manufacturing or processing of products, and the reconstruction or renovation
is required in order to competitively manufacture or process products or for
community development organizations to market a building or structure as a
speculative shell building, which determination must receive prior approval
from the Council.
   3.   “Speculative shell building” means a building or structure owned and
constructed or reconstructed by a community development organization without a
tenant or buyer for the purpose of attracting an employer or user that will
complete the building to the employer’s or user’s specification for
manufacturing, processing, or warehousing the employer’s or user’s product
line.
9.03   ELIGIBILITY.
The new construction of shell buildings by the community development
organization for speculative purposes is eligible for property tax exemption.
The exemption shall be for one of the following:
   1.   The value added by new construction of a shell building or addition to
an existing building or structure.
   2.   The value of an existing building being reconstructed or renovated, and
the value of the land on which the building is located, if the reconstruction
or renovation constitutes complete replacement or refitting of the existing
building or structure.
9.04   WHEN EFFECTIVE.
   1.   If the exemption is for a project described in Subsection 1 of Section
9.03, the exemption shall be effective for the assessment year in which the
building is first assessed for property taxation or the assessment year in
which the addition to an existing building first adds value. If the exemption
is for a project described in Subsection 2 of Section 9.03, the exemption shall
be effective for the assessment year following the assessment year in which the
project commences. An exemption allowed under this section shall be allowed for
all subsequent years until the property is leased or sold or until the
exemption is terminated by ordinance of the Council.
   2.   Eligibility for an exemption as a speculative shell building shall be
determined as of January 1 of the assessment year. If the shell building or any
portion of the shell building is leased or sold, the portion of the shell
building that is leased or sold and a proportionate share of the land on which
it is located, if applicable, shall not be entitled to an exemption under this
section for subsequent years. Upon the sale of the shell building, the shell
building shall be considered new construction for purposes of Section 427B.1 of
the Code of Iowa, if used for purposes set forth in Section 427B.1.
9.05   APPLICATION.
   1.   If the speculative shell building project is a project described in
Subsection 1 of Section
9.03, an application shall be filed pursuant to Section 427B.4 of the Code of
Iowa.
   2.   If the speculative shell building project is a project described in
Subsection 2 of Section
9.03, an application shall be filed pursuant to Section 427.1(27) of the Code
of Iowa.† 3
 
Notes
3 † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 90-2, adopted June 18, 1990, gave Council
  approval of a speculative shell building and is hereby saved from repeal.
CHAPTER 10
URBAN RENEWAL
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted designating Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED           NAME OF AREA
91-2          September 9, 1990 DeWitt Industrial Park Economic Development
                                District
92-8          December 21, 1992 Silver Creek Economic Development District
93-1          April 5, 1993     1993 Addition to Industrial Park Economic
                                Development District
93-14         December 20, 1993 1993 Addition to Silver Creek Economic
                                Development District
97-03         March 3, 1997     1997 Addition to Industrial Park Economic
                                Development District
2008-02       April 21, 2008    2008 Addition to the DeWitt Economic
                                Development District
2015-09       January 4, 2016   2015 Addition to the DeWitt Economic
                                Development District
2021-04       April 19, 2021    March 2021 Addition to DeWitt Economic
                                Development District
2022-01       February 7, 2022  January 2022 Addition to DeWitt Economic
                                Development District
2022-03       April 18, 2022    Amends Ord. 2021-04
2025-06       November 17, 2025 DeWitt Economic Development District (Deleting
                                Property)
CHAPTER 11
DEWITT SELF-SUPPORTED MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
 
11.01 District Created    11.04 District Operation Fund
11.02 Included Property   11.05 Copy Filed
11.03 Benefit of District
11.01   DISTRICT CREATED.
There shall be and there is hereby created in the City a self-supported
municipal improvement district, as defined in the Act, the name of which shall
be the “DeWitt Self-Supported Municipal Improvement District” (sometimes
hereinafter referred to as the “District”), the purposes of which District are
the undertaking of actions and the design and construction of any and all
improvements as defined in the Act and the performance of administration,
redevelopment and revitalization of the District, as authorized by the Act.
11.02   INCLUDED PROPERTY.
The District shall include all the following property:
Blocks 3, 4, 9, 10, 15, 16 and 21 Original Town of DeWitt and Blocks 3 and 4,
South DeWitt.
11.03   BENEFIT OF DISTRICT.
It is hereby found and determined that the owners of all of the property within
the District have a present and potential benefit from the condition,
development and maintenance of the District and that all of the property within
the District is related by virtue of its location within an area of the City
zoned for commercial use.
11.04   DISTRICT OPERATION FUND.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Act, there is hereby established and created
a self-supported improvement district operation fund, which shall be known as
the “DeWitt Self-Supported Municipal Improvement District Operation Fund” (and
is hereinafter referred to as the “Operation Fund”), for which Operation Fund
the City may certify taxes (the “Operation Tax”) against the property as
defined in the Act (excluding property assessed as residential property for
property tax purposes), within the District (the “Property”) each year, in
addition to all other taxes, commencing with the levy of taxes for collection
in the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2007, at a rate not to exceed $6.00 per
thousand dollars of taxable valuation, for the purpose of paying such expenses
of the District as are authorized by the Act, including, but not limited to,
the administrative expenses of the District and part or all of the maintenance
expenses of improvements, as defined in the Act.
11.05   COPY FILED.
The Clerk shall cause a copy of the ordinance codified by this chapter to be
filed in the office of the County Recorder.
CHAPTER 12
DEBT SETOFF PROGRAM
 
                                                                             12.03
                                                                             Procedure for
                                                                             Certification
12.01 Purpose                                                                to the Iowa
                                                                             Department of
                                                                             the Code of
                                                                             Iowa
12.02 Debts Subject to Setoff Constituting “Qualifying Debt” Pursuant to
Section 421.65 of the Code of Iowa
12.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish policies and procedures pursuant to
Section 421.65 of the Code of Iowa, authorizing the City to invoke the setoff
provisions contained therein for debts owing the City and for which the City
has afforded the debtor the opportunity to contest the debt.
12.02   DEBTS SUBJECT TO SETOFF CONSTITUTING “QUALIFYING DEBT” PURSUANT TO
SECTION 421.65 OF THE CODE OF IOWA.  
All debts or charges authorized herein by the City or otherwise set by
resolution approved by the Council shall be deemed “qualifying debts” subject
to the provisions of Section 421.65 of the Code of Iowa, for which the City
shall provide those procedures as set out in this chapter. Such “qualifying
debts” include, but are not limited to the following:
   1.   Past-due utility bills - water, sewer, storm water, and garbage
service;
   2.   Unreturned (overdue) or damaged library materials or equipment;
   3.   Past-due parking tickets;
   4.   Past-due fitness center memberships - missing two consecutive payments;
   5.   Aquatic center season pass, entry fees, rental fees, lessons, or
concessions;
   6.   Park and recreation program fees, park shelter fees, ball diamond
rental fees;
   7.   Past-due pet license;
   8.   Past-due sidewalk repair or replacement costs;
   9.   Past-due sidewalk snow or ice removal invoice;
   10.   Past-due mowing invoice;
   11.   Past-due nuisance abatement invoice;
   12.   Past-due animal impound fee invoice;
   13.   Past-due connection fees, permit fees, private water lines, curb box
(shut off), water meters;
   14.   Past-due false alarm fees;
   15.   Past-due rental license or rental inspection fees;
   16.   Past-due subdivision or planning fees including engineering fees
incurred on behalf of developer;
   17.   Past-due cemetery fees and invoices;
   18.   Any debt which is in the form of a liquidated sum due, owing, and
payable to the Clerk of the District Court; and
   19.   Any other liquidated sum certain, owing, and payable to the City with
respect to which the City has afforded the debtor notice provided herein.
12.03   PROCEDURE FOR CERTIFICATION TO THE IOWA DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE FOR
SETOFF.
With respect to any debt herein, the City shall provide the debtor 15 days
advance written notice to the debtor’s last-known address, affording the debtor
a period of 15 days within which to protest or appeal the delinquency to the
Director of Finance for the City. If the delinquency is upheld by the Director
of Finance, or the debtor has not paid the debt within 15 days of the date of
the notice, the City may certify the delinquency to the Iowa Department of
Revenue for purposes of collection pursuant to Section 421.65 of the Code of
Iowa.
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
 
15.01 Term of Office    15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties 15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments
15.01   TERM OF OFFICE.
The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
   1.   Chief Executive Officer. The Mayor is Chief Executive Officer but does
not exert direct administrative control over the City Administrator or
employees under the City Administrator’s control. The Mayor has the power to
examine all functions of the municipal departments, their records and to call
for special reports from department heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
   2.   Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the police
and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of
emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all
the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
   3.   Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor
deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
   4.   Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto, or take no action on an ordinance, amendment,
or resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an ordinance,
amendment, or resolution within 14 days after passage. The Mayor shall explain
the reasons for the veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the
veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 and 380.6[2])
   5.   Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as
required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the
municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
   6.   Negotiations. Represent the City in all negotiations properly entered
into in accordance with law or ordinance. The Mayor shall not represent the
City where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law,
ordinance, or Council direction.
   7.   Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf
of the City.
   8.   Professional Services. Upon order of the Council, secure for the City
such specialized and professional services not already available to the City.
In executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in accordance with
this Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State.
   9.   Licenses and Permits. Sign all licenses and permits that have been
granted by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be
issued by another municipal officer.
   10.   Nuisances. Issue written order for removal, at public expense, any
nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.
   11.   Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any
absentee officer be carried on during such absence.
15.03   APPOINTMENTS.
The Mayor shall appoint the Mayor Pro Tem and the Mayor also appoints, with
Council approval, the following:
   1.   Library Board of Trustees.
   2.   City Tree Board.
   3.   Civil Service Commission.
   4.   Parks and Recreation Commission.
   5.   City Forester.
   6.   Assistant City Forester.
15.04   COMPENSATION.
The salary of the Mayor is $7,500.00 per year, payable in bi-monthly
installments. By way of other compensation, the Mayor receives such benefits
and insurance as specified by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
15.05   VOTING.
The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
 
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties         16.04 Compensation
16.01   VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.
The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall
serve as vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall
perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the Mayor
to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor
Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ, or discharge from employment
officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint, employ, or
discharge without the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03   VOTING RIGHTS.
The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04   COMPENSATION.
If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s
absence or disability for a continuous period of 15 days or more, the Mayor Pro
Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council,
based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the
compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 17
CITY COUNCIL
 
17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Council Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties          17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power          17.06 Compensation
17.01   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
The Council consists of three Council Members elected at large and one Council
Member from each of two wards as established by the Code of Ordinances, elected
for overlapping terms of four years.
17.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to, the
following:
   1.   General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
   2.   Wards and Precincts. By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into
wards and precincts based upon population, change the boundaries of wards and
precincts, eliminate wards and precincts, or create new wards and precincts.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])
   3.   Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all
funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls, and claims, and order
payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street
improvements, sidewalks, sewers, and other work, improvement, or repairs that
may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16, and 384.38[1])
   4.   Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the
construction of any improvements, bridges, or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
   5.   Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all
contracts. No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless
approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 26)
   6.   Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number,
duties, term of office, and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise
provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
7.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council shall
prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other elected
City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not become
effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the Council shall
not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer
during the months of November and December in the year of a regular City
election. A change in the compensation of Council members becomes effective for
all Council members at the beginning of the term of the Council members elected
at the election next following the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.03   EXERCISE OF POWER.
The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
   1.   Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution
requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a
motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must
be passed to spend public funds in excess of $100,000.00 on a public
improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their
completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure
that fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered
defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
   2.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within 30 days after the Mayor’s veto, the
Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all
of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
   3.   Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become
effective in one of the following ways:
      A.   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective when
the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
      B.   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon
signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
      C.   A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
      D.   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment, or resolution and the
Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes
effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a
law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
      E.   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment, or
resolution, a resolution becomes effective 14 days after the date of passage,
and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of
the ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the date of
passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council
including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not
include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason of a
conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1[a])
17.04   COUNCIL MEETINGS.
Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions
regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section 5.06 of this
Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council meetings are the
following:
   1.   Regular Meetings. The time and place of the regular meetings of the
Council shall be fixed by resolution of the Council.
   2.   Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor
or upon the request of a majority of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
   3.   Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
   4.   Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and
maintain records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
   5.   Compelling Attendance. Any three members of the Council can compel the
attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or duly called
meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
17.05   APPOINTMENTS.
The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers,
duties, compensation, and term of office:
   1.   City Clerk
   2.   City Attorney
   3.   City Administrator
   4.   Police Chief
   5.   Director of Finance
   6.   Planning and Zoning Commission
   7.   Zoning Board of Adjustment
17.06   COMPENSATION.
The salary of each Council member is $40.00 for each meeting of the Council
attended, and $10.00 for each committee meeting said Council member attends,
provided public notice is given of such committee meeting and minutes are taken
at such meeting. It is understood that all compensable committee meetings shall
be held at the Council Chambers or another public place designated in the
public notice. Further, compensable committee meetings shall be only those
meetings called or approved by the Mayor or City Administrator.
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
 
18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General   18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Publication of Minutes       18.10 Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures           18.11 Notification of Appointments
18.05 Other Publications           18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication               18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certification
18.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Clerk to serve at the
discretion of the Council. The Clerk shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02   POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL.
The Clerk or, in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Director of
Finance/Treasurer has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this
Code of Ordinances, and the law.
18.03   PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.
Within 15 days following a regular or special meeting of the Council, the Clerk
shall cause the minutes of the proceedings of the Council, including the total
expenditure from each City fund, to be delivered to a newspaper of general
circulation in the City for publication. The publication shall include a list
of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall show the gross
amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(6))
(Section 18.03 – Ord. 2024-11 – Dec. 24 Supp.)
18.04   RECORDING MEASURES.
The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council and
record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the
Mayor signed, vetoed, or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure
was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 and 2])
18.05   OTHER PUBLICATIONS.
The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings,
and official notices requiring publication as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3)
   1.   Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is
required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at
least once, not less than four or more than 20 days before the date of the
election, hearing, or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
   2.   Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of
Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and
having general circulation in the City.
18.06   AUTHENTICATION.
The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s
signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
18.07   CERTIFICATION.
The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district, building
lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to the
recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08   RECORDS.
The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:
   1.   Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances
and codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
   2.   Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all
writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise
specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   3.   Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents (or accurate
reproductions) for at least five years except that ordinances, resolutions,
Council proceedings, records, and documents (or accurate reproductions)
relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption, or replacement of
public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least 11 years following the
final maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council
proceedings, records, and documents (or accurate reproductions) relating to
real property transactions shall be maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 and 5])
   4.   Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of
any record, paper, or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be
necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a
copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council
resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix
the seal of the City to those public documents or instruments that by this Code
of Ordinances are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 and 5] and 380.7[5])
   5.   Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and
petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall
endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such
communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09   ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and, at the
direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees,
boards, and commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record
of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10   LICENSES AND PERMITS.
The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this
Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which
shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number,
name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit, and purpose for which
issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.11   NOTIFICATION OF APPOINTMENTS.
The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to offices
in the City government of their positions and the time at which they shall
assume the duties of their offices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12   ELECTIONS.
The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance with
Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
18.13   CITY SEAL.
The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the Clerk
to all transcripts, orders, and certificates that it may be necessary or proper
to authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the center of which are
the words “DEWITT” and around the margin of which are the words “CITY SEAL” and
“IOWA.”
CHAPTER 19
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE/TREASURER
 
19.01 Appointment and Compensation     19.06 Audit
19.02 Powers and Duties: General       19.07 Self-Insurance
19.03 General Accounting               19.08 Debt Service
19.04 Budget                           19.09 Abstract of Bills
19.05 Custody of Funds and Investments 19.10 Records
19.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
The Council shall appoint by majority vote a Director of Finance/Treasurer
(hereinafter referred to as the “Director of Finance”) to serve at the
discretion of the Council. The Director of Finance shall receive such
compensation as established by resolution of the Council.
19.02   POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL.
The Director of Finance, or in the Director of Finance’s absence or inability
to act, the Clerk, has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this
Code of Ordinances, and the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
19.03   GENERAL ACCOUNTING.
The Director of Finance shall perform the following general accounting duties:
   1.   Accounts Receivable. Maintain accounts receivable accounts and perform
collections in accordance with Council direction.
   2.   Accounts Payable. Review all accounts payable for accuracy and
completeness.
   3.   Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate.
   4.   Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities
received on behalf of the City and specify the date, from whom, and for what
purpose received. Deposit the same in depositories selected by the Council.
   5.   Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements,
money, or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.
   6.   Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money received from
special assessments.
   7.   Uniform Accounts. Comply with all the provisions of this Code of
Ordinances relating to a uniform system of municipal accounts.
   8.   Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the Director of
Finance/Treasurer’s books and certify monthly to the Council the balance of
cash and investments for each fund and amounts received and disbursed. Provide
required reports to department heads, boards, and commissions.
   9.   Annual Report. Report annually to the Council, as required by law, the
amount of money appropriated during each year, the total amount of checks
issued, showing upon what funds the same were drawn, and total indebtedness of
the City, with a detailed statement of such indebtedness.
   10.   Inspection of Accounts. Permit the inspection of the Director of
Finance’s accounts and vouchers by the public at any time.
19.04   BUDGET.
Assist in the preparation and administration of the City’s annual operating
budget. Prepare budget amendments as required.
19.05   CUSTODY OF FUNDS AND INVESTMENTS.
Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of the City in the manner
provided by law, and Council direction. Invest available idle funds according
to the City’s Investment Policy.
19.06   AUDIT.
Perform internal audit of all City accounts on a quarterly basis. Maintain
accounting procedures required for proper internal control. Coordinate the
annual audit.
19.07   SELF-INSURANCE.
Maintain and administer the self-insurance records and make reimbursements to
City employees.
19.08   DEBT SERVICE.
Serve as Bond Registrar, keeping a register of all bonds outstanding and record
all payments of interest and principal.
19.09   ABSTRACT OF BILLS.
The Director of Finance shall present an abstract of bills to the Council at
all regular Council meetings for their approval. Checks for approved bills
shall be issued by the following Friday.
19.10   RECORDS.
The Director of Finance shall maintain all finance related City records and
documents, or accurate reproductions, for at least five years except that
ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or
accurate reproductions, relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer,
redemption, or replacement of public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at
least 11 years following the final maturity of the bonds or obligations.
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY
 
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.06 Provide Legal Opinion
20.02 Attorney for City            20.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
20.03 Power of Attorney            20.08 Prepare Documents
20.04 Ordinance Preparation        20.09 Representation of City Employees
20.05 Review and Comment
20.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve at the
discretion of the Council. The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.02   ATTORNEY FOR CITY.
The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters affecting
the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court,
tribunal, commission, or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all
actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.03   POWER OF ATTORNEY.
The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to
all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution
of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the
same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.04   ORDINANCE PREPARATION.
The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances that the Council may desire
and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such ordinances
before their final passage by the Council and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.05   REVIEW AND COMMENT.
The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council giving an
opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to or
coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.06   PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION.
The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City
contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the
Mayor, Council, or City Administrator.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.07   ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the
Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.08   PREPARE DOCUMENTS.
The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts, forms,
and other writings that may be required for the use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.09   REPRESENTATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES.
The City Attorney shall not appear on behalf of any City officer or employee
before any court or tribunal for the purely private benefit of said officer or
employee. The City Attorney shall, however, if directed by the Council, appear
to defend any City officer or employee in any cause of action arising out of or
in the course of the performance of the duties of their office or employment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.8)
CHAPTER 21
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
 
21.01 Powers and Duties                  21.03 Compensation
21.02 Administrator-Council Relationship
21.01   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The office of City Administrator is created. The Council shall appoint by
majority vote a City Administrator to serve at the discretion of the Council.
The offices of City Administrator and Clerk may be, but are not required to be,
filled by the same person. The powers and duties of the City Administrator
include the following:
   1.   Administration of City policies as established by the Council.
   2.   Continuous study of City government operating procedures, organization
and facilities and recommendation of fiscal and other policies to the Mayor and
Council whenever necessary.
   3.   Preparation and administration of the City’s annual operating budget.
   4.   Supervision of the City’s administrative policies and procedures
including personnel and purchasing.
   5.   Keeping the Mayor and Council informed on the progress of programs and
the status of policies.
   6.   Coordinating and directing all City services provided through the
various departments.
   7.   Appointment and removal of City employees in accordance with Council
policies and ordinances.
   8.   Study of possible joint administrative arrangements with independent
boards and commissions such as the Library Board, Parks and Recreation
Commission, Planning and Zoning Commission, and making recommendations for such
arrangements as are mutually acceptable.
   9.   Calling special meetings of the Council when the City Administrator
deems such meetings necessary to the interest of the City.
   10.   Performance of such other duties as may be directed by the Council.
21.02   ADMINISTRATOR-COUNCIL RELATIONSHIP.
The City Administrator shall be directly responsible to the Council for the
administration of municipal affairs as set forth in this chapter. All
department heads of the City, except the City Attorney and those City employees
reporting to boards and commissions shall report and be responsible to the City
Administrator. All activities of departments, not exempted above, requiring the
attention of the Council shall be brought before that body by the City
Administrator and all Council policies concerning administration shall be
coordinated through the City Administrator.
21.03   COMPENSATION.
The compensation of the City Administrator shall be in an amount as may from
time to time be fixed by the Council.
CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 
22.01 Public Library                   22.07 Nonresident Use
22.02 Library Trustees                 22.08 Expenditures
22.03 Qualifications of Trustees       22.09 Annual Report
22.04 Organization of the Board        22.10 Injury to Books or Property
22.05 Powers and Duties                22.11 Theft
22.06 Contracting with Other Libraries 22.12 Notice Posted
22.01   PUBLIC LIBRARY.
The public library for the City is known as the DeWitt Community Library. It is
referred to in this chapter as the Library.
22.02   LIBRARY TRUSTEES.
The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
consists of resident and nonresident members. The Board shall consist of nine
members. Seventy-five percent of the members shall be resident members
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. No more than 25
percent of the members shall be nonresidents appointed by the Mayor.
22.03   QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.
All resident members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of
the City. Any nonresident members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and
residents of the unincorporated County. Members shall be over the age of 18
years.
22.04   ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.
The organization of the Board shall be as follows:
   1.   Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for six years,
except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on January 1. Appointments
shall be made every two years of one-third the total number or as near as
possible, to stagger the terms.
   2.   Vacancies. The position of any resident Trustee shall be vacated if
such member moves permanently from the City. The position of nonresident
Trustee shall be vacated if such member moves permanently from the County or
into the City. The position of any Trustee shall be deemed vacated if such
member is absent from six consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in
the case of sickness or temporary absence from the City or County. Vacancies in
the Board shall be filled in the same manner as an original appointment except
that the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the
appointment is made.
   3.   Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their
services.
22.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary,
and such other officers as it deems necessary.
   2.   Physical Plant. To have charge, control, and supervision of the
Library, its appurtenances, fixtures, and rooms containing the same.
   3.   Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
   4.   Hiring of Personnel. To employ a Library Director, and authorize the
Library Director to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary
for the proper management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided,
however, prior to such employment, the compensation of the Library Director,
assistants, and employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of
the members of the Board voting in favor thereof.
   5.   Removal of Personnel. To remove the Library Director, by a two-thirds
vote of the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or
employees for misdemeanor, incompetence, or inattention to duty, subject
however, to the provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
   6.   Purchases. To select, or authorize the Library Director to select, and
make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps,
journals, other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery, and
supplies for the Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
   7.   Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by
nonresidents and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service
exists.
   8.   Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify, or repeal
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the
law, for the care, use, government, and management of the Library and the
business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
   9.   Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by
gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other
moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals collected under the
rules of the Board.
   10.   Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed
property, and devises, and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title
to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale
for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them
from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.
   11.   Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the
performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises, and bequests accepted
by the City by action against the Council.
   12.   Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
   13.   County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements
with the local County historical association where such exists, and to set
apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the
possession of the association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase
necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such
articles as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and
pay for the same out of funds allocated for Library purposes.
22.06   CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES.
The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees
of free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or
semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County,
or with the trustees of any County library district for the use of the Library
by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 and Ch. 28E)
   2.   Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority
vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing
body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent
in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the
contracting party at the last general election. The petition must be presented
to the governing body not less than 40 days before the election. The
proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law which is held in
the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
22.07   NONRESIDENT USE.
The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents of the
City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
   1.   Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to
nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or
County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
   2.   Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other
materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
   3.   Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that
books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
   4.   Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or
other Library materials to nonresidents.
22.08   EXPENDITURES.
All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of the
Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. On orders of the
Board, when signed by its President, expenses shall be submitted to the City
Clerk for payment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 and 392.5)
22.09   ANNUAL REPORT.
The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close of the
fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of the
Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of fines
collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the Library
during the year, together with such further information as may be required by
the Council.
22.10   INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY.
Refer to Section 714.1 of the Code of Iowa.
22.11   THEFT.
Refer to Section 714.1 of the Code of Iowa.
22.12   NOTICE POSTED.
Refer to Section 714.5 of the Code of Iowa.
   1.   Failure to Return. Refer to Section 714.5 of the Code of Iowa.
   2.   Detention and Search. Refer to Section 808.12 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
 
23.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 23.04 Compensation
23.02 Term of Office                 23.05 Powers and Duties
23.03 Vacancies
23.01   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
There shall be appointed by the Council a City Planning and Zoning Commission,
hereinafter referred to as the Commission, consisting of five members, who
shall be residents of the City and qualified by knowledge or experience to act
in matters pertaining to the development of a City plan and who shall not hold
any elective office in the City government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 and 392.1)
23.02   TERM OF OFFICE.
The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five years. The
terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.03   VACANCIES.
If any vacancy exists on the Commission, caused by resignation or otherwise, a
successor for the remainder of the term shall be appointed in the same manner
as the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.04   COMPENSATION.
All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its
first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as
Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during
the Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   2.   Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   3.   Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and
duties and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other
related matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments,
supplements, changes, or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
   4.   Recommendations on Improvements.  The design and proposed location of
public improvements shall be submitted to the Commission for its
recommendations prior to any actions being taken by the City for the
construction or placement of such improvements. Such requirements and
recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement if
the Commission, after 30 days’ written notice requesting such recommendations,
has failed to file the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   5.   Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of
subdivisions or re-subdivisions of land in the City or adjacent thereto, laid
out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same
intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to
the Commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   6.   Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete, and
exclusive authority to expend, for and on behalf of the City, all sums of money
appropriated to it and to use and expend all gifts, donations, or payments that
are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   7.   Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power to
contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as
approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   8.   Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the
Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts and
disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 24
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
 
24.01 Purpose of Parks and Recreation 24.06 Reports
Commission
24.02 Commission Organization         24.07 Gifts
24.03 Vacancies                       24.08 Suggestions to the Council
24.04 Compensation                    24.09 Council Authority
24.05 Administrative Support
24.01   PURPOSE OF PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION.
The purpose of the Parks and Recreation Commission is to serve as a sounding
board for Parks and Recreation staff and citizen concerns, suggestions, and
ideas, less personnel and discipline issues which are under the purview of the
Director of Parks and Recreation, City Administrator, and Council; and to
assist and advise the Council on the needed facilities to provide open space
such as parks, playgrounds and community facilities for other forms of
recreation. The Commission shall give special attention to the development of
long-range planning for availability of parks and recreational facilities for
the use of the public.
24.02   COMMISSION ORGANIZATION.
The Commission shall consist of five members, four of which shall be qualified
voters and residents of the City, one of which may not be a resident of the
City, but shall be a resident of the Central School District. One member shall
be appointed from each of the City’s two wards with the three other members
appointed at large. Each shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the Council for overlapping terms of three years commencing on January 1 of the
year of appointment. Terms shall be staggered. Individuals serving two
consecutive terms must wait a period of three years before being considered for
another term as a Commissioner. The Commission shall annually choose from its
membership a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and Secretary.
24.03   VACANCIES.
The permanent change of residence of any member of the Commission from the City
ward from which the member was appointed to another City ward or outside the
City boundaries, or the absence from three consecutive regular meetings of the
Commission, or failure to attend two-thirds of the regular meetings in any
given year, except if due to illness of the member, shall render the member’s
office vacant. Vacancies occurring in the Commission shall be filled in the
same manner as an original appointment and such appointment shall be for the
unexpired term of the vacancy for which the appointment is made.
24.04   COMPENSATION.
Members shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursable expense.
24.05   ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT.
The City Administrator shall be authorized to take whatever administrative
action is necessary to provide staff assistance and information necessary to
aid the Commission in the performance of its duties.
24.06   REPORTS.
The Commission shall make written reports to the Council of its activities from
time to time as it deems advisable, or upon Council request.
24.07   GIFTS.
The Commission shall have the authority to accept gifts in the name of the City
of real or personal property or mixed property and devises and bequests,
including trust funds, executed deeds and bills of sale for the conveyance of
such property. Title to all property shall be taken in the name of the City and
all moneys shall be deposited by the Clerk to the credit of the Parks and
Recreation accounts.
24.08   SUGGESTIONS TO THE COUNCIL.
The Council shall request suggestions from the Commission and from such public
spirited citizens as are interested in such development, and particularly in
the welfare of children of the City, and shall carefully consider such
suggestions, and shall thereafter determine and promulgate the rules and
regulations which shall govern in the operation and management of the City’s
parks and recreation facilities. Such rules shall be either posted on the
facility or be otherwise publicized in a manner to provide adequate notice to
the using public. Violation of a rule or regulation so posted or publicized may
be cause for denial of use of the facility or, if it is a violation of this
Code of Ordinances, may be prosecuted as a simple misdemeanor. Such rules and
regulations may thereafter be modified and changed from time to time by the
Council.
24.09   COUNCIL AUTHORITY.
All final authority over the administration and policy of the Parks and
Recreation Commission shall be retained and exercised by the Council.
CHAPTER 27
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
 
27.01 Purpose                 27.06 Chairperson
27.02 Appointment and Term    27.07 Clerk
27.03 Qualifications          27.08 Records
27.04 Human Rights Commission 27.09 Rooms and Supplies
27.05 Compensation            27.10 Powers and Duties
27.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the appointment, powers and
duties of a Civil Service Commission in accordance with the requirements of
State law.
27.02   APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
A Civil Service Commission consisting of three members shall be appointed by
the Mayor, with the approval of the Council, for staggered terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.1)
27.03   QUALIFICATIONS.
Commissioners must be citizens of Iowa, eligible electors and residents of the
City preceding their appointment. No person while on said Commission shall hold
or be a candidate for any office of public trust.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
27.04   HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 27.03, when a human rights commission
has been established, the director thereof shall ex officio be a member,
without vote, of the Civil Service Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
27.05   COMPENSATION.
Civil Service Commissioners shall serve without compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
27.06   CHAIRPERSON.
The Commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
27.07   CLERK.
The Clerk shall be clerk of the Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
27.08   RECORDS.
The Civil Service Commission shall keep a record of all its meetings and also a
complete individual service record of each civil service employee; the record
shall be permanent and kept up to date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
27.09   ROOMS AND SUPPLIES.
The Council shall provide suitable rooms in which the Commission may hold its
meetings and supply the Commission with all necessary equipment and a qualified
shorthand reporter or an electronic voice-recording device to enable it to
properly perform its duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.5)
27.10   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Commission shall administer the civil service procedure as contained in
Chapter 400 of the Code of Iowa and amendments thereto and shall have,
exercise, and perform all powers and duties as provided thereby.
CHAPTER 28
CITY TREE BOARD
 
28.01 Creation and Establishment  28.05 Operation
28.02 Term of Office              28.06 Interference with Board
28.03 Compensation                28.07 Review by Council
28.04 Duties and Responsibilities
28.01   CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT.
There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the City, which
shall consist of five members, residents of the City, who shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The City Forester shall serve as an
ex-officio member of the Board.
28.02   TERM OF OFFICE.
The members of the Board shall serve staggered terms of three years and in the
event that a vacancy occurs during the term of any member, said member’s
successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
28.03   COMPENSATION.
Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
28.04   DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
It is the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate, and to assist the
City Forester in the development of, conducting annual updates for, and
administration of a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting,
replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs along the City streets
or on any City property. The Board, when requested by the Council, shall
consider, investigate, make findings, report, and recommend upon any special
matter or question coming within the scope of its work.
28.05   OPERATION.
The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations,
and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be
quorum for the transaction of business.
28.06   INTERFERENCE WITH BOARD.
It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the City Tree
Board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, or removing of any street trees, park trees or
trees on private grounds, as authorized by this chapter.
28.07   REVIEW BY COUNCIL.
The Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and decisions of
the Board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the Board to the
Council, who may hear the matter and make final decision.
CHAPTER 29
CITY FORESTER
 
29.01 Creation and Establishment 29.05 City Tree Board
29.02 Assistant City Forester    29.06 Authority
29.03 Term of Office             29.07 Duties and Responsibilities
29.04 Compensation
29.01   CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT.
It is the purpose of this chapter to create and establish a City Forester and
Assistant City Forester position. The City Forester position shall be appointed
by the Mayor, with the approval of the Council. If deemed beneficial, an
Assistant City Forester position may also be appointed by the Mayor, with the
approval of the Council.
29.02   ASSISTANT CITY FORESTER.
For use in this chapter and all City ordinances, the following reference to the
City Forester shall also include the Assistant City Forester.
29.03   TERM OF OFFICE.
The City Forester position shall be appointed annually and serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor and Council.
29.04   COMPENSATION.
The City Forester shall be considered a City employee with the benefit of all
liability and workers compensation insurance provided employees of the City.
The Forester shall serve for an annual compensation of $1.00. No employee
benefits shall be awarded the City Forester.
29.05   CITY TREE BOARD.
The Tree Board has been established pursuant to
Chapter 28 of this Code of Ordinances and to assist the City Forester in the
development of a comprehensive tree plan for the City and to promote the goals
of the tree program. The City Forester shall serve as an ex-officio member of
the Tree Board.
29.06   AUTHORITY.
Under the direction of the Director of Public Works and the Director of Parks
and Recreation for areas under their responsibility (i.e., public works grounds
and street rights-of-way and park grounds, respectively), the City Forester
shall have the authority and jurisdiction of regulating the planting,
maintenance, and removal of trees on publicly owned property to ensure safety
or preserve or enhance the aesthetics of such public sites. The City Forester
shall have the authority to supervise or inspect all work to be done.
29.07   DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
The City Forester shall have the following general powers and duties:
   1.   Under the direction of the Director of Public Works or the Director of
Parks and Recreation, depending in whose jurisdiction work is being
accomplished, to direct, manage, supervise, and control all planting, removal,
maintenance, and protection of all trees and shrubs on public areas.
   2.   To guard all trees and shrubs within the City to prevent the spread of
disease or pests and to eliminate dangerous conditions that may affect the
life, health, or safety of persons or property.
   3.   Prepare a yearly budget outlining revenue and expenditures, including
funding for training classes and appropriate memberships, necessary to
establish, monitor, and foster active completion and compliance of the
comprehensive tree program.
   4.   Such other powers and duties as provided by the laws of the State or by
ordinance of the City, and the Tree Board.
   5.   The City Forester shall enforce
Chapter 150, Trees, of this Code and periodically make any recommendations for
changes to
Chapter 150.
   6.   The City Forester shall prepare and deliver at least annually to the
Council a report on the status and completion of the comprehensive tree program
of the City.
   7.   The City Forester shall develop a higher level of knowledge by
attending classes, maintaining appropriate memberships, and participating in
advancing the understanding of trees.
   8.   The City Forester shall report to the Director of Public Works or the
Director of Parks and Recreation depending in whose jurisdiction work is being
accomplished.
   9.   The City Forester shall assist in the completion of applications and
execution of requests for external sources of funds to enhance the City tree
program.
   10.   The City Forester shall foster a tree education program with the
employees of the City and with appropriate external sources. Active
participation should be encouraged with the various school systems, businesses,
and citizens of the City on tree education.
CHAPTER 30
POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
30.01 Department Established       30.07 Powers and Duties of Police Chief
30.02 Organization                 30.08 Departmental Rules
30.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 30.09 Summoning Aid
30.04 Required Training            30.10 Taking Weapons
30.05 Compensation                 30.11 Uniform Allowance
30.06 Police Chief Appointed
30.01   DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
The Police Department of the City is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.
30.02   ORGANIZATION.
The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement
officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the
Council.
30.03   PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.
In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement
officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification standards
established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
30.04   REQUIRED TRAINING.
All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law at
an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment.
Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])
(501 IAC 3 and 8)
30.05   COMPENSATION.
Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such compensation
as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
30.06   POLICE CHIEF APPOINTED.
The Council shall appoint the Police Chief to serve at the pleasure of the
Council. Appointment of police officers shall be pursuant to Chapter 400 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.13)
30.07   POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   General. Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by law or
ordinance.
   2.   Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances, and regulations and bring
all persons committing any offense before the proper court.
   3.   Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the
Police Chief.
4.   Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to the
State Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
   5.   Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including
conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
   6.   Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers,
boards, and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
   7.   Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for
the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
   8.   Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by
showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City
ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest, and the disposition of the
charge.
   9.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report
as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
   10.   Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and
be responsible for the care, maintenance, and use of all vehicles, equipment,
and materials of the department.
30.08   DEPARTMENTAL RULES.
The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the Code of
Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary for
the operation of the department.
30.09   SUMMONING AID.
Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as
the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
30.10   TAKING WEAPONS.
Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items that
are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have within
such person’s control, to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
30.11   UNIFORM ALLOWANCE.
All peace officers shall be provided a uniform allowance as determined by
resolution of the Council which shall be granted in the form of the purchase of
clothing meeting the standard of color, style, and quality specified by the
City. Any officer who leaves the department’s service shall turn over all items
identifiable as official uniforms, including insignia, before receiving final
compensation.
CHAPTER 31
RESERVE PEACE OFFICERS
31.01   PURPOSE; ESTABLISHMENT.
Pursuant to authority granted to the City under Chapter 80D of the Code of
Iowa, there is hereby created and established the DeWitt Reserve Peace Officers
Force. Such force shall not exceed 10 members without Council approval and is
established for the purpose of assisting the Police Chief in the exercise of
police powers. The provisions contained in Chapter 80D of the Code of Iowa are
hereby adopted by reference.
CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
 
35.01 Establishment                       35.08 Water Connections
35.02 Fire Committee                      35.09 Rules for Firefighters,
                                          Pedestrians, and Drivers
35.03 Purpose                             35.10 Hindrance to Fire Officers and
                                          Equipment
35.04 Officers and Trustees               35.11 Obedience to Fire Chief
35.05 Fire Apparatus, Equipment, Property 35.12 Duties of Fire Chief
35.06 Calls Beyond Corporate Limits       35.13 Authority to Cite Violations
35.07 Insurance
35.01   ESTABLISHMENT.
There is established a Fire Department to be known as the DeWitt Volunteer
Rescue Fire Company No. 1. The Fire Department will consist of such members as
prescribed in the bylaws adopted by the department, and such by-laws are hereby
made a part of the laws, rules and regulations of the City as fully as though
specifically set forth herein, and any and all amendments thereto shall have
the same force and effect and any such amendments, additions, or alterations
shall be made known to the Council. The same members of the DeWitt Volunteer
Rescue Fire Company No. 1 also provide fire protection service to the DeWitt
Fire District outside of the City limits. This body is known as the DeWitt
Volunteer Fire Department Inc., which is a separate nonprofit corporation
organized under the State of Iowa, by providing fire protection by private
contract. This corporation is bound by the same bylaws, houses its equipment in
the fire station owned by the City, and uses this equipment for all fires in
the City limits and in the fire district (parts of Washington Township and
rural DeWitt Township) outside of the City limits. Hereinafter “Fire
Department” shall refer to all firefighters operating under the single set of
by-laws adopted by DeWitt Fire Rescue Company No. 1 and DeWitt Volunteer Fire
Department, Inc.
35.02   FIRE COMMITTEE.
The Fire Committee shall consist of three members of the Council, each of whom
is appointed by the Mayor. The purpose of the Fire Committee is to act as a
liaison between the Fire Department and the Council, to monitor that the City
owned fire equipment is maintained in proper repair, to oversee and recommend
capital purchases for approval by the Council.
35.03   PURPOSE.
The department is established to prevent and extinguish fires, to protect lives
and property against fires, and to answer all emergency calls for which there
is no other established agency.
35.04   OFFICERS AND TRUSTEES.
The officers of the Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Chief, First
Assistant Chief, Second Assistant Chief, a Secretary-Treasurer, and an
Assistant Secretary-Treasurer. In addition, there shall be a training officer
and three Trustees. The election and terms of officers and trustees, as well as
the duties and responsibilities of them, and the chain of command are
specifically set forth by the by-laws.
35.05   FIRE APPARATUS, EQUIPMENT, PROPERTY.
All fire apparatus, equipment, and property of the City for firefighting shall
be in the possession, care, and control of the Fire Department in accordance
with its by-laws.
35.06   CALLS BEYOND CORPORATE LIMITS.
The City has approved certain conditions upon which the fire department and
equipment will answer calls outside the corporate limits. The Fire Department
shall have the same governmental immunity as operating within the corporate
limits. The City has also entered into mutual aid agreements which, when
situations arise whereby an extra alarm fire would exhaust the available
firefighting equipment and manpower of another fire district, may cause the
need for the use of the City equipment and members of the Fire Department
outside the corporate limits.
35.07   INSURANCE.
The City shall insure the members of the Fire Department (DeWitt Fire Rescue
Company No. 1 and DeWitt Volunteer Fire Department, Inc.) under its worker’s
compensation policy. In addition, it shall maintain insurance coverage on all
equipment and property owned by the City.
35.08   WATER CONNECTIONS.
Water from City fire hydrants may be used for protection and firefighting
purposes on property owned outside the City limits which are covered under
contracts of mutual aid and contracts between the DeWitt Volunteer Fire
Department, Inc. and DeWitt and parts of Washington Township.
35.09   RULES FOR FIREFIGHTERS, PEDESTRIANS, AND DRIVERS.
All fire trucks, when proceeding to a fire and when returning to the fire
station, shall comply with the traffic rules and applicable to all other
vehicles, and when proceeding to a fire or other emergency, should sound their
siren and use warning lights and shall have the right-of-way on all streets,
avenues, and alleys over any vehicles or conveyances. When the siren is sounded
and the warning lights are used, drivers of all other vehicles shall
immediately stop as close to the curb as possible, not less than 30 feet from
intersecting streets, and remain in that position until the right-of-way of the
fire truck has been assured. All pedestrians along the streets on which the
trucks are passing shall remain on the sidewalks and away from street
intersections. No driver of any vehicle shall follow closer than 300 feet from
fire or rescue equipment, and no driver of any vehicle shall park closer than
300 feet from a fire.
35.10   HINDRANCE TO FIRE OFFICERS AND EQUIPMENT.
No person shall willfully offer any hindrance to an officer or fire fighter in
performance of their duties, or deface, injure, or destroy any equipment for
fire protection.
35.11   OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of this Fire Chief.
35.12   DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.
The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or
ordinance, including (but not limited to) the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention
and the investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires.
   2.   Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits, and
development of fire emergency plans.
   3.   Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation
as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation,
investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other
hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the
reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   4.   Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle, or vessel from
approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel,
or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the Fire
Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   5.   Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect
ropes, guards, barricades, or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-
of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to
prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the Fire
Department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete,
or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
   6.   Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline, and control of the Fire Department. The members of the Fire
Department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
   7.   Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all
fire apparatus, tools, equipment, and other property used by or belonging to
the Fire Department.
   8.   Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage
in excess of $200,000.00 has occurred as a result of a fire, or if arson is
suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately. For all other
fires causing an estimated damage of $50.00 or more or emergency responses by
the Fire Department, file a report with the State Fire Marshal’s Division
within 10 days following the end of the month. The report shall indicate all
fire incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of the
property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated
total loss to the property, origin of the fire as determined by investigation,
and other facts, statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 and 100.3)
   9.   Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any
building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of
making such investigation or inspection that under law or ordinance may be
necessary to be made and that is reasonably necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 10A.514)
   10.   Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers, or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
   11.   Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal,
and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by
investigating, preventing, and reporting data pertaining to fires.
   12.   Records. Cause to be kept records of the Fire Department personnel,
firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number
of responses to alarms, their cause, and location, and an analysis of losses by
value, type, and location of buildings.
   13.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report
of the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as
may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
35.13   AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS.
Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa
may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa, for
violations of State or local fire safety regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
CHAPTER 36
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
 
36.01 Purpose                     36.05 Notifications
36.02 Definitions                 36.06 Police Authority
36.03 Cleanup Required            36.07 Liability
36.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs
36.01   PURPOSE.
In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety, and welfare from
the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated
to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal, and cleanup of
hazardous substance spills within the City limits.
36.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control,
identify, analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove, or dispose of a hazardous
substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])
   2.   “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual,
imminent, or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance
onto the land, into a water of the State, or into the atmosphere which creates
an immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety or to the
environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])
   3.   “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not
limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an
irritant or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat, or other
means. “Hazardous substance” may include any hazardous waste identified or
listed by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under
Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1,
1977, or any hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous
material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])
   4.   “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles,
stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the
release of which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers,
and any other person in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous
condition occurs, whether the person owns the hazardous substance or is
operating under a lease, contract, or other agreement with the legal owner of
the hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])
36.03   CLEANUP REQUIRED.
Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping,
spilling, leaking, or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the hazardous
substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the environment
or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground
waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied by a
cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to an
acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the
responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to
begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the
incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based
on the character of the hazardous condition, said notice setting a deadline for
accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City will proceed to procure
cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with
the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished within the deadline. In the
event that it is determined that immediate cleanup is necessary as a result of
the present danger to the public health, safety, and welfare, then no notice
shall be required and the City may proceed to procure the cleanup and bill the
responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup. If the bill for
those services is not paid within 30 days, the City Attorney shall proceed to
obtain payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the
capacity of the City to finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the
Council and immediately seek any State or federal funds available for said
cleanup.
36.04   LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS.
The responsible person shall be strictly liable to the City for all of the
following:
   1.   The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents of the
City as a result of the failure of the responsible person to clean up a
hazardous substance involved in a hazardous condition.
   2.   The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City to
evacuate people from the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the
person.
   3.   The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of,
or loss of City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous
condition caused by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury,
destruction, or loss.
   4.   The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or the agents
of the City in responding at and to the scene of a hazardous condition caused
by that person.
36.05   NOTIFICATIONS.
   1.   A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing
of a hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources
and the Clinton Law Center of the occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon
as possible but not later than six hours after the onset of the hazardous
condition or discovery of the hazardous condition. The Clinton Law Center shall
immediately notify the Department of Natural Resources.
   2.   Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the
Clinton Law Center, which shall then notify the Department of Natural
Resources.
36.06   POLICE AUTHORITY.
If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer or an
authorized representative may:
   1.   Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a
hazardous condition, and
   2.   Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a
hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.
No person shall disobey an order of any Peace Officer issued under this
section.
36.07   LIABILITY.
The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries, or
losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the
responsible person as defined in Section
36.02(4).
CHAPTER 37
FALSE ALARMS
 
37.01 Purpose    37.03 Penalty
37.02 Definition 37.04 Notification
37.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to assess a civil penalty for false alarms
received by the Police Department or Fire Department which require a police
officer to report to the scene or a response from the Fire Department to the
scene. False alarms are an increasing problem, in part due to errors by the
owners or operators of the system or failure on the part of operators of the
system to shut the alarm down before entering the premises. False alarms expose
the public to danger as well as to additional costs in response by the Police
or Fire Department to those alarms.
37.02   DEFINITION.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Alarm end user” means the person, firm, corporation, or entity of any
kind of control of any building, structure, or facility who purchases, leases,
contracts for, or otherwise obtains an alarm system.
   2.   “Alarm system” means a method of detecting and signaling the presence,
entry or attempted entry, or holdup into or on a protected premise. The term
does not mean audible alarms from automobiles.
   3.   “False alarm” means any signal, directly or indirectly, from an alarm
system, eliciting an urgent response by police when a situation requiring an
urgent response does not, in fact, exist. The term does not include an alarm
signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary
circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm end user. The
burden of proving that such alarm was not a false alarm shall be on the alarm
end user.
37.03   PENALTY.
The owner or lessor of the alarm system shall forfeit a civil penalty of $50.00
for each false alarm to the police in excess of four such alarms received in a
12-month period of time or a civil penalty in the amount of $350.00 for each
false fire alarm in excess of two such alarms received in a 12-month period of
time; provided, however, no such fee or civil penalty shall be assessed in the
event it can be shown that the false alarm or false fire alarm was caused by a
surge in electricity caused by a power company or that the same was caused by
lightening or other natural causes which activated the alarm. Additionally, if
there is a documented service call by the alarm company immediately after a
false alarm in an attempt to fix or determine the cause of the false alarm, a
penalty will not be assessed.
37.04   NOTIFICATION.
Upon receipt of a third false alarm within a 12-month period, the Police
Department or the Fire Department, or the designee of either department, shall
notify the owner of the alarm as shown by the records of the department that
the owner shall have 30 days within which to forfeit the required amount. Such
amount shall be paid to the Clerk and a receipt shall be given. In the event
that the owner or lessor of the alarm system shall fail to pay the civil
penalty within 30 days, the City shall file a claim with the State District
Court, Magistrate Division, alleging the circumstances and this chapter as the
basis for the civil penalty.
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
 
40.01 Assault            40.04 Failure to Disperse
40.02 Harassment         40.05 Disorderly House
40.03 Disorderly Conduct
40.01   ASSAULT.
No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
   1.   Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to cause pain or injury to
another or that is intended to result in physical contact that will be
insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute
the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])
   2.   Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to place another in
fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting,
or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])
An act described in Subsections 1 and 2 shall not be an assault under the
following circumstances: (i) if the person doing any of the enumerated acts,
and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other
activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable
incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk of
serious injury or breach of the peace; (ii) if the person doing any of the
enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic
school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a
school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle or
other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or
staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school
grounds, or at an official school function, regardless of the location, whether
the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between
students or other individuals, if the degree and the force of the intervention
is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those
assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02   HARASSMENT.
No person shall commit harassment.
   1.   A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy, or
alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
      A.   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing, or via
electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to
cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      B.   Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      C.   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      D.   Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law
enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing
that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal
act, knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   2.   A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without
legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent
to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section,
unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in
which two or more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other.
“Personal contact” does not require a physical touching or oral communication,
although it may include these types of contacts.
40.03   DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
No person shall do any of the following:
   1.   Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or
in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in
athletic contests may engage in such conduct that is reasonably related to that
sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1a])
   2.   Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or
public building which intentionally or recklessly causes unreasonable distress
to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1b])
   3.   Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening
gesture that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a
violent reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1c])
   4.   Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of
authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct
intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1d])
   5.   False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate
a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such
report to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1e])
   6.   Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United
States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the
United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will
provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault. As used in this
subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1f])
      A.   “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
      B.   “Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
      C.   “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be
flown from a pole or mast.
      D.   “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make
imperfect.
      E.   “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate, or trample.
      F.   “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a
machine, vehicle, or animal to tread upon.
   7.   Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 1,000 feet of the building or other
location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within
1,000 feet of a funeral procession or burial:
      A.   Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable distress to the
persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the
funeral procession.
      B.   Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction
by another.
      C.   Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral
procession, or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral,
memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.
This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during, and
within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or
burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
40.04   FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or
persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse.
No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
40.05   DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   1.   Definition.
      A.   “Disorderly house” means any structure or any room therein, or any
part of the premises adjacent thereto, in or upon which occurs any disorderly
conduct as defined in Section 723.4 of the Code of Iowa, as it now reads or may
hereafter be amended, or any of the other following prohibited activities:
         (1)   The open storage, use, or consumption of a controlled substance
as defined in Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, under which possession of such
substance would be an offense;
         (2)   Gambling in violation of Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa;
         (3)   Dispensing, selling, or consumption of an alcoholic beverage in
violation of Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa;
         (4)   Acts of prostitution, pimping or pandering as defined in Chapter
725 of the Code of Iowa.
   2.   Keeping a Disorderly House. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly
keep a disorderly house as defined in this section. For purposes of this
section, “keep” means ownership or having control of a structure or room
therein or any part of the adjacent premises. A person shall not be guilty of
this offense if that person has taken steps or action reasonably calculated to
abate, eliminate, or prevent further acts of disorderly conduct, such as
engaging in a legal eviction process.
   3.   Frequenting or Being Found in a Disorderly House. It is unlawful for
any person to frequent or be found in a disorderly house as defined in this
section. As used herein, a structure, room, or adjacent premises may only be
defined as a disorderly house at such time as disorderly conduct and other
acts, which are included in the definition of disorderly house, may be
occurring upon the premises.
   4.   Municipal Infraction. A violation of this section will constitute a
municipal infraction punishable pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Code of
Ordinances.
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
                                                         41.08 Abandoned or
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances                  Unattended
                                                         Refrigerators
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public     41.09 Antenna and
Safety Entities                                          Radio Wires
41.03 Providing False Identification Information         41.10 Barbed Wire and
                                                         Electric Fences
41.04 Refusing to Assist Officer                         41.11 Discharging
                                                         Weapons
41.05 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees        41.12 Throwing and
                                                         Shooting
41.06 Interference with Official Acts                    41.13 Urinating and
                                                         Defecating
41.07 Removal of an Officer’s Communication or Control 41.14 Fireworks
Device
                                                         41.15 Failure to
                                                         Assist
41.01   DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.
No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive,
caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person delivers such
into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes reasonable precautions
that the substance will not be taken by children or animals from the place
where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02   FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES.
No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
   1.   Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department,
a law enforcement authority, or other public safety entity, knowing that the
information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act
knowing the act did not occur.
   2.   Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he or
she is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or
assistance.
   3.   Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who
enters the information on a citation.
41.03   PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION.
No person shall knowingly provide false identification information to anyone
known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider, or
firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is
within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency
medical care provider, or firefighter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)
41.04   REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.
Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to
render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an
arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render
assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause,
refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
41.05   HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or
employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.06   INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.
No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to be a
peace officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider under Chapter 147A of
the Code of Iowa, medical examiner, or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer,
or a person performing bailiff duties pursuant to Section 602.1303[4] of the
Code of Iowa, in the performance of any act that is within the scope of the
lawful duty or authority of that officer, jailer, emergency medical care
provider, medical examiner, or firefighter, or person performing bailiff
duties, or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any
authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order of any court. The
terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in this section do not include verbal
harassment unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present ability and
apparent intention to execute a verbal threat physically.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
41.07   REMOVAL OF AN OFFICER’S COMMUNICATION OR CONTROL DEVICE.
No person shall knowingly or intentionally remove or attempt to remove a
communication device or any device used for control from the possession of a
peace officer or correctional officer, when the officer is in the performance
of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that
officer and the person knew or should have known the individual to be an
officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.12)
41.08   ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.
No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice
box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such
refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on
premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so
accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.09   ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.
It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio
wires, or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground, or public building without written consent of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.10   BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose
land within the City limits without the written consent of the Council unless
such land consists of 10 acres or more and is used as agricultural land.
41.11   DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
   1.   It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers,
pistols, guns, or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except by
written consent of the Council.
   2.   No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner.
41.12   THROWING AND SHOOTING.
It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks, or missiles of any kind or
to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB guns, or
other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building, without written
consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.13   URINATING AND DEFECATING.
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk, street,
alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building, including
but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway, or
window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
41.14   FIREWORKS.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
   1.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
      A.   “Consumer fireworks” means the following fireworks, as described in
Chapter 3 of the American Pyrotechnics Association (“APA”) Standard 87-1:
         (1)   First-class consumer fireworks:
            a.   Aerial shell kits and reloadable tubes;
            b.   Chasers;
            c.   Helicopters and aerial spinners;
            d.   Firecrackers;
            e.   Mine and shell devices;
            f.   Missile-type rockets;
            g.   Roman candles;
            h.   Sky rockets and bottle rockets;
            i.   Multiple tube devices under this paragraph which are
manufactured in accordance with APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.5.
         (2)   Second-class consumer fireworks:
            a.   Cone fountains;
            b.   Cylindrical fountains;
            c.   Flitter sparklers;
            d.   Ground and hand-held sparkling devices, including multiple
tube ground and hand-held sparkling devices that are manufactured in accordance
with APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.5;
            e.   Ground spinners;
            f.   Illuminating torches;
            g.   Toy smoke devices that are not classified as novelties
pursuant to APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.2;
            h.   Wheels;
            i.   Wire or dipped sparklers that are not classified as novelties
pursuant to APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.2.
      B.   “Display fireworks” includes any explosive composition, or
combination of explosive substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration,
or detonation, and includes fireworks containing any explosive or flammable
compound, or other device containing any explosive substance. “Display
fireworks” does not include novelties or consumer fireworks enumerated in
Chapter 3 of the APA Standard 87-1.
      C.   “Novelties” includes all novelties enumerated in Chapter 3 of the
APA Standard 87-1, and that comply with the labeling regulations promulgated by
the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission.
   2.   Display Fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to use or explode any
display fireworks; provided, the City Council may, upon application in writing,
grant a permit for the display of display fireworks by municipalities, fair
associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or groups of individuals
approved by the City when the display fireworks will be handled by a competent
operator, but no such permit shall be required for the display of display
fireworks at the Iowa State Fairgrounds by the Iowa State Fair Board, at
incorporated county fairs, or at district fairs receiving State aid.. No permit
shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or sponsoring organization has
filed with the City evidence of insurance in the following amounts:
      A.   Personal Injury:   $250,000.00 per person
      B.   Property Damage:   $50,000.00
      C.   Total Exposure:   $1,000,000.00
   3.   Consumer Fireworks It is unlawful for any person to use or explode
consumer fireworks within the City outside of the following dates:
      A.   State Code Dates. Allowed by Section 364.2(6) of the Code of Iowa:
         (1)   July 3 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
            a.   Except when July 3 falls on a Saturday or Sunday preceding
July 4, in which fireworks shall be allowed between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m.
         (2)   July 4 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
         (3)   December 31 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:30 a.m. on the
immediately following day.
      B.   City Allowed Dates.
         (1)   No other dates or times permitted.
(Subsection 3 – Ord. 2025-03 – Jul. 25 Supp.)
   4.   Novelties. This section does not apply to novelties.
41.15   FAILURE TO ASSIST.
A person who reasonably believes another person is suffering from a risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death shall, if the person is able,
attempt to contact local law enforcement or local emergency response
authorities, if doing so does not place the person or other person at risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death. No person shall without
lawful cause violate the provisions of this section. A person shall not be
required to contact local law enforcement or emergency response authorities if
the person knows or reasonably believes that the other person is not in need of
help or assistance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.12)
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
 
42.01 Trespassing                       42.05 Fraud
42.02 Criminal Mischief                 42.06 Theft
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.07 Other Public Property Offenses
42.04 Unauthorized Entry
42.01   TRESPASSING.
   1.   Prohibited. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the
property of another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.8)
   2.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[1])
      A.   “Property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance,
vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly or
privately owned.
      B.   “Public utility” is a public utility as defined in Section 476.1 of
the Code of Iowa or an electric transmission line as provided in Chapter 478 of
the Code of Iowa.
      C.   “Public utility property” means any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure owned, leased,
or operated by a public utility and that is completely enclosed by a physical
barrier of any kind.
      D.   “Railway corporation” means a corporation, company, or person
owning, leasing, or operating any railroad in whole or in part within this
State.
      E.   “Railway property” means all tangible real and personal property
owned, leased, or operated by a railway corporation, with the exception of any
administrative building or offices of the railway corporation.
      F.   “Trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])
         (1)   Entering upon or in property without the express permission of
the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a
public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place
thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
         (2)   Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification
after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or
vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or the
agent or employee of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by
any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise
the use or maintenance of the property.
         (3)   Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect
of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
         (4)   Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing
therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein
anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the
owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession.
         (5)   Entering or remaining upon or in railway property without lawful
authority or without the consent of the railway corporation which owns, leases,
or operates the railway property. This paragraph does not apply to passage over
a railroad right-of-way, other than a track, railroad roadbed, viaduct, bridge,
trestle, or railroad yard, by an unarmed person if the person has not been
notified or requested to abstain from entering onto the right-of-way or to
vacate the right-of-way and the passage over the right-of-way does not
interfere with the operation of the railroad.
         (6)   Entering or remaining upon or in public utility property without
lawful authority or without the consent of the public utility that owns,
leases, or operates the public utility property. This paragraph does not apply
to passage over public utility right-of-way by a person if the person has not
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering onto the right-of-way or to vacate the right-of-way.
   3.   Specific Exceptions. “Trespass” does not mean either of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])
      A.   Entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of
retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been
thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that
the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route
to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is
possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
This paragraph does not apply to public utility property where the person has
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering.
      B.   Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway.
42.02   CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally
damage, deface, alter, or destroy property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03   DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES.
It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or
destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of
the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement, or
notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by
order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04   UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY.
No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public building,
premises, or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said
building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open
to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an
unauthorized entry.
42.05   FRAUD.
It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06   THEFT.
It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
42.07   OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES.
The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other activities or conditions that are also deemed
to be public property offenses:
   1.   
Chapter 22 – Library
      A.   Section
22.10 – Injury to Books or Property
      B.   Section
22.11 – Theft of Library Property
   2.   
Chapter 135 – Street Use and Maintenance
      A.   Section
135.01 – Removal of Warning Devices
      B.   Section
135.02 – Obstructing or Defacing
      C.   Section
135.03 – Placing Debris On
      D.   Section
135.04 – Playing In
      E.   Section
135.05 – Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
      F.   Section
135.08 – Burning Prohibited
      G.   Section
135.12 – Dumping of Snow
   3.   
Chapter 136 – Sidewalk Regulations
      A.   Section
136.12 – Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
      B.   Section
136.16 – Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
      C.   Section
136.17 – Defacing
      D.   Section
136.18 – Debris on Sidewalks
      E.   Section
136.19 – Merchandise Display
      F.   Section
136.20 – Sales Stands
CHAPTER 43
CAMPING REGULATIONS
 
43.01 Unlawful Camping                              43.04 Enforcement
43.02 Storage of Personal Property in Public Places 43.05 Definitions
43.03 Penalty for Violations                        43.06 Rules
 
43.01   UNLAWFUL CAMPING.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities, or
use camp paraphernalia in the following areas:
      A.   Any park, unless expressly authorized by the DeWitt Director of
Parks and Recreation or designee;
      B.   Any publicly-owned property to which the public is not ordinarily
allowed access, including but not limited to, public buildings, water storage
tank sites, well sites, stormwater ponds and facilities, and other secured
properties;
      C.   That portion of any street or sidewalk that is expressly reserved
for vehicular or pedestrian travel;
      D.   Portions of any street right-of-way that is not expressly reserved
for vehicular or pedestrian travel; and
      E.   Any other publicly-owned parking lot or publicly-owned property,
improved or unimproved.
43.02   STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to store personal property,
including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas;
      A.   Any park;
      B.   Any publicly-owned property to which the public is not ordinarily
allowed access, including but not limited to, public buildings, water storage
tank sites, well sites, stormwater ponds and facilities, and other secured
properties;
      C.   That portion of any street or sidewalk that is expressly reserved
for vehicular or pedestrian travel;
      D.   Portions of any street right-of-way that is not expressly reserved
for vehicular or pedestrian travel; and
      E.   Any other publicly-owned parking lot or publicly-owned property,
improved or unimproved.
43.03   PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   1.   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a simple
misdemeanor punishable by a fine but not imprisonment. Notwithstanding, the
maximum fine imposed for a first conviction for a violation of this chapter
shall be no more than one hundred and five dollars ($105.00).
   2.   Prior to imposing any fine for violation of this chapter, the court
shall make an inquiry into a person’s ability to pay. In the event that a
defendant is determined by the court to be unable to pay the fine imposed, the
court is explicitly authorized to impose a requirement to perform community
service in lieu of paying a fine.
43.04   ENFORCEMENT.
   1.   A violation of this chapter shall be enforced as follows:
      A.   Prior to issuing any citation of arrest pursuant to this chapter,
the investigating officer shall inquire whether the unlawful camping and
storage of personal property is due to houselessness. If the officer learns
that such is the case, the officer shall determine, in accordance with the
relevant department policy, if there is available overnight shelter to
accommodate the subject of the investigation. If the officer determines that
there is no available overnight shelter, the officer shall not issue a citation
unless it is a repeat offense.
      B.   If the officer determines that there is available overnight shelter,
the officer may, within his or her discretion:
         (1)   Provide directions to the shelter location.
         (2)   Offer one-time transport to the shelter location.
         (3)   Any individual who refuses to accept the shelter space offered
is subject to citation in accordance with Section
43.03 of this chapter.
43.05   DEFINITIONS.
   1.   The following definitions are applicable to this chapter unless the
context otherwise requires:
      A.   “Available overnight shelter” means a location which is designed or
offers temporary, overnight lodging to those without such. A person’s choice
not to attend or avail themselves of available overnight shelter, engage in
illegal activity, or failure to follow rules applicable to any such available
overnight shelter shall not make a shelter unavailable for the purpose of this
chapter.
      B.   “Camp” means to pitch or occupy camp facilities, to use camp
paraphernalia;
      C.   Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, or
temporary shelters when used for sleeping or overnight shelter. “Camp
facilities” does not include tents, huts, or temporary shelters when used
temporarily in a park for recreation or play during daylight hours when the
park is open to the public;
      D.   “Camp paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins,
cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or noncity-designated cooking facilities
and similar equipment;
      E.   “Park” means those areas subject to the executive and administrative
responsibility of the DeWitt Parks & Recreation Department including but not
limited to parks, trails, playgrounds, athletic fields, and public open space;
      F.   “Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put
for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location;
      G.   “Street” means any highway, lane, road, street, right-of-way,
boulevard, alley, and every way or place in DeWitt that is open as a matter of
right to public vehicular travel.
43.06   RULES.
   1.   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to adopt rules, regulations,
administrative policies, and procedures for implementing Sections
43.01 through
43.06.
(Chapter 43 – Ord. 2024-13 – Dec. 24 Supp.)
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
 
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.02 Public Consumption or   45.04 Social Host
Intoxication
45.01   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
As used in this section, “legal age” means 21 years of age or more.  
   1.   A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase, consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic beverages in their
possession or control; except in the case of any alcoholic beverage given or
dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the
knowledge, presence, and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or
medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or
dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under
legal age may handle alcoholic beverages during the regular course of the
person’s employment by a retail alcohol licensee, or wine or beer permittee
under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[3])
   2.   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for
the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage from
any retail alcohol licensee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02   PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
   1.   As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
      A.   “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of
Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code of
Iowa.
      B.   “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine
to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using
devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
      C.   “Peace officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
      D.   “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a
public or private school that provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten
through grade twelve.
   2.   A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer upon
the public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic
liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a retail alcohol
license. A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer
on public school property or while attending any public or private school-
related function. A person shall not be intoxicated in a public place.
   3.   A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
   4.   When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public
intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that
the person may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own expense.
If a device approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample
of a person’s breath to determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is
available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a
prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test
performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper
foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or
urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours
after the person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be
the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03   OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
[See Section
62.01(50) and (51) of this Code of Ordinances.]
45.04   SOCIAL HOST.
A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has control over,
property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any person,
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under the age of
18, to consume or possess on such property any alcoholic beverage. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a landlord or manager of the
property or to a person under legal age who consumes or possesses any alcoholic
beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony, or rite.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47)
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
 
46.01 Curfew                 46.03 Contributing to Delinquency
46.02 Cigarettes and Tobacco
46.01   CURFEW.
This section shall be known as the DeWitt, Iowa, Juvenile Curfew.
   1.   Purpose. The Council has determined that a curfew for minors is
necessary to promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of
the City and specifically to achieve the following purposes:
      A.   Reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of adults
responsible for minors.
      B.   Protect the public from the illegal acts of minors committed
individually and in groups and/or gangs after the curfew hour.
      C.   Protect minors from improper influences and criminal activity by
individuals and groups and/or gangs that prevail in public places after the
curfew hours.
   2.   Definitions. For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
      A.   “Knowingly” means knowledge which a responsible adult should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that
responsible adult’s custody. It is intended to continue to hold the neglectful
or careless adult responsible for a minor to a reasonable standard of adult
responsibility through an objective test. It is, therefore, no defense that an
adult responsible for a minor was completely indifferent to the activities or
conduct or whereabouts of the minor.
      B.   “Minor” means any unemancipated person under the age of 18 years.
      C.   “Nonsecured custody” means custody in an unlocked multipurpose area,
such as a lobby, office, or interrogation room which is not designed, set aside
or used as a secure detention area, and the person arrested is not physically
secured during the period of custody in the area; the person is physically
accompanied a police officer or a person employed by the facility where the
person arrested is being held; and the use of the area is limited to providing
nonsecured custody only or while waiting transfer to an appropriate juvenile
facility or to court, for contacting of and release to the person’s parents, or
other responsible adult, or for other administrative purposes; but not for
longer than six hours without the oral or written order of a judge or
magistrate authorizing the detention. A judge shall not extend the period of
time in excess of six hours beyond the initial six-hour period.
      D.   “Public places” means shopping areas, parking lots, parks,
playgrounds, streets, alleys, sidewalks dedicated to public use; and also
includes such parts of buildings and other premises whether publicly or
privately owned which are used by the general public or to which the general
public is invited commercially for a fee or otherwise; or in or on which the
general public is permitted without specific invitation; or to which the
general public has access.
      E.   “Responsible adult” means a parent, guardian, or other adult
specifically authorized to by law or authorized by a parent or guardian to have
custody or control of a minor.
      F.   “Unemancipated” means unmarried and still under the custody or
control of a responsible adult.
   3.   Curfew Established. Unless accompanied by a responsible adult, no minor
under the age of 18 years shall be in any public place during the following
times:
      A.   Sunday - Thursday: 11:00 p.m. through 5:00 a.m.
      B.   Friday - Saturday: 12:00 a.m. through 5:00 a.m.
   4.   Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the juvenile curfew:
      A.   The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.
      B.   The minor is on the sidewalk of the property where the minor resides
or on either side of the place where the minor resides and the adult
responsible for the minor has given permission for the minor to be there.
      C.   The minor is present at or is traveling between home and one of the
following:
         (1)   Minor’s place of employment within one hour after the end of
work.
         (2)   Minor’s place of religious activity within one hour after the
end of the religious activity.
         (3)   Governmental or political activity within one hour after the end
of the activity.
         (4)   School activity or within one hour after the end of the
activity.
         (5)   Assembly such as a march, protest, demonstration, sit-in, or
meeting of an association for the advancement of economic, political,
religious, or cultural matters; or for any other activity protected by the
First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution within one hour after the end of the
assembly, association meeting, or other activity protected by the First
Amendment.
         (6)   The minor is on an emergency errand for a responsible adult.
         (7)   The minor’s business, trade, or occupation, in which the minor
is permitted by law to be engaged, requires the presence of the minor in the
public place.
   5.   Responsibility of Adults. It is unlawful for any responsible adult
knowingly to permit or to allow a minor to be in any public place in the City
within the time periods prohibited by this section, unless the minor’s presence
falls within one of the above subsections.
   6.   Enforcement Procedures.
      A.   Determination of Age. In determining the age of the juvenile and in
the absence of convincing evidence such as birth certificate or a driver’s
license, a police officer on the street shall, in the first instance, use his
or her best judgment in determining age.
      B.   Grounds for Arrest; Conditions of Custody. Grounds for arrest are
that the person refuses to sign the citation without qualification; persists in
violating this curfew section; refuses to provide proper identification or to
identify the person’s self; or constitutes an immediate threat to the person’s
own safety or the safety of the public. A law enforcement officer who arrests a
minor for a curfew violation may keep the minor in custody either in a shelter
care facility or in any non-secured setting. The officer shall not place bodily
restraints, such as handcuffs, on the minor unless the minor physically resists
or threatens physical violence when being taken into custody. A minor shall not
be placed in detention following a curfew violation.
      C.   Notification of Responsible Adult. After a minor is taken into
custody, the law enforcement officer shall notify the parent or adult
responsible for the minor as soon as possible. The minor shall then be released
to the parent or adult responsible for the minor, unless instructed to release
the minor to another person by the parent or adult responsible, upon the
promise of such person to produce the child in court at such time as the court
may direct. If a minor is issued a citation to appear for a violation of this
section, a law enforcement officer shall notify the adult responsible for the
minor as soon as possible, within 24 hours of the violation.
   7.   Penalties.
      A.   Responsible Adult’s First Violation. In the case of a first
violation by a minor, the law enforcement officer shall, by certified mail,
send to the adult responsible for the minor, written notice of the violation
with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of
the curfew ordinance against both the responsible adult and minor, with
applicable penalties.
      B.   Responsible Adult’s Second Violation. Any responsible adult as
defined in this section who, following receipt of a warning, knowingly allows
the minor to violate any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
simple misdemeanor.
      C.   Minor’s First Violation. In the case of a first violation by a
minor, the law enforcement officer shall give the minor a written warning,
which states that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of
the curfew ordinance against the responsible adult and the minor, with
applicable penalties, or, at the law enforcement officer’s discretion, may
issue the minor a citation for a first violation.
      D.   Minor’s Second Violation. For the minor’s second and subsequent
violations of any of the provisions of this section, the minor is guilty of a
simple misdemeanor.
46.02   CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO.
It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to smoke, use, possess,
purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes. Possession of tobacco,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes
by an individual under 21 years of age shall not constitute a violation of this
section if the individual under 21 years of age possesses the tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as part
of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a
valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers for
sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.03   CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY.
It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under 18 years of age to
commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
47.01 Purpose                    47.10 Swimming
47.02 Use of Drives Required     47.11 Amplified Sound
47.03 Fires                      47.12 Hunting and Trapping
47.04 Littering                  47.13 Solicitations
47.05 Parks Closed               47.14 Offensive Acts
47.06 Camping Areas              47.15 Privately Owned Animals
47.07 Camping Refused            47.16 Closing Sections of Park
47.08 Supervision                47.17 Nicotine Regulations in City Parks
47.09 Trees, Plants, and Flowers
47.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park facilities
by the general public by establishing rules and regulations governing the use
of park facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
47.02   USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED.
No person shall drive any car, cycle or other vehicle, or ride or lead any
horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or roadways
therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the City.
47.03   FIRES.
No fires shall be built, except in a place provided therefor, and such fire
shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be immediately
used by some other party.
47.04   LITTERING.
No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter, or foreign
substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that purpose.
47.05   PARKS CLOSED.
With the exception of events or activities sponsored or approved by the Parks
and Recreation Commission or the Council (such as Autumn Fest, Tunes In Town,
the Paul Skeffington Memorial Race, baseball and softball leagues, flag
football, and so forth) all parks are closed between dusk and 5:00 a.m.
47.06   CAMPING AREAS.
No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in portions prescribed or
designated by the Council.
47.07   CAMPING REFUSED.
The City may refuse camping privileges or rescind any and all camping
privileges for cause.
47.08   SUPERVISION.
All park grounds and facilities shall be operated and maintained under the
supervision of the Park and Recreation Commission.
47.09   TREES, PLANTS, AND FLOWERS.
No tree, plant, or flower may be cut, pulled, or damaged in City parks without
prior approval from the Park and Recreation Commission.
47.10   SWIMMING.
No swimming is permitted in Silver Creek at Westbrook Park.
47.11   AMPLIFIED SOUND.
The use of any system for amplifying sounds, whether for speech or music, is
prohibited without prior approval from the Park and Recreation Commission.
47.12   HUNTING AND TRAPPING.
No person in a park shall hunt, trap, shoot, or throw missiles at any animal,
reptile, or bird in a City park.
47.13   SOLICITATIONS.
No person shall solicit in any manner or for any purpose, or sell or offer for
sale, any goods, wares, merchandise in any park without prior approval from the
Park and Recreation Commission.
47.14   OFFENSIVE ACTS.
No person shall engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting, or
indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to
breach the public peace.
47.15   PRIVATELY OWNED ANIMALS.
No privately owned animal shall be allowed in a City park unless accompanied
and controlled by owner or person having custody of said animal. The owner or
person having the custody of said animal shall have such animal under control
and firmly held on a leash, cord, or chain. The owner or person having the
custody of said animal shall be responsible for any damage caused in any event
by such animal.
47.16   CLOSING SECTIONS OF PARK.
Any park or parts of any park may be declared closed to the public by the Park
and Recreation Commission at any time as found necessary by the Park and
Recreation Commission.
47.17   NICOTINE REGULATIONS IN CITY PARKS.
   1.   The Council finds that:
      A.   Tobacco or nicotine use in the proximity of children and adults
engaging in or watching outdoor activities is detrimental to their health and
can be dangerous to those using such facilities; and
      B.   Adults visiting areas frequented by youth, like parks, are role
models for youth and can have a positive effect on the lifestyle choices they
make;
      C.   This is an opportunity to create and sustain an environment that
supports a non-tobacco and non­nicotine norm through a tobacco-free and
nicotine-free policy, rule enforcement, and adult-peer role modeling during
recreation;
      D.   The tobacco industry advertises at and sponsors events to foster a
connection between tobacco use and community events;
      E.   Tobacco products (extends to all types of tobacco and nicotine
products), once consumed in public spaces, are often discarded on the ground
requiring additional maintenance expenses, diminish the beauty of outdoor
facilities, and pose a risk to toddlers, pets, and wildlife due to ingestion.
   2.   Policy. Use of tobacco products, nicotine products, and electronic
vaporizers is prohibited in the following City parks and outdoor recreational
facilities at all times: the DeWitt Community Center (including front entrance
area), the DeWitt Fitness Center (including parking lot), DeWitt Aquatic Center
(including parking lot), the DeWitt Skate Park, Pool Park, all baseball
softball fields (at Little Trees Park, Westbrook Park and Pool Park), all
soccer fields (at Westbrook Park, Pool Park, and Little Trees Park), all
playgrounds (at Westbrook Park, Paarmann Park, Little Trees Park, and at
Lincoln Park), all bleachers (at Pool Park, Westbrook Park and Little Trees
Park), and the Dog Park. Additionally, the use of tobacco products, nicotine
products, and electronic vaporizers is prohibited at all City parks and outdoor
recreational facilities when there is a public event occurring such as, but not
limited to, athletic events and games, public concerts, public speakers, other
public presentations, Autumnfest, National Night Out, the Skeffington Memorial
Race, the John Bloom Art Festival, Tunes in Town, and other similar events. For
the purpose of this section tobacco includes any smoking, chewing, dipping,
lighting, or any other use of any tobacco product. Nicotine products include,
but are not limited, to look-a-likes where the original would include tobacco
or nicotine, products such as dissolvable, spitless, snus, chewing, electronic
cigarettes, and any other product containing nicotine. Electronic vaporizers
are defined as any device, including, but not limited to, e-cigarettes, e-pens,
e-hookah, e-cigars, and vape pens used to vaporize plant material, liquids,
oils, nicotine, or other chemicals that may be inhaled by users. Use of FDA
approved prescription medication and products for cessation are allowed. This
section applies to all visitors, employees, and attendees.
   3.   Municipal Infraction. A violation of this section will constitute a
municipal infraction punishable pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Code of
Ordinances.
CHAPTER 48
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
 
48.01 Definitions                       48.05 Property Owner/Lessee
                                        Responsibility
48.02 Mobile Food Unit License Required 48.06 License Fees
48.03 Mobile Food Unit Licensing        48.07 Compliance with the Law
Application
48.04 Mobile Food Vendor Locations      48.08 Suspension or Revocation of
                                        License
 
48.01   DEFINITIONS.
Mobile food vendor: a person engaged in the business of selling food or
beverages from a mobile food unit (self-contained motorized vehicle, trailer or
pushcart).
48.02   MOBILE FOOD UNIT LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the sale of food or beverages
from a mobile food unit without first obtaining a mobile food unit license. A
mobile food unit license issued by the City Clerk or the City Clerk’s designee
shall be subject to the following:
   1.   A mobile food unit license includes:
      A.   An annual license that expires on December 31st each year. (Fee
$150)
      B.   A one-day license that is purchased for a specific single day. (Fee
$25)
   2.   Each mobile food unit shall be licensed separately. No license transfer
is allowed.
   3.   Each mobile food unit shall comply with Clinton County and State of
Iowa inspection requirements and display its State license in full view of the
public in or on the unit.
   4.   Each mobile food unit shall have a working fire suppression system.
   5.   Exempt.
      A.   Seasonal food stands selling only local fresh produce between May
15, and October 15.
      B.   Non-profits, community organizations, and DeWitt restaurants shall
not be required to acquire a permit for special events.
      C.   Mobile food vendors on private property and not open to the public
are exempt from the license.
48.03   MOBILE FOOD UNIT LICENSING APPLICATION.
   1.   Filing. Applications shall be filed with the City Clerk. No application
request shall be accepted for filing and processing unless it conforms to the
requirements of this chapter. This would include a complete and true
application, all of the required materials and information prescribed, and is
accompanied by the required fees. Fees shall be set by resolution.
   2.   Timely Submittal. Unless otherwise provided herein, applications must
be submitted not less than five (5) calendar days prior to the proposed start
date of the mobile food unit activities. The City reserves the right to reject
any applications that have not been timely submitted to the City.
   3.   Application Contents. Application shall be made on a form provided by
the City and shall include:
      A.   Full name of the applicant.
      B.   Applicant’s contact information including mailing address, phone
numbers and e-mail address.
      C.   Photographs of the mobile food unit from the front, side and back.
      D.   Make, model, and year of vehicle to be used and the license plate
number (if required).
      E.   Overall size of the vehicle; to include length, width, and height.
      F.   Site plan or drawing of location including:
         (1)   Address.
         (2)   Property lines.
         (3)   Driveways.
         (4)   Sidewalks.
         (5)   Parking areas.
         (6)   Buildings on the property.
         (7)   Fire hydrants.
         (8)   Other utilities such as utility poles, street lights,
transformers, utility boxes, and so forth.
      G.   A certificate of insurance naming the City of DeWitt as an
additional insured. The certificate shall include the following government
immunities provisions provided by Iowa Code Chapter 670.4:
         (1)   The company and the insured expressly agree and state that the
purchase of this policy of insurance by the insured does not waive any of the
defenses of governmental immunity available to the insured under Iowa Code
Section 670.4 as it now exists and as it may be amended from time to time.
         (2)   The company and the insured further agree that this policy of
insurance shall cover only those claims not subject to the defense of
governmental immunity under Iowa Code Section 670.4 as it now exists and as it
may be amended from time to time.
   4.   Right to Appeal. Any applicant whose application for license was
disapproved may appeal to the City Council at its next regularly scheduled
meeting by filing with the City Clerk or the City Clerk’s designee a written
request for an appeal to the City Council at least seven (7) days prior to the
meeting. As a result of this appeal, the City Council may affirm, modify or
reverse the decision of the Clerk not to issue the license. If the application
for license is denied, the applicant is not eligible for the issuance of a
license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of
notification that the license application was disapproved, was served in person
or deposited in U.S. Mail.
   5.   Applications Deemed Withdrawn. Any application received shall be deemed
withdrawn if it has been held in abeyance, awaiting the submittal of additional
requested information from the applicant, and if the applicant has not
communicated in writing with the City and made reasonable progress within
thirty (30) days from the last notification from the City to the applicant. The
applicant fee is nonrefundable. Any application deemed withdrawn shall require
submission of a new application and fees to begin a new review and approval
process.
   6.   Issuance of License. Upon completion of the review process and a
determination of compliance with the applicable regulations, the City Clerk or
the City Clerk’s designee will issue a mobile food unit license.
48.04   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR LOCATIONS.
   1.   Mobile food unit shall not be operated on public property except as
part of an event approved under a special event permit by the City or as
authorized by the Parks & Recreation Department (event such as Tunes in Town,
Paul Skeffington Memorial Race). Mobile units also are prohibited from parking
within 50 feet of any permanent building establishment that sells prepared food
or beverages.
   2.   No mobile food unit shall be left unattended or stored on any site
overnight, unless that property is under the ownership or control of (by way of
a lease or other contractual agreement) the operator of the unit and is being
done so in compliance with all other City Code requirements or the mobile food
unit is a participant in a multiple (contiguous) day, City permitted, public
property special event. Any mobile food unit found unattended shall be
considered in violation of these regulations and subject to license revocation,
towing, or any other action legally allowed.
   3.   Music and Sound Making Devices. The use of music or sound making
devices as a part of a mobile food unit shall be prohibited, unless expressly
allowed as part of an approved event.
   4.   Mobile Food Unit Performance Standards. Persons conducting business
from a mobile food unit must do so in compliance with the following standards:
      A.   The mobile food vendor must obtain expressed written consent of the
property owner or lessee to use the property on which they propose to operate.
The written consent must be kept in the unit at all times that the unit is on
the property. Written consent does not excuse or permit the violation of any
other imposable regulations.
      B.   The operator of the mobile food unit shall display their City
license in full view of the public in or on the unit.
      C.   Mobile food shall be limited to hours of operation between eight
o’clock (8:00) a.m. and 9 o’clock (9:00) p.m.
      D.   Mobile food units shall serve patrons who are on foot only; no
drive-up service to the unit itself shall be provided or allowed.
      E.   The mobile food unit must be located on a paved or rocked surface.
      F.   Mobile food units shall only be located on property that is zoned C-
2 General Commercial District, C-3 Highway Business District, M-2 Heavy
Industrial District, or M-1 Light Industrial District unless otherwise approved
by the City Council.
      G.   All mobile food units shall maintain a minimum separation from
buildings of fifteen feet as measured to the closest building element including
awnings or canopies, tents or membrane structures. Location of the food unit
shall not impede pedestrians from entering or exiting a building.
      H.   The window or area where a patron orders and receives their purchase
shall be located so as to not require a patron to stand, or create a line that
may cause pedestrians to be in the public right of way, vehicle travel lane,
including parking lot drive aisles, or similar situation that may create a
potential safety hazard. Adequate safe space for patrons waiting for their
order must be available on the property where the mobile food unit is located.
      I.   Signs are limited to those that are attached to the exterior of the
mobile unit and must be mounted flat against the unit and not project more than
six inches (6”) from the exterior of the unit. One temporary freestanding
business identification sign of 16 square feet or less is permitted. Such a
sign shall only be permitted during the time the mobile unit is operating. Off
premises signs directing patrons to the mobile food unit are prohibited.
      J.   During business hours, the mobile food vendor shall provide a trash
receptacle for use by customers and shall keep the area around the mobile food
unit clear of litter and debris at all times.
      K.   All mobile food units shall be located in such a manner as to not
create a safety hazard, such as blocking emergency access to buildings and the
site, obstructing access to fire hydrants, impeding entering and exiting from a
building, creating a visual impediment for the motoring public at drive
entrances, intersections, pedestrian crossings, or similar movement and access.
48.05   PROPERTY OWNER/LESSEE RESPONSIBILITY.
By allowing the mobile food unit on their property, the property owner or
lessee jointly and severally with the vendor are responsible for compliance
with this chapter and to ensure the safety of pedestrians and access of
emergency vehicle to and around the site. Failure to do so could result in the
property owner or lessee being party to any enforcement actions or penalties
allowed by law.
48.06   LICENSE FEES.
At the time of the submittal of a license application, the applicant shall pay
to the City the applicable licensee fee in addition to any applicable
inspection fee(s). The fee schedule will bet set by resolution and may be
modified from time to time with approval by resolution of the City Council. Any
licensee who surrenders their license prior to the date of expiration shall not
be entitled to a refund of any portion of the fee.
48.07   COMPLIANCE WITH THE LAW.
Each mobile food unit vendor shall comply with all applicable federal, State,
and local laws, regulations, and rules.
48.08   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or
revoked by the City as follows:
   1.   Grounds. The City Clerk or the City Clerk’s designee may suspend or
revoke any license issued under this chapter, for any of, but not limited to,
the following reasons:
      A.   The licensee has made fraudulent statements in his/her application
for the license or in the conduct of his/her business.
      B.   The licensee has violated this chapter or any other chapter of this
Code or has otherwise conducted his/her business in an unlawful manner.
      C.   The licensee has conducted his/her business in such manner as to
endanger the public welfare, safety, order, or morals.
      D.   The City Clerk or City Clerk’s designee has received and
investigated three (3) or more found complaints during the licensed period
related to the manner in which the licensee is conducting business.
   2.   Notice of Suspension or Revocation; Right to Appeal. The City Clerk or
the City Clerk’s designee shall cause notice of the license revocation to be
served in person by a City official or by mail to the licensee’s local address,
which notice shall specify the reason(s) for such action, at which time
operations of the licensee must cease within the corporate limits of the City
of DeWitt. The licensee may appeal the revocation of the license to the City
Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting by filing with the City Clerk
or the City Clerk’s designee a written request for an appeal to the City
Council at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting. The City Council may
affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the City Clerk or the City Clerk’s
designee to revoke such license. If a license is revoked, no refund of any
license fee paid shall be made. Upon the revocation of a license, the licensee
is not eligible for the issuance of a new license under this chapter for a
period of one year from the date the license revocation is served in person or
deposited in the U.S. Mail.
(Chapter 48 – Ord._2024-01 – Mar. 24 Supp.)
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
 
50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.05 Nuisance Abatement
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated   50.06 Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice
50.03 Other Conditions       50.07 Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited   50.08 Adult Establishments
 
50.01   DEFINITION OF NUISANCE.
Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to
interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02   NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions that are
deemed to be nuisances in the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
   1.   Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing, or using any building or other
place for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture that, by
occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other
annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property
of individuals or the public.
   2.   Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth, or
noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of
others.
   3.   Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding without
legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor, or collection of
water.
   4.   Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the
water of any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its
natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
   5.   Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by
fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places, or burying grounds.
   6.   Billboards. Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether
erected and constructed on public or private property, that so obstruct and
impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway,
boulevard, or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render
dangerous the use thereof. (See also Section
62.06)
   7.   Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk,
such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones, and paper, by dealers in such
articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof
construction. (See also
Chapter 51)
   8.   Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
   9.   Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush, or other
vegetation in the City so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard.
   10.   Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch elm disease. (See also
Chapter 150)
   11.   Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within
1,000 feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or
landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take-
off and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or
enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.
   12.   Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of
prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code
of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as
defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or houses
where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, or breaches of the peace are carried
on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
50.03   OTHER CONDITIONS.
The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other conditions that are deemed to be nuisances:
   1.   Junk and Junk Vehicles (See
Chapter 51)
   2.   Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See
Chapter 105)
   3.   Dangerous Buildings (See
Chapter 145)
   4.   Trees (See
Chapter 150)
50.04   NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public
or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or State
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05   NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
Whenever any authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such
officer has the authority to determine on a case-by-case basis whether to
utilize the nuisance abatement procedure described in Section
50.06 of this chapter or the municipal infraction procedure referred to in
Section
50.07. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY WRITTEN NOTICE.
Any nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in
this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   1.   Contents of Notice to Property Owner. The notice to abate shall
contain: † 1
  
      A.   Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the
nuisance.
      B.   Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
      C.   Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to
abate the nuisance.
      D.   Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.
      E.   Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or
condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within
the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against the
property owner.
   2.   Method of Service. The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or
sent by certified mail to the property owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   3.   Request for Hearing. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a
hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a
hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time
stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance
exists and it must be abated as ordered. The hearing will be before the Council
at a time and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the Council shall be
conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated
within a reasonable time under the circumstances.
   4.   Abatement in Emergency. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may
perform any action that may be required under this chapter without prior
notice. The City shall assess the costs as provided in Subsection 6 of this
section after notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions of
Subsections 1 and 2, and the hearing as provided in Subsection 3.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   5.   Abatement by City. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or
condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the
required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred.
The itemized expense account shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall pay such
expenses on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   6.   Collection of Costs. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total
expense incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to
abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not
been paid within one month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County
Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner
as, general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   7.   Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement. If the amount expended to
abate the nuisance or condition exceeds $500.00, the City may permit the
assessment to be paid in up to 10 annual installments, to be paid in the same
manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against
benefited property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
   8.   Failure to Abate. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who
shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time
required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of
Ordinances.
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is
  included in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use
  of this administrative abatement procedure, particularly where cost of abatement
1 is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to whether or not a nuisance does
  in fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings, we
  recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with
  abatement and assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in
  court under Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.
50.07   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
In lieu of the abatement procedures set forth in Section
50.06, the requirements of this chapter may be enforced under the procedures
applicable to municipal infractions as set forth in
Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances.
50.08   ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS.
   1.   As used in this section, “adult establishment” means any business that
provides nude or topless dancing or operates any other adult-oriented business.
   2.   A public safety nuisance exists when it is established by clear and
convincing evidence that an owner, manager, employee, contemporaneous patron,
or guest of an adult establishment commits any of the following acts either on
the premises or in any parking lots or areas, including but not limited to
public rights-of-way, adjacent to the premises:
      A.   Unlawfully discharges a firearm or uses an offensive weapon, as
defined in Section 724.1 of the Code of Iowa, regardless of whether it inflicts
injury or death.
      B.   Assaults another person with a dangerous weapon as defined in
Section 702.7 of the Code of Iowa resulting in injury or death.
      C.   Engages in a riot as defined in Section 723.1 of the Code of Iowa on
three or more dates within a 12-month period to which the police respond and
disperse a crowd. The participants need not be the same persons for each
incident.
   3.   When the City Attorney believes a serious threat to the public safety
exists, the City Attorney or any other attorney on behalf of the City Attorney,
may file a suit in equity in the district court without bond seeking abatement
of the public safety nuisance arising from an adult establishment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.12)
(Section 50.08 – Ord. 2024-06 – Dec. 24 Supp.)
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
 
51.01 Definitions                       51.04 Exceptions
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.05 Notice to Abate
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance
 
51.01   DEFINITIONS.
The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
   1.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-
ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery,
and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery, or appliances; iron,
steel, or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass,
tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly
stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.
   2.   “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage with the
County Treasurer or unlicensed and having any of the following characteristics:
      A.   Broken Glass. Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield,
window, headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken glass.
      B.   Broken, Loose, or Missing Part. Any vehicle with a broken, loose, or
missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel, or trunk lid.
      C.   Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects. Any vehicle that has become
the habitat for rats, mice, snakes, or any other vermin or insects.
      D.   Flammable Fuel. Any vehicle that contains gasoline or any other
flammable fuel.
      E.   Inoperable. Any motor vehicle that lacks an engine or two or more
wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle totally
inoperable, or that cannot be moved under its own power or has not been used as
an operating vehicle for a period of 30 days or more.
      F.   Defective or Obsolete Condition. Any other vehicle that, because of
its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to
the public health and safety.
Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding
that the vehicle is a junk vehicle.
   3.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and
includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle,
tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof.
51.02   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any
private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or junk
vehicle.
51.03   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE.
It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon private
property, unless excepted by Section
51.04, constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a
nuisance within the meaning of Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk
or junk vehicle is kept upon private property in violation hereof, the owner of
or person occupying the property upon which it is located shall be prima facie
liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04   EXCEPTIONS.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk vehicle
stored within:
   1.   Structure. A garage or other enclosed structure; or
   2.   Salvage Yard. An auto salvage yard or junk yard lawfully operated
within the City.
51.05   NOTICE TO ABATE.
Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property in
violation of Section
51.03, the City shall within five days initiate abatement procedures as
outlined in
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
CHAPTER 52
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
 
52.01 Purpose                      52.04 Determining Factors
52.02 Controlled Substance Defined 52.05 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
52.03 Drug Paraphernalia Defined   52.06 Manufacture, Delivery, or Offering For
                                   Sale
52.01   PURPOSE.  
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with intent to
use, manufacture, and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined herein.
52.02   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED.  
The term “controlled substance” as used in this chapter is defined as the term
“controlled substance” is defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
52.03   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED.  
The term “drug paraphernalia” as used in this chapter means all equipment,
products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or
designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing, containing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa. It includes, but is not limited to:
   1.   Growing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can
be derived.
   2.   Processing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances.
   3.   Isomerization Devices. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance.
   4.   Testing Equipment. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or
designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or
purity of controlled substances.
   5.   Scales. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
   6.   Diluents. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose, or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances.
   7.   Separators; Sifters. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for
use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise
cleaning or refining marijuana.
   8.   Mixing Devices. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices
used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances.
   9.   Containers. Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
   10.   Storage Containers. Containers and other objects used, intended for
use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
   11.   Injecting Devices. Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects
used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting
controlled substances into the human body.
   12.   Ingesting-Inhaling Device. Objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin, marijuana,
cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
      A.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with
or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
      B.   Water pipes;
      C.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
      D.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
      E.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as
a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand;
      F.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
      G.   Chamber pipes;
      H.   Carburetor pipes;
      I.   Electric pipes;
      J.   Air driven pipes;
      K.   Chillums;
      L.   Bongs;
      M.   Ice pipes or chillers.
52.04   DETERMINING FACTORS.  
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose of
enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be considered in addition
to all other logically relevant factors:
   1.   Statements. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use.
   2.   Prior Convictions. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone
in control of the object under any State or federal law relating to any
controlled substance.
   3.   Proximity to Violation. The proximity of the object, in time and space,
to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of
the Code of Iowa.
   4.   Proximity to Substances. The proximity of the object to controlled
substances.
   5.   Residue. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object.
   6.   Evidence of Intent. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of
an owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom
he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of
the Code of Iowa.
   7.   Innocence of an Owner. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not prevent a finding
that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   8.   Instructions. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use.
   9.   Descriptive Materials. Descriptive materials accompanying the object
explaining or depicting its use.
   10.   Advertising. National and local advertising concerning its use.
   11.   Displayed. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
   12.   Licensed Distributor or Dealer. Whether the owner, or anyone in
control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the
community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
   13.   Sales Ratios. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales
of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
   14.   Legitimate Uses. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community.
   15.   Expert Testimony. Expert testimony concerning its use.
52.05   POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.  
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
52.06   MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY, OR OFFERING FOR SALE.
It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver,
manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia,
intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used, or knowing
that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions                  55.14 Keeping, Sheltering or Harboring
                                   Dangerous/Vicious Animals
55.02 Animal Neglect               55.15 Impoundment of High-Risk Animals
55.03 Livestock Neglect            55.16 At Large: Impoundment
55.04 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs 55.17 Disposition of Animals
55.05 Livestock                    55.18 Impounding Costs
55.06 At Large Prohibited          55.19 Sterilization
55.07 Damage or Interference       55.20 Animal Pound
55.08 Annoyance or Disturbance     55.21 Animal Adoption
55.09 Vicious Animal               55.22 Unhealthful or Unsanitary
                                   Conditions
55.10 Rabies Vaccination           55.23 Number of Animals Limited
55.11 Owner’s Duty               55.24 Pet Awards Prohibited
55.12 Quarantine/Confinement       55.25 Tampering With A Rabies Vaccination
Requirements                       Tag
55.13 High-Risk Animals            55.26 Tampering With An Electronic
                                   Handling Device
 
55.01   DEFINITIONS.
The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
   1.   “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any medium,
including (but not limited to) print, radio, television, sign, display, label,
tag or articulation.
   2.   “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
Ref. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
   3.   “Animal control officer” means a person designated by the Council to
perform such duties involving animal control and having authority for the
enforcement of this chapter.
   4.   “At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the
control of a competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, or housed in
a veterinary hospital or kennel, on a leash, or at heel beside a competent
person and obedient to that person’s command
   5.   “Business” means any enterprise relating to any of the following:
      A.   The sale or offer for sale of goods or services.
      B.   A recruitment for employment or membership in an organization.
      C.   A solicitation to make an investment.
      D.   An amusement or entertainment activity.
   6.   “Cat” means a member of the Felis domestica species, male or female,
whether altered or not.
   7.   “Dog” means a member of the canine species, male or female, whether
altered or not.
   8.   “Dangerous animal-high risk” means and includes any animal which is not
naturally tamed or gentle; or which is of a wild nature or disposition; or
which is capable of killing or inflicting serious injury upon human beings and
having known tendencies, individually or as a species, to do so; or which,
because of its size or other characteristics, would constitute a danger to
human life or property if it is not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in
secure quarters, including, but not limited to, the following animals, which
shall be deemed as dangerous per se: bears, wolves, wolf hybrid dogs, foxes,
coyotes, lions, tigers, panthers, lynx, bobcats, elephants, bison, poisonous or
venomous snakes, poisonous or venomous spiders, poisonous or venomous reptiles
or other poisonous or venomous animals, alligators, crocodiles, anacondas,
pythons, boa constrictors, and piranhas. Dangerous animals also include but are
not limited to:
      A.   Any cross breed of such animals which have similar characteristics
of the animals specified above;
      B.   Any other specific class, species or subspecies of animals declared
to be high-risk or dangerous by the City Council.
      C.   Any other animal deemed “dangerous” in accordance with Iowa Code
§717F.1(5), as amended.
   9.   “Fair” means any of the following:
      A.   The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State Fair Board
pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event conducted by a
fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products.
      C.   An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or concession
booths.
   10.   “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill” as defined in
Section 99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.
   11.   “Guard dog” means any dog trained or used to protect persons or
property by attacking or threatening to attack any person found within the area
patrolled by the dog and that is either securely enclosed within that area at
all times or under the continuous control of a trained handler that is 18 yrs
or older.
   12.   “Kennel” means any State or federally licensed premises on which dogs
or cats, six months old or older, are kept or raised for the bona fide purpose
of sale and which are kept under constant restraint.
   13.   “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine,
ovine or porcine species, ostriches, rheas and emus; farm deer as defined in
Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa; or poultry.
Ref. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
   14.   “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an
animal.
   15.   “Pet” means a living dog, cat, or an animal normally maintained in a
small tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not limited to a
rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch, tropical fish,
goldfish, snake, turtle, gecko, or iguana.
   16.   “Pound” means a facility for the prevention of cruelty to animals
operated by the State, a municipal corporation, or other political subdivision
of the State for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized stray, homeless,
abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, or other animals; or a facility operated for
such a purpose under a contract with any municipal corporation or incorporated
society.
Ref. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   17.   “Research facility” means any school or college of medicine,
veterinary medicine, pharmacy, dentistry, or osteopathic medicine, or hospital,
diagnostic or research laboratories, or other educational or scientific
establishment situated in the State concerned with the investigation of, or
instruction concerning the structure or function of living organisms, the
cause, prevention, control, or cure of diseases or abnormal conditions of human
beings or animals.
Ref. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   18.   “Veterinarian” means a veterinarian licensed pursuant to Chapter 169
of the Code of Iowa who practices veterinary medicine in the State.
   19.   “Vicious animal” means any dog or other animal which, unprovoked and
in a terrorizing manner, or in apparent attitude of attack, approaches any
person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places; or any dog
with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause
injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals;
or any dog which bites, inflicts injury upon, assaults or otherwise attacks a
human being or domestic animal on public or private property; or any dog or
other animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting
or any animal trained for fighting.
55.02   ANIMAL NEGLECT.
   1.   It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of an animal and
confines that animal to fail to provide the animal with any of the following
conditions for the animal’s welfare:
Ref. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
      A.   Access to food in an amount and quality reasonably sufficient to
satisfy the animal’s basic nutrition level to the extent that the animal’s
health or life is endangered.
      B.   Access to a supply of potable water in an amount reasonably
sufficient to satisfy the animal’s basic hydration level to the extent that the
animal’s health or life is endangered.  Access to snow or ice does not satisfy
this requirement.
      C.   Sanitary conditions free from excessive animal waste or the
overcrowding of animals to the extent that the animal’s health or life is
endangered.
      D.   Ventilated shelter reasonably sufficient to provide adequate
protection from the elements and weather conditions suitable for the age,
species, and physical condition of the animal so as to maintain the animal in a
state of good health to the extent that the animal’s health or life is
endangered. The shelter must protect the animal from wind, rain, snow, or sun
and have adequate bedding to provide reasonable protection against cold and
dampness. A shelter may include a residence, garage, barn, shed, or doghouse.
      E.   Grooming, to the extent it is reasonably necessary to prevent
adverse health effects or suffering.
      F.   Veterinary care deemed necessary by a reasonably prudent person to
relieve an animal’s distress from any of the following:
         (1)   A condition caused by failing to provide for the animal’s
welfare as described in this section.
         (2)   An injury or illness suffered by the animal causing the animal
to suffer prolonged pain and suffering.
   2.   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      A.   A person operating a commercial establishment under a valid
authorization issued or renewed under Section 162.2A of the Code of Iowa, or a
person acting under the direction or supervision of that person, if all of the
following apply:
         (1)   The animal, as described in Subsection 1, was maintained as part
of the commercial establishment’s operation.
         (2)   In providing conditions for the welfare of the animal, as
described in Subsection 1, the person complied with the standard of care
requirements provided in Section 162.10A(1) of the Code of Iowa, including any
applicable rules adopted by the Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship
applying to: (i) a State licensee or registrant operating pursuant to Section
162.10A(2)(a) or (2)(b) of the Code of Iowa; or (ii) a permittee operating
pursuant to Section 162.10A(2)(c) of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   A research facility if the research facility has been issued or
renewed a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture and Land
Stewardship pursuant to Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa, and performs functions
within the scope of accepted practices and disciplines associated with the
research facility.
55.03   LIVESTOCK NEGLECT.
It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any place to
fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary animal
husbandry practices, or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance, or to
injure or destroy livestock by any means that causes pain or suffering in a
manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices.
Ref. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.04   ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS.
It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of a cat or dog to
relinquish all rights in and duties to care for the cat or dog. This section
does not apply to any of the following:
Ref. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
   1.   The delivery of a cat or dog to another person who will accept
ownership and custody of the cat or dog.
   2.   The delivery of a cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound or that has
been issued or renewed a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture
and Land Stewardship under Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa.
   3.   A person who relinquishes custody of a cat at a location in which the
person does not hold a legal or equitable interest, if previously the person
had taken custody of the cat at the same location and provided for the cat’s
sterilization by a veterinarian.
55.05   LIVESTOCK.
It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except in
compliance with
Chapter 56, Urban Chickens, or by written consent of the City Building Official
and in compliance with the City’s zoning regulations, which only permits
livestock in areas zoned A-1 Agricultural Holding District. Buildings, yards,
and enclosures for cattle, goats, swine, or domestic fowl must at all times be
kept clean and free from filth and stagnant water. All such permits expire
annually and may be withdrawn for cause by the Council at any time.
55.06   AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at large within the
corporate limits of the City. No owner of any animal shall allow such animal to
be outside the confines of the property of the owner unless the animal is held
firmly on a leash, cord, or chain and under the control of its owner.
55.07   DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE.
It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to
pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference
with, the premises.
55.08   ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.
It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow or permit such dog to cause
serious annoyance or disturbance to any person by frequent and habitual
howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise, or by running after or chasing
persons, bicycles, automobiles, or other vehicles.
55.09   VICIOUS ANIMAL.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor a dangerous/vicious
animal within the City unless the dangerous/vicious animal is kept in
accordance with the provisions listed below in Section
55.13. A person who violates this section shall be subject to a municipal
infraction which may include the permanent removal of the dangerous/vicious
animal from the City limits.
   1.   The Polic Chief is authorized to implement the provisions of Section
55.12 (quarantine/confinement requirements) in response to a violation of this
section.
   2.   In the event an animal has acted in a manner described in Section
55.01(4) and is found at large or unattended upon any property within the City,
thereby creating a hazard to life or property, such animal may, at the
discretion of the Police Chief or his/her designee, be destroyed if it cannot
safely be confined or captured. The City shall be under no duty to attempt the
confinement or capture of a dangerous/vicious animal found at large, nor shall
it have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to its destruction.
   3.   In the event that the Police Chief determines that an animal has acted
in a manner described in Section
55.01(19), the Police Chief or his/her designee has discretional authority to
cite or summons such animal owner before the proper court or refer the matter
to the City Council to determine disposition.
55.10   RABIES VACCINATION.
Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal. It is
unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in the person’s possession, six
months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. Dogs kept
in kennels and not allowed to run at large shall not be subject to these
vaccination requirements.
Ref. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
Local health and law enforcement officials shall enforce the provisions of
Sections
55.10,
55.12,
55.15 &
55.17 relating to vaccination and impoundment of dogs. Such public officials
shall not be responsible for any accident or disease of a dog resulting from
the enforcement of the provisions of said sections.
Ref. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.36)
55.11   OWNER’S DUTY.
It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog, cat or other animal which has
bitten or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or
attack to report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It
shall be the duty of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board
of health the existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from
rabies.
Ref. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.12   QUARANTINE/CONFINEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
In the event that the Police Department or local board of health receives
information or has reason to believe that: (i) a dog or other animal has bitten
a person; (ii) a dog or other animal is suspected of having rabies or other
disease communicable to humas; (iii) a dog or other animal meets the definition
of a vicious animal or dangerous animal (as defined in Section
56.01 of this Code of Ordinances); or (iv) a dog or other animal is in
violation of this Code of Ordinances, the Police Department has the authority
to immediately take the animal to the approved vet clinic or shelter for the
purposes of examination/testing and/or observation. It is a violation of this
chapter for the owner of such a dog or animal to fail to or refuse to produce
said dog or animal. The Police Chief or his designee may do any of the
following with regard to a dog or animal that has been seized under this
chapter:
   1.   Retain such a dog or animal at the owner’s expense for purposes of
observation and testing for a period of not to exceed 30 days.
   2.   Release such animal to the control of its owner pursuant to a written
agreement and checklist with the owner upon such terms and conditions as the
Police Chief deems reasonably necessary to ensure public safety including but
not limited to any one or more of the following:
      A.   To keep the animal confined to the owner’s premises in an enclosure
or by any other means approved by the Police Chief.
      B.   To require the owner to identify the animal by means of a special
blaze orange collar.
      C.   To keep the animal securely muzzled, leashed, and under control of a
person 18 years of age or older who is physically capable of restraining the
animal and to keep the dog or animal on the owner’s premises at all times.
      D.   To require the owner to inform by any means, including (but not
limited to) the postmaster, utility companies, meter readers, or other persons
who routinely come on the property of the owner that a dangerous/vicious animal
is on the premises or if the owner moves his or her residence to another
location within the City, to inform any such persons that the animal is now on
the new premises.
      E.   To require the owner to prove financial responsibility for any
injury or damage which may be caused by the animal by posting a cash or surety
bond for an amount up to $1,000.00 with the City Clerk.
      F.   To require all impoundment fees to be paid by the owner before said
animal is released.
      G.   To require the owner to agree that any violation of the agreement
will result in the animal(s) being impounded and destroyed.
   3.   Refer the matter to the City Council or proper court to determine
disposition.
This section does not apply if a police service dog or a horse used by a law
enforcement agency and acting in the performance of its duties has bitten a
person.
55.13   HIGH-RISK ANIMALS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor a high risk animal
within the City unless the high risk animal is kept in accordance with Section
55.14. A person who violates this section shall be subject to a municipal
infraction which may include the permanent removal of the high-risk animal from
the City limits.
55.14   KEEPING, SHELTERING OR HARBORING DANGEROUS/VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   1.   Every person keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous/vicious
animal shall annually report such f act in writing to the Police Chief,
together with the following information:
      A.   The species name of each animal;
      B.   The number of such animals of each species kept on the premises;
      C.   A physical description of such animal, including any pet names to
which it might respond;
      D.   The location of such animal within the City, including the location
of the cage or place of confinement upon or in said premises where the animal
is kept;
      E.   In the case of poisonous animals, the location of the nearest
sources of anti-venom of that species.
   2.   Every person owning, keeping, shelter or harboring a dangerous/vicious
animal shall:
      A.   Annually register and pay the required Dangerous/Vicious Animal
License & registration fee.
      B.   Keep the animal from running at large;
      C.   Keep the animal from going into the streets and other public or
private place within the City unless muzzled, on a leash six feet or less in
length, and under the control of an individual 18 years of age or older;
      D.   While the animal is on the owner’s property ensure that it is
securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or
structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to
prevent the dangerous/vicious animal from escaping. Such pen or structure must
have minimum dimensions of 5’ x 10’ with height of six feet and must have
secure sides and be capped. The enclosure must also provide the dangerous/
vicious animal protection from the elements. Warning signs must be placed on
all sides of the property and at least two feet from any entrance to the
property. The warning signs must say “Dangerous/Vicious Dog” or similar
language adequate to warn those approaching. Additionally, a representative of
the City shall, prior to the high-risk animal’s authorized use and annually
thereafter, inspect and document the securely enclosed locked pens, signage,
and structures to ensure compliance requirements and file the document with the
City Clerk.
   3.   Every person keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous/vicious
poisonous animal(s) shall be required to keep 10 doses of anti-venom on hand
and current at all times.
   4.   No person keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous or vicious
animal shall permit or allow such animal to enter upon or traverse any property
of another, except when such animal is being transported while in a cage or
otherwise confined.
   5.   It is the owner’s responsibility to notify the Police Department
immediately in the event that a dangerous/vicious animal has escaped and is at
large.
   6.   In the event that the Police Chief determines that a dangerous/vicious
animal is being kept, sheltered or harbored by any person in violation of the
provisions of this section, the Police Department may issue a citation or
summons to cause such person to appear before the proper court or refer the
matter to the City Council to determine disposition.
   7.   A dangerous/vicious animal’s owner must spay or neuter and microchip
the animal. The micro chipping, spaying, or neutering procedure must be done by
a veterinarian at the owner’s expense. The data attached to the microchip must
be kept current.
   8.   The owner of a dangerous/vicious animal, as defined in Section
55.01, shall have 10 days to comply with the provisions of this section once
said animal satisfies any of the elements of Section
55.01.
   9.   Keeping Guard Dogs. The prohibition contained in this section does not
apply to keeping of guard dogs. However, guard dogs must be kept within a
structure, or a fenced enclosure as defined in Section
55.14(4) at all times. Any guard dog found at large may be processed as a
dangerous/vicious animal pursuant to the provisions of this section. Any
premises guarded by a guard dog shall be prominently posted with a sign
containing the words “GUARD DOG” or words of similar importance, and the owner
of such premises shall inform the Police Department and City Clerk, in writing,
that a guard dog is on duty at the premises. It is the owner’s responsibility
to notify the Police Department immediately when a guard dog has escaped and is
running at large.
55.15   IMPOUNDMENT OF HIGH-RISK ANIMALS.
   1.   The Police Department shall immediately seize and impound any
dangerous/vicious animal if:
      A.   The animal is not licensed as required by Section
55.14(1)(B); or
      B.   The owner does not secure the animal in a proper enclosure; or
      C.   The animal is outside the proper enclosure and not under physical
restraint of a responsible person 18 years of age or older by a leash not
longer than six feet or not muzzled.
   2.   Impoundment and Disposition.
      A.   First Offense. The first time a dangerous/vicious animal is seized
under this section it may be reclaimed by the owner of the animal upon payment
of impounding and boarding fees, and presentation of proof to the Police
Department that all the applicable requirements of Section
55.14 have been met. Additionally, the owner shall be subject to a municipal
infraction. An animal not reclaimed within seven days may be disposed of as
provided under Section
55.17, and the owner is liable to the Police Department for costs incurred in
confining and disposing of the animal.
      B.   Second Offense. The second time a dangerous/vicious animal is seized
under this section it may be reclaimed by the owner upon payment of impounding
and boarding fees, and presentation of proof, which shall include a signed
affidavit from the person taking custody of the animal, to the Police
Department that the animal will be removed from the City. An animal not
reclaimed within seven days will be disposed of as provided under Section
55.17, and the owner is liable to the Police Department for costs incurred in
confining and disposing of the animal.
      C.   Third Offense. The third time a dangerous animal is seized under
this section it shall be euthanized and the owner shall be liable to the Police
Department for the costs incurred in confining and disposing of the animal.
   3.   Any animal believed by the City Administrator, the City Administrator’s
designee, or the Police Department to be a dangerous/vicious-animal shall be
impounded, at the owner's expense, until such time as a final resolution is
reached or until such time the animal is reclaimed by the owner of the animal
upon payment of impounding and boarding fees, and presentation of proof to the
Police Department that all the applicaple requirements of Section
55.14 have been met.
55.16   AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT.
Animals found at large in violation of this chapter shall be seized and
impounded, and/or at the discretion of the peace officer, the owner may be
served a summons to appear before a proper court to answer charges made
thereunder.
55.17   DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
When an animal has been apprehended and impounded, written notice shall be
provided to the owner within two days after impoundment, if the owner’s name
and current address can reasonably be determined by accessing a tag or other
device that is on or part of the animal. Any animal not reclaimed by its owner
within seven working days after impoundment (or in the event notice was given
to the owner, within seven days after the notice was mailed) shall be made
available for adoption in a suitable home. Impounded animals may be recovered
by the owner upon payment of impounding costs, and if an unvaccinated dog or
cat, by having it immediately vaccinated. If the owner fails to redeem the
animal within seven days from the date that the notice is mailed, or if the
owner cannot be located within seven days and the animal has not been adopted,
the animal shall be disposed of in accordance with law or destroyed by
euthanasia.
Ref. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37, 351.41)
55.18   IMPOUNDING COSTS.
Impoundment fees for each animal is $25.00 for the first impoundment of any
calendar year and $35.00 for the second and $50.00 for the third and successive
impoundment of the same animal during any calendar year. In addition to
impounding fees, boarding costs for animals are $15.00 per day, per animal.
Ref. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37 and 351.41)
55.19   STERILIZATION.
No unclaimed dog or cat shall be released for adoption without being neutered
or spayed or without a written agreement from the adopter guaranteeing that
such animal will be neutered or spayed within 15 days.
55.20   ANIMAL POUND.
   1.   The City animal pound shall be conducted and operated by the animal
control personnel under the supervision, direction, and control of the Police
Chief.
   2.   It shall be the duty of the animal control personnel to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and to impound any animal found running at large
contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The animal control personnel shall
provide adequate and wholesome food for animals impounded and shall provide
careful and humane treatment toward such animals and shall provide for humane
destruction of animals as provided in this chapter.
   3.   The animal control personnel, upon impounding any animal pursuant to
this chapter, shall make a complete registration for such animal, entering the
date, species, breed, color, and sex of such animal, any tattoo number and
whether licensed. If such animal is chipped or licensed, the name and address
of the owner and the number of the license tag shall also be entered. The
register of impounded animals shall be available for inspection during
reasonable hours by the owners of animals not wearing the required tag when
impounded.
   4.   The Clerk may be designated as the official agent of the City for the
purpose of issuing City animal licenses and collecting licensing fees therefore
pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 57.
   5.   No person shall willfully interfere with, molest, or injure an agent of
the City authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter or seek to
release any animal properly in the custody of such authorized agent.
55.21   ANIMAL ADOPTION.
Any person wishing to adopt any dog or cat from the City must, where required,
have said animal neutered or spayed, inoculated against rabies and distemper,
purchase the required licenses, and provide the City with all adoption
information as required by the City.
55.22   UNHEALTHFUL OR UNSANITARY CONDITIONS.
   1.   An owner shall keep all structures, pens, coops, or yards wherein
animals are confined clean, devoid of vermin, and free of odors arising from
feces.
   2.   No owner or walker of any animal shall permit the animal to discharge
feces upon any public or private property, other than the property of the owner
of the animal. The owner or walker shall be deemed to permit the animal’s
discharge of feces if the owner does not immediately thereafter take steps to
remove and clean up the feces from the property.
   3.   All feces removed as aforesaid shall be placed in an airtight container
and shall be stored in a sanitary manner in an appropriate refuse container
until it is removed pursuant to refuse collection procedures or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner.
   4.   Any person violating this section may be charged with a municipal
infraction.
55.23   NUMBER OF ANIMALS LIMITED.
The total combined number of cats and dogs over the age of four months which
may be kept in anyone household shall be limited to five. All animals kept must
be licensed. This section shall not apply to a person who operates a
commercially State licensed kennel in an area properly zoned therefore. Any
person violating this section may be charged with a municipal infraction and be
compelled to remove excess animals from the property.
55.24   PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.
   1.   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or advertise
that a pet may be awarded as any of the following:
      A.   A prize for participating in a game.
      B.   A prize for participating in a fair.
      C.   An inducement or condition for visiting a place of business or
attending an event sponsored by a business.
      D.   An inducement or condition for executing a contract that includes
provisions unrelated to the ownership, care, or disposition of the pet.
   2.   Exceptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
      A.   A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code of Iowa if
the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a pet on the
premises of the pet shop.
      B.   Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers of America;
the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated with outdoor
recreation, hunting, or fishing, including but not limited to the Iowa
Sportsmen’s Federation.
Ref. (Code of Iowa, Ch. 717E)
55.25   TAMPERING WITH A RABIES VACCINATION TAG.
It is unlawful to tamper with a rabies vaccination tag.
   1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with a rabies vaccination tag
if all of the following apply:
      A.   The person knowingly removes, damages, or destroys a rabies
vaccination tag as described in Section 351.35 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   The rabies vaccination tag is attached to a collar worn by a dog,
including as provided in Sections 351.25 and 351.26 of the Code of Iowa.
   2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
      A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized
to take action by the owner.
      B.   A peace officer.
      C.   A veterinarian.
      D.   An animal shelter or pound.
Ref. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.45)
55.26   TAMPERING WITH AN ELECTRONIC HANDLING DEVICE.
It is unlawful to tamper with an electronic handling device.
   1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with an electronic handling
device if all of the following apply:
      A.   The person knowingly removes, disables, or destroys an electronic
device designed and used to maintain custody or control of the dog or modify
the dog’s behavior.
      B.   The electronic device is attached to or worn by the dog or attached
to an item worn by the dog, including (but not limited to) a collar, harness,
or vest.
   2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
      A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized
to take action by the owner.
      B.   A peace officer.
      C.   A veterinarian.
      D.   An animal shelter or pound.
Ref. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.46)
(Chapter 55 – Ord. 2025-04 – Dec. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 56
URBAN CHICKENS
 
56.01 Definitions                  56.08 Predators, Rodents, Insects, and
                                   Parasites
56.02 Permit Required              56.09 Feed and Water
56.03 Number and Types of Chickens 56.10 Waste Storage and Removal
Allowed
56.04 Zoning Districts Allowed     56.11 Chickens At Large
56.05 Non-Commercial Use Only      56.12 Unlawful Acts
56.06 Enclosures                   56.13 Violations
56.07 Odor and Noise Impacts
 
56.01   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Chicken” means a member of the subspecies Gallus gallus domesticus, a
domesticated fowl.
   2.   “Duplex” means the use of a legally described lot for two dwelling
units, each occupied by one family within a single building.
   3.   “Permitted tract of land” means the tract of land as identified by the
application upon which a permit is granted for keeping chickens pursuant to
this chapter.
   4.   “Permittee” means an applicant who has been granted a permit to raise,
harbor, or keep chickens pursuant to this chapter.
   5.   “Permitting officer” means the Building Official or designee.
   6.   “Single-family dwelling” means any building that contains only one
dwelling unit used and occupied for living purposes.
   7.   “Tract of land” means a property or a zoned lot that has one single-
family dwelling located on that property or zoned lot.
   8.   “Urban chicken” means a chicken kept on a permitted tract of land
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter.
56.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall raise, harbor, or keep chickens within the City without a valid
permit obtained from the permitting officer under the provisions of this
chapter.
   1.   Annual Application and Fee. In order to obtain a permit, an applicant
must submit a completed application each year on forms provided by the
permitting officer and paying all fees required by this chapter. There is no
refund on fees.
   2.   Inspection and Fee. Prior to an applicant obtaining the first permit
for a tract of land, the applicant must allow inspection of the property and
pay a one-time inspection fee as set forth in the fee appendix. Inspection of
the requirements set forth in
56.04 Zoning,
56.06 Enclosures, and
56.10 Waste Storage will be performed. No permit shall be issued until the
permitting officer has provided written approval of the inspection
requirements.
   3.   Requirements. The requirements to the receipt of a permit include:
      A.   All requirements of this chapter are met;
      B.   All fees, as may be provided for from time to time by Council
resolution, for the permit are paid in full;
      C.   There are no nuisance conditions, or unresolved violations of
nuisance ordinance, on the property.
      D.   All judgments in the City’s favor and against the applicant have
been paid in full;
      E.   The tract of land to be permitted shall contain only one single-
family dwelling or a duplex, which is occupied and used as such by the
applicant or permittee.
      F.   The applicant shall disclose and provide copies of any deed
restrictions, condominium restrictions, neighborhood association by-laws,
covenants, and restrictions, and rental agreements that may concern the ability
of the applicant to have urban chickens on the proposed permitted tract of
land.
      G.   If the applicant is renting the proposed permitted tract of land,
the property owner of the parcel must provide written approval of any
application for urban chickens. Tenants shall submit with their application
written authorization from the property owner to keep chickens or install a
coop.
   4.   Issuance of Permit. If the permitting officer concludes, as a result of
the information contained in the application, that the requirements for a
permit have been met, then the officer shall issue the permit.
   5.   Denial, Suspension, Revocation, Non-Renewal. The permitting officer may
deny, suspend, revoke, or decline to renew any permit issued for any of the
following grounds:
      A.   False statements on any application or other information or report
required by this chapter to be given by the applicant;
      B.   Failure to pay any application, penalty, re-inspection, or
reinstatement fee required by this chapter or Council resolution;
      C.   Failure to correct deficiencies noted in notices of violation in the
time specified in the notice;
      D.   Failure to comply with the provisions of an approved mitigation/
remediation plan by the permitting officer, or designee.
      E.   Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter.
   6.   Notification. A decision to revoke, suspend, deny, or not renew a
permit shall be in writing, delivered by ordinary mail or in person to the
address indicated on the application. The notification shall specify reasons
for the action.
   7.   Effect of Revocation, Etc. When an application for a permit is denied,
or when a permit is revoked, the applicant may not re-apply for a new permit
for a period of one year from the date of the denial or revocation.
   8.   Appeals. No permit may be denied, suspended, revoked, or, not renewed
without notice and providing an opportunity to be heard to the applicant or
permit holder. In any instance where the permitting officer has denied,
revoked, suspended, or not renewed a permit, the applicant or holder of urban
chicken may appeal the decision to the City Administrator, or designee other
than the permitting officer, within 10 business days of receipt by the
applicant or holder of the permit of the notice of the decision. The applicant
or holder of the permit will be given an opportunity for a hearing. The
decision of the officer hearing the appeal, or any decision by the permitting
officer which is not appealed in accordance to this chapter, shall be deemed
final action.
56.03   NUMBER AND TYPES OF CHICKENS ALLOWED.
   1.   The maximum number of chickens allowed is four per tract of land.
   2.   Only female chickens (hens) are allowed.
   3.   Chickens must have wings appropriately clipped to prevent them from
flying.
56.04   ZONING DISTRICTS ALLOWED.
Permits will be granted only for tracts of land located in residential
districts as identified on the current Official Zoning Map on file with the
City.
56.05   NON-COMMERCIAL USE ONLY.
A permit shall not allow the permittee to engage in chicken breeding or
fertilizer production for commercial purposes.
56.06   ENCLOSURES.
   1.   Chickens must be kept in an enclosure or fenced area at all times.
Chickens shall be secured within a henhouse or chicken tractor during non-
daylight hours.
   2.   Enclosures must be kept in a clean, dry, odor-free, neat, and sanitary
condition at all times.
   3.   Henhouses, chicken tractors, and chicken pens must provide adequate
ventilation and adequate sun and shade and must be impermeable to rodents, wild
birds, and predators, including dogs and cats.
   4.   Henhouses and chicken tractors.
      A.   Henhouses and chicken tractors shall be designed to provide safe and
healthy living conditions for the chickens with a minimum of four-square feet
and 10 square feet enclosed outside space per bird while minimizing adverse
impacts to other residents in the neighborhood.
         (1)   A henhouse or chicken tractor shall be enclosed on all sides and
shall have a roof and doors. Access doors must be able to be shut and locked at
night. Opening windows and vents must be covered with predator and bird-proof
wire of less than one-inch openings.
         (2)   The materials used in making a henhouse or chicken tractor shall
be uniform for each element of the structure such that the walls are made of
the same material, the roof has the same shingles or other covering, and any
windows or openings are constructed using the same materials. The use of scrap,
waste board, sheet metal, or similar materials is prohibited. Henhouses and
chicken tractors shall be well maintained.
      B.   Henhouses, chicken tractors, and chicken pens shall only be located
in the rear yard required by
Chapter 165, Zoning Regulations, unless the setback requirements cannot be met,
in which case the permitting officer may authorize urban chickens to be kept in
another area of the permitted land but within the required setbacks.
      C.   Henhouses, chicken tractors, and chicken pens must be located at
least 10 feet from the property line and at least 25 feet from any adjacent
residential dwelling, church, school, or place of business.
      D.   Any enclosed chicken pen shall consist of sturdy wire fencing. The
pen must be covered with wire, aviary netting, or solid roofing.
56.07   ODOR AND NOISE IMPACTS.
   1.   Odors from chickens, chicken manure, or other chicken related
substances shall not be perceptible beyond the boundaries of the permitted
tract of land.
   2.   Noise from chickens shall not be loud enough beyond the boundaries of
the permitted tract of land at the property boundaries to disturb persons of
reasonable sensitivity.
56.08   PREDATORS, RODENTS, INSECTS, AND PARASITES.
The permittee shall take necessary action to reduce the attraction of predators
and rodents and the potential infestation of insects and parasites. Chickens
found to be infested with insects and parasites that may result in unhealthy
conditions to human habitation may be removed by a City Animal Control Officer.
56.09   FEED AND WATER.
Chickens shall be provided with access to feed and clean water at all times.
The feed and water shall be unavailable to rodents, wild birds, and predators.
56.10   WASTE STORAGE AND REMOVAL.
All stored manure shall be covered by a fully enclosed structure with a roof or
lid over the entire structure. No more than three cubic feet of manure shall be
stored on the permitted tract of land. All other manure not used for composting
or fertilizing shall be removed. The henhouse, chicken tractor, chicken pen,
and surrounding area must be kept free from trash and accumulated droppings.
Any dead chickens shall be removed immediately and disposed of in a sanitary
manner.
56.11   CHICKENS AT LARGE.
   1.   The permittee’s chickens shall not roam off the permitted tract of
land. A domesticated animal causing the death of a chicken which is off the
permitted tract of land shall not, for that reason alone, be considered a
dangerous or aggressive animal. The City shall not be obligated to enforce its
animal control provisions in such instances.
   2.   The City shall not be obligated to impound or provide shelter for
chickens found running at large.
56.12   UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep chickens in violation of
any provision of this chapter or any other provision of this Code.
   2.   It shall be unlawful for any owner, renter, or leaseholder of property
to allow chickens to be kept on the property in violation of the provisions of
this chapter.
   3.   No person shall keep chickens inside a single-family dwelling unit,
multi-family dwelling unit(s) or rental unit.
   4.   No person shall slaughter any chickens within the City.
   5.   No person shall keep a rooster.
   6.   No person shall keep chickens on a vacant or uninhabited tract of land.
56.13   VIOLATIONS.
Any violation of the terms of this chapter that constitutes a health hazard or
that interferes with the use or enjoyment of neighboring property is a
nuisance. Violations of any provision of this chapter shall be prosecuted as
either a simple misdemeanor or a municipal infraction.
CHAPTER 57
LICENSING AND VACCINATION OF ANIMALS
 
57.01 Annual License and Registration 57.05 License Tag
Required
57.02 Fees                            57.06 License Records
57.03 Delinquency                     57.07 Change of Ownership; Transfer of
                                      License
57.04 Certification of Vaccination    57.08 Exceptions
 
57.01   ANNUAL LICENSE AND REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   1.   Every owner of a dog or cat over six months old shall procure a license
from the City on or before the first day of April of each year, or within 30
days of the animal being brought into the City, or when the animal has reached
six months of age.
   2.   The owner of a dog or cat for which a license is required shall apply
on forms provided by the City. The form of the application shall state the
breed, sex, age, color, markings, and name, if any, of the dog or cat, and the
address of the owner and shall be signed by the owner. The application shall
also state the date of the most recent rabies vaccination, the type of vaccine
administered, and the date the dog or cat shall be revaccinated.
   3.   The owner of any animal that has been deemed or categorized as vicious
or declared as dangerous, by any administrative body, tribunal, City Officer
or, by definition of a high-risk animal, in accordance with Chapter 55, shall
be required to report and register the animal with the City upon established
residency within the City. Additionally, those animals that are classified as
dangerous animals must receive approval from the Council prior to being brought
into the City. Failure to report or register the animal shall constitute a
simple misdemeanor, punishable as provided by law.
   4.   All licenses shall expire on April 1 of the year following the date of
issuance.
57.02   FEES.
The license fee for spayed and neutered animals is $10.00 per year. For animals
that are not spayed or neutered, the annual license fee is $30.00.
57.03   DELINQUENCY.
All license fees shall become delinquent on the first day of April of the year
in which they are due and a delinquent penalty of $10.00 per month shall be
added to each unpaid license on and after said date.
57.04   CERTIFICATION OF VACCINATION.
At the time of making application for a City license, the owner shall furnish
to the City a veterinarian’s certificate showing that the pet animal for which
the license is sought has been vaccinated against rabies and distemper and that
such vaccination will not expire within six months from the date the license is
issued. In order to take advantage of the lower rate for spayed and neutered
animals, the owner shall, at the time application is made for an animal
license, present a certificate of neutering signed by a veterinarian containing
a description of the animal, its call name and date of neutering, if known.
Such certificate may be used in subsequent license applications.
57.05   LICENSE TAG.
   1.   Upon the original issuance of the license, the City shall deliver or
mail to the owner a license tag stamped with the following:
      A.   Name of issuing City.
      B.   Serial number of the license which shall be recorded by the City.
   2.   Every pet animal shall wear the tag provided whenever such animal is
off the property of its owner. Any method may be used to attach the tag to the
animal, such as a collar or other suitable device.
   3.   It is unlawful for any person who is not the owner or the agent of such
owner, or an employee of the City or its agent acting in an official capacity,
to remove a license tag from an animal prior to the expiration of the license.
   4.   Upon the filing of an affidavit that the license has been lost or
destroyed, the owner may obtain another tag upon payment of a duplicate fee of
$3.00 for spayed and neutered animals and $8.00 for those animals that are not
spayed or neutered.
57.06   LICENSE RECORDS.
The City shall keep a book to be known as the record of licenses which shall
show:
   1.   The date of each application for a license.
   2.   The description of the dog or cat as specified in the application,
together with the name of the owner of the animal.
   3.   The date when each license tag is issued and the serial number of each
tag, the date of the most recent rabies vaccination, the type of vaccine
administered, and the date the animal is to be revaccinated.
   4.   The amount of all fees paid.
   5.   Such other data as may be required by law.
57.07   CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP; TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
When the permanent ownership of an animal is transferred, the new owner shall,
within 30 calendar days from the date of change of ownership, make application
for a new license as provided in this section regardless of whether or not the
animal was previously licensed.
57.08   EXCEPTIONS.
The licensing provisions of this chapter shall not be applied to animals whose
owners are nonresidents temporarily within the City, kennel dogs which are kept
or raised in facilities licensed pursuant to the Code of Iowa, as amended,
solely for the bona fide purpose of sale and which are kept under constant
restraint, animals brought into the City for the purpose of participating in
any animal show or animals properly trained to assist persons with
disabilities, providing such animals are kept restrained on the owner’s
premises and under supervision or control at all times or under leash at all
times.
CHAPTER 58
MOWING OF PROPERTIES
 
58.01 Mowing of Properties 58.03 Method of Service
58.02 Penalty
 
58.01   MOWING OF PROPERTIES.
All property within the City, whether vacated or non-vacated, is required to be
mowed any time the vegetation reaches a height of more than 12 inches.
58.02   PENALTY.
The City, or its agents, may mow any property which is not mowed by the time
the vegetation reaches a height of 12 inches, and a charge of $30.00 per hour
for such mowing, plus a surcharge of $40.00, will be charged to the property
owner with a minimum charge of $70.00 for any property mowed by the City or its
agents. The Director of Finance will be directed to bill the property owner for
the costs of mowing as set out above. If not paid within 30 days, the Clerk is
to certify the cost and assessments to the County Treasurer, and it shall then
be collected with and in the same manner as general taxes.
58.03   METHOD OF SERVICE.
Property owners in violation of Section 58.01 will be mailed a notice by
regular mail. Owners shall be allowed five days from the date the notice is
mailed to comply with Section
58.01. If the violation of
58.01 is not corrected within five days the City will proceed as set forth in
Section
58.02.
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
 
60.01 Title                          60.05 Reports of Traffic Accidents
60.02 Definitions                    60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic        60.08 Parades Regulated
 
60.01   TITLE.
Chapters 60 through
70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as the “DeWitt Traffic
Code” (and are referred to herein as the “Traffic Code”).
60.02   DEFINITIONS.
Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law, such
definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are hereby adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:
   1.   “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including the
following designated streets:
      A.   Fifth Avenue to Seventh Avenue;
      B.   Seventh Street to Eleventh Street;
      C.   Sixth Street from Fifth Avenue to Seventh Avenue.
   2.   “MPH” means miles per hour.
   3.   “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or vehicles organized
for marching or moving on the streets in an organized fashion or manner or any
march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the
public as a parade.
   4.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
   5.   “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   6.   “Pedestrian” means a person afoot or a person using a pedestrian
conveyance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(51))
   7.   “Pedestrian conveyance” means any human-powered device by which a
pedestrian may move other than by walking or by which a pedestrian may move
another person, including but not limited to a wheelchair, stroller,
skateboard, scooter, or other similar device. Pedestrian conveyance also
includes an electric personal assistive mobility device and any other device
used to move a person sitting or standing on the device regardless of whether
the device is powered by an electric motor, so long as the electric motor
produces less than 750 watts. Pedestrian conveyance does not include a bicycle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(51A))
   8.   “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban, or school district, where 40
percent or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of 300 feet or
more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(63))
   9.   “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway for a distance of 200 feet in either direction from a schoolhouse.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(70))
   10.   “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.
   11.   “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
   12.   “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control sign or signal.
   13.   “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in
the business, school, or residence districts.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(78))
   14.   “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the
purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
   15.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway. Vehicle does not
include:
      A.   Any device moved by human power, including a low-speed electric
bicycle.
      B.   Any device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
      C.   Any personal delivery device operated pursuant to Chapter 321O of
the Code of Iowa.
      D.   Any integral part of a truck tractor or road tractor which is
mounted on the frame of the truck tractor or road tractor immediately behind
the cab and which may be used to transport persons and property, but which
cannot be drawn upon the highway by the truck tractor or another motor vehicle.
      E.   Any steering axle, dolly, auxiliary axle, or other integral part of
another vehicle which in and of itself is incapable of commercially
transporting any person or property but is used primarily to support another
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(90))
(Section 60.02 – Ord. 2024-10 – Dec. 24 Supp.)
60.03   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law relating to motor vehicles and
law of the road are enforced by the Police Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
60.04   POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
A peace officer or, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the Fire
Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an
emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 and 321.236[2])
60.05   REPORTS OF TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS.
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the City
shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of
Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06   PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.
A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the
driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic
violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with
reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading, or other manifest
of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration
certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such
vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require
exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07   OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
60.08   PARADES REGULATED.
No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as provided
herein:
   1.   Permit Required. No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining a
written permit from the Mayor or City Administrator. Such permit shall state
the time and date for the parade to be held and the streets or general route
therefor. Such written permit granted to the person organizing or sponsoring
the parade shall be permission for all participants therein to parade when such
participants have been invited by the permittee to participate therein. No fee
shall be required for such permit.
   2.   Parade Not A Street Obstruction. Any parade for which a permit has been
issued as herein required, and the persons lawfully participating therein,
shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets notwithstanding the
provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.
   3.   Control by Police and Firefighters. Persons participating in any parade
shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in the
performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members of the
Fire Department.
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
 
61.01 Installation  61.04 Standards
61.02 Crosswalks    61.05 Compliance
61.03 Traffic Lanes
 
61.01   INSTALLATION.
The Council shall establish by resolution, and cause to be placed and
maintained, appropriate traffic control devices to indicate parking spaces and
zones, no parking zones, limited parking zones, reserved parking zones, loading
zones, safety zones, school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones, traffic zones
other than the above, truck routes, school stops, stop intersections, yield
right-of-way intersections, one-way streets, streets to be laned for traffic,
and play streets. The Council shall also have the power to designate and
indicate by resolution intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by
traffic signals; intersections at which left turns, right turns and U-turns
shall be prohibited; and intersections at which markers, buttons or other
indications shall be placed to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles
traversing or turning at such intersections. The City shall keep a record of
all such traffic control devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.254 and 321.255)
61.02   CROSSWALKS.
The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to designate and maintain
crosswalks by appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due
to traffic conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
street or roadway, and at such other places as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] and 321.255)
61.03   TRAFFIC LANES.
Where traffic lanes have been marked on street pavements at such places as
traffic conditions require, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane
except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful
turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] and 321.255)
61.04   STANDARDS.
Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.05   COMPLIANCE.
No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic
control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless
at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to the exceptions
granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under Section 321.231 and
321.231A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
 
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
 
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.05 Quiet Zones
62.02 Play Streets Designated  62.06 Obstructing View at Intersections
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks    62.07 Use of Engine Brakes Prohibited
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle
 
62.01   VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.
Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of a
peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire, or who
fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory
laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in
violation of this section. These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by
reference and are as follows:
   1.   Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
   2.   Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited; exception.
   3.   Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
   4.   Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
   5.   Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.
   6.   Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.
   7.   Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.
   8.   Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
   9.   Section 321.91 – Limitation on liability; penalty for abandonment.
   10.   Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
   11.   Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
   12.   Section 321.104 – Penal offenses against title law.
   13.   Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates permitted.
   14.   Section 321.174 – Operators licensed; operation of commercial
vehicles.
   15.   Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicle with expired license.
   16.   Section 321.180 – Instruction permits, commercial learner’s permits,
and chauffeur’s instruction permits.
   17.   Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged
fourteen through seventeen.
   18.   Section 321.193 – Restrictions on licenses; penalty.
   19.   Section 321.194 – Special minors’ licenses.
   20.   Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service order;
penalties.
   21.   Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s
identification card; penalty.
   22.   Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
   23.   Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain tobacco, tobacco products
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes.
   24.   Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license or when
disqualified; penalties.
   25.   Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
   26.   Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
   27.   Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
   28.   Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
   29.   Section 321.223 – Driver’s license inspection for motor vehicle
rental.
   30.   Section 321.224 – Record kept.
   31.   Section 321.232 – Speed detection jamming devices; penalty.
   32.   Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles, highway use.
   33.   Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
   34.   Section 321.235B – Low-speed electric bicycles.
   35.   Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
   36.   Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
   37.   Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
   38.   Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs, or signals;
unlawful possession; traffic signal preemption devices.
   39.   Section 321.262 – Leaving scene of traffic accident prohibited;
vehicle damage only; removal of vehicles.
   40.   Section 321.263 – Information and aid; leaving scene of personal
injury accident.
   41.   Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
   42.   Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
   43.   Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.
   44.   Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
   45.   Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device while
driving; text-messaging.
   46.   Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.
   47.   Section 321.277A – Careless driving.
   48.   Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
   49.   Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.
   50.   Section 321.284 – Open container in motor vehicles, drivers.
   51.   Section 321.284A – Open container in motor vehicles, passengers.
   52.   Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
   53.   Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
   54.   Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
   55.   Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
   56.   Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
   57.   Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.
   58.   Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
   59.   Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
   60.   Section 321.305 – One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands.
   61.   Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
   62.   Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
   63.   Section 321.309 – Towing.
   64.   Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
   65.   Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
   66.   Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
   67.   Section 321.314 – When signal required.
   68.   Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
   69.   Section 321.316 – Stopping.
   70.   Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
   71.   Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.
   72.   Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
   73.   Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
   74.   Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
   75.   Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
   76.   Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
   77.   Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
   78.   Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
   79.   Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
   80.   Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on
highways.
   81.   Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
   82.   Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
   83.   Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.
   84.   Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
   85.   Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad
train or railroad track equipment.
   86.   Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
   87.   Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
   88.   Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
   89.   Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
   90.   Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
   91.   Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
   92.   Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
   93.   Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
   94.   Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by hazardous
material.
   95.   Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
   96.   Section 321.366 – Acts prohibited on fully-controlled access
facilities.
   97.   Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
   98.   Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
   99.   Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
   100.   Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
   101.   Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
   102.   Section 321.372 – Discharging pupils, stopping requirements;
penalties.
   103.   Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
   104.   Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
   105.   Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
   106.   Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
   107.   Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
   108.   Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
   109.   Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles, motorized bicycles, and
all-terrain vehicles.
   110.   Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
   111.   Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
   112.   Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
   113.   Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
   114.   Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
   115.   Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
   116.   Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
   117.   Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
   118.   Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
   119.   Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
   120.   Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
   121.   Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
   122.   Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
   123.   Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
   124.   Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
   125.   Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
   126.   Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
   127.   Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
   128.   Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
   129.   Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
   130.   Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
   131.   Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
   132.   Section 321.422 – Red light in front, rear lights.
   133.   Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
   134.   Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.
   135.   Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
   136.   Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
   137.   Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, air horns, and bells prohibited.
   138.   Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
   139.   Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
   140.   Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
   141.   Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
   142.   Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
   143.   Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
   144.   Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
   145.   Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
   146.   Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
   147.   Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
   148.   Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
   149.   Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety rules.
   150.   Section 321.449A – Rail crew transport drivers.
   151.   Section 321.449B – Texting or using a mobile telephone while
operating a commercial motor vehicle.
   152.   Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation regulations.
   153.   Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
   154.   Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
   155.   Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles.
   156.   Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
   157.   Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
   158.   Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
   159.   Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
   160.   Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
   161.   Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight; exceptions, penalties.
   162.   Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
   163.   Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
62.02   PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as
a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion
thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are
within such closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest
care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03   VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except
at a permanent or temporary driveway. Motorized wheelchairs and three-wheel
motorized carts used in the same manner as a motorized wheelchair are
authorized access on sidewalks.
62.04   CLINGING TO VEHICLE.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all
passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
in-line skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05   QUIET ZONES.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06   OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.
It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard, or other object to obstruct
the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear view of
traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such obstruction
is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated in
the manner provided by
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.07   USE OF ENGINE BRAKES PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or cause
to be used or operated within the City any engine brake, compression brake or
mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any
vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual, or explosive noise from the
vehicle. The usage of an engine brake, compression brake, or mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in braking or deceleration in a manner so as to be
audible at a distance of 300 feet from the motor vehicle shall constitute
evidence of a prima facie violation of this section.
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
 
63.01 General                             63.04 Special Speed Zones
63.02 State Code Speed Limits             63.05 Minimum Speed
63.03 Parks, Cemeteries, and Parking Lots
 
63.01   GENERAL.
Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful
and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper,
having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any
other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any
street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a stop
within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02   STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.
The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the Code of
Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically designated
otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.
   1.   Business District - 20 MPH.
   2.   Residence or School District - 25 MPH.
   3.   Suburban District - 45 MPH.
63.03   PARKS, CEMETERIES, AND PARKING LOTS.
A speed in excess of 15 MPH in any public park, cemetery, or parking lot,
unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
63.04   SPECIAL SPEED ZONES.
In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of Transportation, or
whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section
63.02 is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found
to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street
system, the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower
speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location. The following
special speed zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
   1.   Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 35 MPH is unlawful on
any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   On East Third Avenue from the Union Pacific Railroad crossing to
Industrial Street.
      B.   On Eleventh Street from the east City limits to the Westbrook Park
entrance in the 2,000 block of Eleventh Street.
      C.   On Industrial Street from Sixth Avenue to its east terminus, with
the exception of the curve located in the 300 and 400 block, where the maximum
speed will be posted at 20 MPH.
      D.   On Lake Street from Sixth Avenue to 1,300 block.
      E.   On Sixth Avenue from the north right-of-way (ROW) line of Highway 30
to Third Street and from Twelfth Street to the 1,600 block.
63.05   MINIMUM SPEED.
A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
 
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.03 Left Turn for Parking
64.02 U-Turns
 
64.01   TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
   1.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   2.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right
half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection
to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
   3.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street
shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way
street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street
being entered upon leaving the intersection.
The Council may cause markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or
adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions
require, that a different course from that specified above be traveled by
vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or signs are so
placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other
than as directed and required by such markers, buttons, or signs.
64.02   U-TURNS.
It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection;
however, U-turns are prohibited within the Business District and at any
intersection where a sign prohibiting U-turns is posted in accordance with
Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
64.03   LEFT TURN FOR PARKING.
No person shall make a left hand turn, crossing the centerline of the street,
for the purpose of parking on said street.
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
 
65.01 Stop or Yield                 65.04 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
65.02 School Stops                  65.05 Pedestrians' Right-of-Way
65.03 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk
 
65.01   STOP OR YIELD.
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield as directed by traffic control
devices posted in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
65.02   SCHOOL STOPS.
At any school crossing zone, every driver of a vehicle approaching said zone
shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point 10 feet from the approach
side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and thereafter
proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed
through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
65.03   STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk
area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do
so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.04   STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.
Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
65.05   PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT-OF-WAY.
Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to
so yield to a pedestrian or a person riding a bicycle crossing the roadway
within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
(Section 65.05 – Ord. 2024-10 – Dec. 24 Supp.)
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
 
66.01 Temporary Embargo                  66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.05 Truck Routes
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
66.01   TEMPORARY EMBARGO.
If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of deterioration,
rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets will be seriously
damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by
the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so designated by such
signs erected in accordance with
Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 and 472)
66.02   PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.
The Council may, upon application and good cause being shown, issue a special
permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the maximum
specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named in the
permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the City is
responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 and 321E.2)
66.03   LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at
any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets for which said signs are
erected in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 and 475)
66.04   LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES.
Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity less than the
maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street serving the
bridge, the Council may cause to be posted and maintained signs, in accordance
with
Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code, on said bridge and at suitable distances ahead
of the entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load limits, and no
person shall drive a vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded, upon said bridge in
excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
66.05   TRUCK ROUTES.
When truck routes have been designated in accordance with
Chapter 61, any motor vehicle exceeding established weight limits shall comply
with the following:
   1.   Use of Established Routes. Every such motor vehicle having no fixed
terminal within the City or making no scheduled or definite stops within the
City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall travel over or upon those
streets within the City designated as truck routes and none other.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
   2.   Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any such motor vehicle, when loaded or
empty, having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite stop within the
City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over or upon the
designated routes to the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and
shall proceed thereto, load or unload and return, by the most direct route to
its point of departure from said designated route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
   3.   Employer’s Responsibility. The owner, or any other person, employing or
otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly
permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to
this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
 
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking
 
67.01   WALKING IN STREET.
Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a street, walk on the
left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02   HITCHHIKING.
No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03   PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
 
68.01 One-Way Traffic Required
 
68.01   ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.
When appropriate signs are in place, as provided for in Chapter 61 of this
Traffic Code, vehicular traffic, other than permitted cross traffic, shall move
only in the direction indicated on such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[4])
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
 
69.01 Parking Limited Or Controlled 69.08 Persons with Disabilities Parking
69.02 Park Adjacent To Curb         69.09 Truck Parking Limited
69.03 Parking On One-Way Streets    69.10 Snow Removal
69.04 Angle Parking                 69.11 Snow Routes
69.05 Manner of Angle Parking       69.12 Municipal Parking Lot
69.06 Parking for Certain Purposes  69.13 Recreational Vehicles
Illegal
69.07 Parking Prohibited            69.14 Unlicensed Vehicles and Trailers
69.01   PARKING LIMITED OR CONTROLLED. 
Parking of vehicles shall be controlled or limited where so indicated by
designated traffic control devices in accordance with Chapter 61 of this
Traffic Code. No person shall stop, park, or stand a vehicle in violation of
any such posted parking regulations unless in compliance with the directions of
a peace officer.
69.02   PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and
with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge
of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and
vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03   PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way
street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction
of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within
18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in
the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.04   ANGLE PARKING.
Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only upon those streets or portions of
streets which have been signed or marked for angle or diagonal parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.05   MANNER OF ANGLE PARKING.
Upon those streets or portions of streets that have been signed or marked for
angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an angle
to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated
by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle or the load thereon, when
said vehicle is parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into
the roadway more than a distance of 16 feet when measured at right angles to
the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.06   PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.
No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than 72 hours,
unless otherwise limited under the provisions of this chapter, or for any of
the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   1.   Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
   2.   Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such
vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
   3.   Advertising. Displaying advertising.
   4.   Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a
duly established marketplace or when so authorized or licensed under this Code.
69.07   PARKING PROHIBITED.
No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
   1.   Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[5])
   2.   Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   3.   Mailboxes. Within 20 feet on either side of a mailbox that is so placed
and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   4.   Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[1])
   5.   Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[2])
   6.   Intersection. Within an intersection or within 10 feet of an
intersection of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])
   7.   Fire Hydrant. Within five feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[4])
   8.   Stop Sign or Signal. Within 10 feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[6])
   9.   Railroad Crossing. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red
light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[8])
   10.   Fire Station. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within 75 feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[9])
   11.   Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[10])
   12.   Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[11])
   13.   Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when
standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or
when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be
painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])
   14.   Churches, Nursing Homes, and Other Buildings. A space of 50 feet is
hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium,
hotel having more than 25 sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab
stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people
are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor
vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or
discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is
necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
   15.   Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person
shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. The provisions of this
subsection do not apply to a vehicle parked in any alley that is 18 feet wide
or less, provided that said vehicle is parked to deliver goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   16.   Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or
private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
   17.   Parking or Terrace. Upon the parking or terrace, designated as that
area between the curb line and the sidewalk line, where curbing has been
installed.
   18.   Parking on Privately Owned Areas. Upon privately-owned property or an
area developed as a private off-street parking facility, without the consent of
the owner, lessee, or person in charge of such privately-owned property or
facility. In any proceedings for violation of this section, the registration
plates displayed on such motor vehicle involved in such violation shall
constitute in evidence the prima facie presumption that the registered owner of
such motor vehicle was the person who parked or placed such motor vehicle at
the point where such violation occurred.
   19.   Hazardous Parking. No vehicle of any kind shall be parked on public or
private property so as to create a safety hazard with pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
69.08   PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.
The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of persons
with disabilities parking spaces:
   1.   Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be
established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa
and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish
any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining
Council approval.
      A.   Residential. Residents desiring a persons with disabilities parking
space in front of their residence on public right-of-way shall complete a
Residential Persons With Disabilities Parking Space Request listing the name,
address, and telephone number of the person with the disability and the
handicap license plate number or the hang tag permit number. Only requests from
residents without off-street parking will be considered. The Director of Public
Works will investigate the request by going to the residence to observe parking
saturation and door-to-curb accessibility. If an on-street parking problem does
not exist, the request shall be denied. If approved, the cost of the sign,
post, and installation shall be borne by the applicant. Residential persons
with disabilities parking spaces shall be 25 feet in length. Annually, letters
will be sent to those residents having signs asking for verification that the
need still exists.
   2.   Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking
space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of
a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code
of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
      A.   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit.
      B.   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or
being transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa.
      C.   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section
321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.
   3.   Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a
wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
      A.   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must
comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa when
utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
      B.   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone that is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa.
69.09   TRUCK PARKING LIMITED.
No person shall park a motor truck, semi-trailer, or other motor vehicle with
trailer attached in violation of the following regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   1.   Parking Restricted. Excepting only when such vehicles are actually
engaged in the delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo, no person shall
park or leave unattended any vehicle more than 19 feet in length on any streets
within the City. When actually receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo,
such vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a manner which will not interfere
with other traffic, and such receiving and delivery time shall not exceed 30
minutes at any one time.
   2.   Noise. No such vehicle shall be left standing or parked upon any
street, alley, public or private parking lot, or drive of any service station
with the engine, auxiliary engine, air compressor, refrigerating equipment or
other device in operation giving off audible sounds excepting only the drive of
a service station when actually being serviced, and then in no event for more
than 30 minutes.
   3.   Livestock. No such vehicle containing livestock shall be parked on any
street, alley, or highway for a period of time of more than 30 minutes.
69.10   SNOW REMOVAL.
   1.   No person shall park, abandon, or leave unattended any vehicle on any
public street or alley when snow or freezing rain is falling on such public
street or alley, unless the snow or ice has been removed or plowed from said
street or alley and the snow or freezing rain has ceased to fall, except that
persons are allowed to park or remain parked in the downtown business area, on
City or DeWitt Chamber and Development Company owned or leased lots (not
including the City Hall or Public Library Parking areas) or on the downtown
business streets listed in the following paragraph until the time posted on
temporary snow removal signs erected by the Public Works Department. No
additional signs or notices are required to prohibit parking outside the
downtown business area when snow or freezing rain is falling.
   2.   In the business area, snow plowed to the curb area will not be removed
until proper temporary signs (posted notice) have been erected by the Director
of Public Works or authorized employees giving notice of such snow removal.
Such snow shall be removed after 12:00 a.m. on the following streets and
avenues:
      A.   Eighth Street from Fifth Avenue to Seventh Avenue;
      B.   Fifth Avenue from Eighth Street to Eleventh Street;
      C.   Ninth Street from Fifth Avenue to Seventh Avenue; and
      D.   Seventh Avenue from Seventh Street to Eleventh Street;
      E.   Seventh Street from Fifth Avenue to Seventh Avenue;
      F.   Sixth Avenue from Sixth Street to Eleventh Street;
      G.   Tenth Street from Fifth Avenue to Seventh Avenue.
Following posted notice, all cars parked, abandoned, or left unattended after
midnight within the business area along the above-named streets and avenues
that hinder or in any way block the way of snow removal equipment will be towed
away, without notice, at the owner’s expense.
   3.   In the downtown business area, on City or DeWitt Chamber and
Development Company owned or leased lots snow will not be removed until proper
temporary signs (posted notice) have been erected by the Director of Public
Works or authorized employees giving notice of such snow removal. Signs will be
erected the day before the snow is to be removed and will stay in place until
the snow is cleared from the lots. Such snow shall be removed during a regular
working day and typically between 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. The City may choose
to remove snow from one parking lot one day and from another parking lot
another day. In any case snow will not be removed without posted notice.
   4.   Following posted notice, all cars parked, abandoned, or left unattended
the day after the notice has been posted (temporary snow removal signs) that
hinder or in any way block the way of snow removal equipment will be towed
away, without notice, at the owner’s expense.
69.11   SNOW ROUTES.
The Council may designate certain streets in the City as snow routes. When
conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface of a designated snow
route, it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to impede or block traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[12])
69.12   MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT.
Municipal parking lots shall be open to the public parking and use 24 hours
daily. No vehicle shall be parked longer than 24 hours in a municipal parking
lot. It is the duty of the driver or operator of any vehicle to park within
sections for vehicles marked or painted upon the surface and not over or across
said lines.
69.13   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
It is unlawful to park a boat trailer, utility trailer, or unoccupied motor
home, travel or camping trailer, on any public street or alley or in any
residential area for a period of time in excess of 24 hours. Upon application
to the Police Department, emergency or temporary parking for occupied travel
trailers, campers, and motor homes may be permitted at designated locations on
public streets, alleys, or any other public or in any residential area for a
three day period, subject to extended time of up to three days upon
reapplication, and subject to any other prohibitions or regulations imposed by
traffic and parking ordinances of the City.
69.14   UNLICENSED VEHICLES AND TRAILERS.
Motor vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates
shall not be parked or stored on any lot other than in completely enclosed
buildings.
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
 
70.01 Arrest or Citation            70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle
                                    Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations          70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal
                                    Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.06 Impounding Vehicles
 
70.01   ARREST OR CITATION.
Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
   1.   Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person
before a local magistrate; or
   2.   Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate
a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner
of Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-
approved computerized device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 and 321.485)
70.02   SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.
For violations of the Traffic Code that are designated by Section 805.8A of the
Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of those
violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 and 805.8A)
70.03   PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE.
Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of
Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the
office of the Clerk. The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount of
$10.00 for all violations except snow route parking violations and improper use
of a persons with disabilities parking permit. If such fine is not paid within
30 days, it shall be increased by $5.00. The simple notice of a fine for snow
route parking violations is $25.00, and the simple notice of a fine for
improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit is $100.00.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1b] and 321L.4[2])
70.04   PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED.
When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and
the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein provided
shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
70.05   PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation
occurred shall be raised by proof that:
   1.   Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information
was parked in violation of the Traffic Code; and
   2.   Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question.
70.06   IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
   1.   A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed,
a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot, or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
      A.   Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
      B.   Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is
so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
      C.   Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban
on parking during snow removal operations.
      D.   Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for
a continuous period in violation of any limited parking time. If the owner can
be located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   2.   Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or
driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and
storage.
CHAPTER 75
ATVS AND UTVS
 
75.01 Purpose                  75.07 Equipment
75.02 Definitions              75.08 UTV Hours of Operation
75.03 General Regulations      75.09 Speed
75.04 Operation of ATVs        75.10 Traffic Code
75.05 Operation of UTVs        75.11 Negligence
75.06 UTV Prohibited Locations 75.12 Accident Reports
 
75.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles and off-road utility vehicles within the City.
75.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized vehicle, with not less
than three and not more than six non-highway tires, that is limited in engine
displacement to less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to
less than 1,200 pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled
by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
   2.   “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat
or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering
control and that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain.
“Off-road motorcycle” includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a
certificate of title and registered for highway use under Chapter 321 of the
Code of Iowa, but which contains design features that enable operation over
natural terrain. An operator of an off-road motorcycle is also subject to the
provisions of this chapter governing the operation of ATVs and UTVs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
   3.   “Off-road utility vehicle” or “UTV” means a motorized vehicle, with not
less than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized tracks,
that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled
by the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for control. “Off-road
utility vehicle” or “UTV” includes the following vehicles:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
      A.   “Off-road utility vehicle - Type 1” includes vehicles with a total
dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
      B.   “Off-road utility vehicle - Type 2” includes vehicles, other than
Type 1 vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less and a width of
65 inches or less.
      C.   “Off-road utility vehicle - Type 3” includes vehicles with a total
dry weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches, or
both.
75.03   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle, or UTV within the City in
violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa, or in violation of rules
established by the Natural Resource Commission of the Department of Natural
Resources governing their registration, equipment, and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G and Ch. 321I)
75.04   OPERATION OF ATVS.
   1.   ATVs Not Permitted. ATVs are not permitted on any City street, alley,
park, or public property with the following exceptions and exceptions listed
per Chapter 3211.10 of the Code of Iowa.
   2.   Exceptions. A person shall not operate an ATV upon roadways or highways
except as provided below:
      A.   A registered ATV may be operated on the roadways or alleys of City
for purpose of snow removal within 24 hours of the cessation of the snow fall.
      B.   The operation is between sunrise and sunset and is incidental to the
vehicle's use for agricultural purposes. For purposes of this paragraph,
“incidental to the vehicle’s use for agricultural purposes” includes stopping
in the course of agricultural use to obtain fuel for the ATV or to obtain food
or a nonalcoholic beverage for the operator.
      C.   The operation is incidental to the vehicle’s use for the purpose of
surveying by a licensed engineer or land surveyor.
      D.   The ATV is operated by an employee or agent of a political
subdivision or public utility for the purpose of construction or maintenance on
or adjacent to the highway.
      E.   The ATV is operated by an employee or agent of a public agency as
defined in Section 34.1 of the Code of Iowa for the purpose of providing
emergency services or rescue.
      F.   The ATV is operated for the purpose of mowing, installing approved
trail signs, or providing maintenance on a snowmobile or ATV trail designated
by the Department of Natural Resources.
      G.   A person operating an ATV on a City street shall have a valid
driver's license and the vehicle shall be operated at speeds of 35 miles per
hour or less.
      H.   ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails.
   3.   Direct Crossing. An ATV may make a direct crossing of a highway that is
not part of the interstate road system provided all of the following occur:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[5])
      A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing.
      B.   The ATV is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder
or main traveled way of the highway.
      C.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
      D.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or highway.
      E.   The crossing is made from a street, roadway, or highway on which the
ATV is authorized to operate to a street, roadway, or highway on which such
vehicle is authorized to operate.
75.05   OPERATION OF UTVS.
UTVs may be operated upon the streets of the City by persons who are 18 years
of age or older and are possessing a valid State operator’s license, except as
prohibited in Section
75.06. While operated on a City street, the number of passengers permitted on a
UTV shall not exceed the number of seats intended for passengers. While on City
streets, operators must have on their person or in the UTV proof of the
required insurance.
75.06   UTV PROHIBITED LOCATIONS.
   1.   Trails. UTVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except where
designated. UTVs shall not be operated on any recreational, bike, or walking
trail.
   2.   Railroad Right-of-Way. UTVs shall not be operated on an operating
railroad right-of-way. A UTV may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-
way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of
law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing
after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])
   3.   Parks and Other City Land. UTVs shall not be operated in any park,
playground, or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City.
   4.   Sidewalk or Parking. UTVs shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the
sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”
   5.   Direct Crossing. A UTV may make a direct crossing of a highway that is
not part of the interstate road system provided all of the following occur:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[5])
      A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing.
      B.   The UTV is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder
or main traveled way of the highway.
      C.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
      D.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or highway.
      E.   The crossing is made from a street, roadway, or highway on which the
UTV is authorized to operate to a street, roadway, or highway on which such
vehicle is authorized to operate.
   6.   Special Exemptions. The Chief of Police is authorized to permit UTVs to
operate on restricted City areas for certain special events.
75.07   EQUIPMENT.
UTVs operated upon City streets shall be equipped with at least the following:
   1.   UTVs operated on City streets shall be equipped with a muffler,
headlights, taillights, turn signals, seatbelts, or safety restraints and
adequate brakes to stop and hold the UTV in a stopped position. Driver and all
passengers must comply with all seatbelt and occupant restraint requirements,
including the use of child safety seats, as required for motor vehicles
operating on a public roadway. Driver and all passengers shall each wear a
properly adjusted safety belt or safety harness any time the UTV is in motion
on a City street or alley.
   2.   UTVs operated on City streets shall be equipped with an adequate
exhaust system.
75.08   UTV HOURS OF OPERATION.  
UTVs may be operated on City streets from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. UTVs may be
operated during prohibited hours when being used for snow removal.
75.09   SPEED.
No UTV shall be operated at a speed in excess of the posted speed limit, nor
shall any UTV be operated at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper for
the existing conditions.
75.10   TRAFFIC CODE.
Any person operating a UTV shall strictly adhere to all traffic signs and
signals and all other traffic rules and regulations, and shall obey the orders
and direction of any law enforcement officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic. No person shall leave an UTV unattended on public property while the
motor is running or the keys are in the ignition switch.
75.11   NEGLIGENCE.
The owner and operator of an ATV or UTV are liable for any injury or damage
occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or UTV. The owner of an ATV or
UTV shall be liable for any such injury or damage only if the owner was the
operator of the ATV or UTV at the time the injury or damage occurred or if the
operator had the owner’s consent to operate the ATV or UTV at the time the
injury or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, 321I.19)
75.12   ACCIDENT REPORTS.
Whenever an ATV or UTV is involved in an accident resulting in injury or death
to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500.00 or more, either the
operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law
enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State
law.
(Code of Iowa, 321I.11)
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
 
76.01 Scope of Regulations            76.08 Riding on Sidewalks
76.02 Traffic Code Applies            76.09 Towing
76.03 Double Riding Restricted        76.10 Improper Riding
76.04 Two Abreast Limit               76.11 Parking
76.05 Speed                           76.12 Equipment Requirements
76.06 Emerging From Alley or Driveway 76.13 Special Penalty
76.07 Carrying Articles               76.14 Coasters, Skateboards and Roller
                                      Skates
 
76.01   SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or
upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to
those exceptions stated herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.02   TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or
by the Traffic Code of the City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except
as to those provisions that by their nature can have no application. Whenever
such person dismounts from a bicycle, the person shall be subject to all
regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)
76.03   DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED.
A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and
regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons
at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234[3 and 4])
76.04   TWO ABREAST LIMIT.
Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast
except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles. All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right and
shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.05   SPEED.
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.06   EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall,
upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway,
yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or
sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to
all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.07   CARRYING ARTICLES.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article that
prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.08   RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
The following provisions apply to riding bicycles on sidewalks:
   1.   Business District. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk
within the Business District, as defined in Section
60.02(1) of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
   2.   Other Locations. When signs are erected on any sidewalk or roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person shall
disobey the signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
   3.   Yield Right-of-Way. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a
sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall
give audible signal before overtaking and passing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.09   TOWING.
It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow any other
vehicle upon the streets of the City unless the vehicle is manufactured for
such use.
76.10   IMPROPER RIDING.
No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or reckless manner such as
zigzagging, stunting, speeding, or otherwise so as to disregard the safety of
the operator or others.
76.11   PARKING.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.12   EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
Every person riding a bicycle shall be responsible for providing and using
equipment as provided herein:
   1.   Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front emitting a white light visible from a
distance of at least 300 feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear, except
that a red reflector on the rear, of a type that is visible from all distances
from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
   2.   Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake that will
enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean
pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.13   SPECIAL PENALTY.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the
scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty provided for violations of
this Code of Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle to be impounded by the City
for not less than five days for the first offense, 10 days for a second
offense, and 30 days for a third offense.
76.14   COASTERS, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER SKATES.
No person riding upon a skateboard, roller skates, or riding in or by means of
any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar wheeled device shall operate such device
upon any roadway except while crossing a street within a crosswalk and when so
crossing, such persons shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to
all the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section does not apply to any
street while set aside as a play street as authorized by the provisions of this
Code of Ordinances. No person riding upon a skateboard, roller skates, or
riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar wheeled device
shall operate such device on any sidewalk on the following streets or parts of
streets:
   1.   Fifth Avenue from Seventh Street to Eleventh Street;
   2.   Sixth Avenue from Sixth Street to Eleventh Street;
   3.   Seventh Avenue from Seventh street to Eleventh Street;
   4.   Seventh Street from Fifth Avenue to Seventh Avenue;
   5.   Eighth Street from Fifth Avenue to Seventh Avenue;
   6.   Ninth Street from Fifth Avenue to Seventh Avenue;
   7.   Tenth Street from Fifth Avenue to Seventh Avenue;
   8.   Eleventh Street from Fifth Avenue to Seventh Avenue.
No person riding upon a skateboard, roller skates, or riding in or by means of
any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar wheeled device shall operate such device
upon any private property within the corporate limits of the City unless said
person has first obtained permission from the property owner or person in
control.
CHAPTER 77
SNOWMOBILES
 
77.01 Purpose             77.04 Places of Operation
77.02 Definition          77.05 Negligence
77.03 General Regulations 77.06 Accident Reports
 
77.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of snowmobiles within
the City.
77.02   DEFINITION.
For purposes of this chapter “snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs
less than 1,000 pounds, that uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type
tread with a width of 48 inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis,
or tread, and is designed for travel on snow or ice. “Snowmobile” does not
include an all-terrain vehicle that has been altered or equipped with runners,
skis, belt-type tracks, or treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
77.03   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
No person shall operate a snowmobile within the City in violation of the
provisions of Chapter 321G of the Code of Iowa ,or rules established by the
Natural Resource Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing
their registration, numbering, equipment, and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G)
77.04   PLACES OF OPERATION.
The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as to
where snowmobiles may be within the City:
   1.   Streets. Snowmobiles are allowed to be operated on the following
streets:
      A.   A west-east route described as starting at the west City limits on
Lake Street, and then continuing east on either side of Lake Street to South
Sixth Avenue, thence south on east side of South Sixth Avenue to Industrial
Street.
      B.   A south-north route described as starting at the south City limits
and then continuing north on the east side of South Sixth Avenue to the 400
block. After crossing private property easements negotiated by private
snowmobile rider organizations, the south-north route picks up again just south
of the Union Pacific railroad tracks at South Third Avenue East, then north on
the east side of South Third Avenue East continuing north on Third Avenue East
to East Fourth Street, thence west on East Fourth Street Fourth Street, thence
north on Third Avenue to the northerly end of Third Avenue. After crossing
private property easements negotiated by private snowmobile rider
organizations, the south-north route picks up again at the point where Sixth
Avenue joins Northridge Road continuing northwest on the north side of
Northridge Road to the north City limits.
      C.   The routes established herein shall be the only permitted snowmobile
routes, and snowmobiles shall be operated within the roadways (except as noted
in Paragraphs A and B above) of said public streets. Snowmobiles shall be
transported to the snowmobile routes. They shall also be subject to the
following regulations.
   2.   Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only
under the following circumstances:
      A.   Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an
emergency (e.g., medical or when needed to transport hospital staff to
hospital, etc.) during the period of time when and at locations where snow and
ice upon the roadway render travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical
and unsafe.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
      B.   Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a
prohibited street provided:
         (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to
the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a
quick and safe crossing;
         (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
street;
         (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic
which constitutes an immediate hazard; and
         (4)   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
      C.   Police Department Use. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street
when operated by an on-duty Police Officer.
   3.   Railroad Right-of-way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way. Snowmobiles may be driven directly across a
railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any
other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[8])
   4.   Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on the Skeffington Memorial
Trail System.
   5.   Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any
park, playground, or upon any other City owned property without the express
permission of the City. A snowmobile shall not be operated on any City right-
of-way without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.
   6.   Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the
sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for
purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is
authorized by this chapter.
77.05   NEGLIGENCE.
The owner and operator of a snowmobile are liable for any injury or damage
occasioned by the negligent operation of the snowmobile.
77.06   ACCIDENT REPORTS.
Whenever a snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury or death
to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500.00 or more, either the
operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law
enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 and 321I.11)
CHAPTER 78
GOLF CARTS
 
78.01 Purpose                           78.07 Traffic Code
78.02 Operation of Golf Carts Permitted 78.08 Permits
78.03 Prohibited Locations              78.09 Accident Reports
78.04 Equipment                         78.10 Violation and Penalty
78.05 Hours                             78.11 Annual Review
78.06 Speed
78.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to permit the operation of golf carts on certain
streets in the City, as authorized by Section 321.247 of the Code of Iowa, as
amended. This chapter applies whenever a golf cart is operated on any street or
alley, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
78.02   OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS PERMITTED.
Golf carts may be operated upon the streets of the City by persons who have a
valid operator’s license, except as prohibited in Section 78.03. While operated
on a City street the number of passengers permitted on a golf cart shall not
exceed the number of seats intended for passengers. All passengers must be in a
seat. While on City streets, operators must have on their person, or in the
golf cart, proof of the required insurance.
78.03   PROHIBITED LOCATIONS.
    1.   Streets. Golf carts shall not be operated upon any City street with a
posted speed limit of greater than 25 MPH or upon the following streets:
      A.   Eleventh Street (including East Eleventh Street).
      B.   300th Avenue.
      C.   Sixth Avenue (including South Sixth Avenue and Northridge Road).
      D.   Humeston Road.
      E.   Industrial Drive (including East Industrial Drive).
      F.   Lake Street.
      G.   U.S. Highway 30.
      H.   U.S. Highway 61.
However, golf carts may cross the aforementioned streets.
   2.   Trails. Golf carts shall not be operated on any recreational, bike, or
walking trail.
   3.   Sidewalks. Golf carts shall not be operated upon sidewalks.
   4.   Parking. Golf carts shall not be operated upon that portion of a street
right-of-way between the curb or edge of street paving and the sidewalk
referred to as the parking.
   5.   City Parks and Other Land Owned by the City. Golf carts shall not be
operated in City parks or upon other City-owned land unless for a special event
authorized by the Council, and the operator possesses a valid City permit.
   6.   Special Exemptions. The Police Chief is authorized to permit golf carts
to operate on restricted City streets for certain special events.
78.04   EQUIPMENT.
Golf carts operated upon City streets shall be equipped with at least the
following:
   1.   A slow moving vehicle sign.
   2.   A bicycle safety flag, the top of which shall be a minimum of five feet
from ground level, and extend a minimum two feet above the highest point of the
golf cart.
   3.   Golf carts operated on City streets shall be equipped with adequate
brakes to stop and hold the cart in a stopped position.
78.05   HOURS.
Golf carts may be operated on City streets only between sunrise and sunset as
set by the U.S. Naval Observatory.
78.06   SPEED.
No golf cart shall be operated at a speed in excess of the lesser of 25 MPH or
that posted. Golf carts shall not be modified to increase speed.
78.07   TRAFFIC CODE.
Any person operating a golf cart, including those for which a City permit has
been issued, shall strictly adhere to all traffic signs and signals and all
other traffic rules and regulations, and shall obey the orders and direction of
any law enforcement officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic. No person
shall leave a golf cart unattended on public property while the motor is
running, or the keys are in the ignition switch.
78.08   PERMITS.
No person shall operate a golf cart on any public street or alley for any
purpose unless the golf cart has passed a safety inspection by the Police
Department and the operator possesses a City permit to operate a golf cart on
City streets, issued by the Clerk.
   1.   Golf cart owners may apply for a permit from the Clerk on forms
provided by the City.
   2.   The Clerk shall not issue a permit until the owner/operator has
provided the following:
      A.   Evidence that the owner or operator possesses a valid driver’s
license.
      B.   Proof owner or operator has liability insurance (minimum limit of
$300,000.00 coverage) covering operation of golf carts on City streets.
      C.   A form indicating that the golf cart has passed the required
inspection conducted by the Police Department. The fee for such inspection
shall be set by resolution. This is a one-time inspection. Vehicles that pass
an inspection will not need to be re­ inspected unless the vehicle is found in
violation of this Code, then a vehicle might need to be inspected again.
      D.   The operator of a golf cart shall display the City permit sticker
prominently on a rear fender or on a similar component which is clearly visible
from the rear.
      E.   All permits issued shall uniquely identify the name and address of
the owner or operator.
      F.   The annual fee for such permits shall be set by resolution.
      G.   The permits expire annually on December 31 regardless of the date of
issue.
      H.   Permits can be revoked by the Police Chief as result of any
violation of the City’s Code or the Code of Iowa. The revocation, including a
description of the violation, shall be provided in writing to the owner of the
golf cart. The revocation may be appealed to the Council within 10 days of the
written notice of revocation of the permit. The owner shall request the appeal
in writing and submit the appeal to the Clerk.
78.09   ACCIDENT REPORTS.
Whenever a snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury or death
to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500.00 or more, either the
operator, or someone acting for the operator, shall immediately notify a law
enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 and 321I.11)
78.10   VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
    1.   Any person guilty of violating the provisions herein shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a scheduled fine for the first
violation and revocation of the City permit for a period of six months.
   2.   Any person guilty of violating this chapter two times shall be subject
to a fine for a second violation and permanent revocation of the City permit.
78.11   ANNUAL REVIEW.
The Council shall annually review Chapter 78 to determine if the chapter
warrants amendment or repeal.
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
 
80.01 Definitions                       80.06 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of   80.07 Disposal of Totally Inoperable
Abandoned Vehicles                      Vehicles
80.03 Notice by Mail                    80.08 Proceeds from Sales
80.04 Reclamation of Abandoned Vehicles 80.09 Duties of Demolisher
80.05 Fees for Impoundment
 
80.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1] and Sec. 321.90)
   1.   “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
      A.   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than 24 hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more wheels or
other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
      B.   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more
than 24 hours.
      C.   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private
property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property
for more than 24 hours.
      D.   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police
authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of 10 days. However, a police
authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the 10-day period by
commencing the notification process.
      E.   Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority
to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
      F.   A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the
Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment
fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out
the impoundment order.
   2.   “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of
Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap, or
scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
   3.   “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or establishment,
motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
   4.   “Police authority” means the Iowa State Patrol or any law enforcement
agency of a county or city.
80.02   AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request of
any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic, shall
take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take into
custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The police authority may
employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a private entity,
equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing, or
disposing of abandoned vehicles. A property owner or other person in control of
private property may employ a private entity that is a garage keeper to dispose
of an abandoned vehicle, and the private entity may take into custody the
abandoned vehicle without a police authority’s initiative. If a police
authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police
authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses of the
registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to
the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
80.03   NOTICE BY MAIL.
   1.   A police authority or private entity that takes into custody an
abandoned vehicle shall send notice by certified mail that the vehicle has been
taken into custody, no more than 20 days after taking custody of the vehicle.
Notice shall be sent to the last known address of record of the last known
registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known
claimant to the vehicle.
   2.   Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. The notice shall include all
of the following:
      A.   A description of the year, make, model and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle.
      B.   The location of the facility where the vehicle is being held.
      C.   Information for the persons receiving the notice of their right to
reclaim the vehicle and personal property contained therein within 10 days
after the effective date of the notice. Persons may reclaim the vehicle or
personal property upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges
resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of
the notice required pursuant to this section.
      D.   A statement that failure of the owner, lienholders, or claimants to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the
time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders, and claimants
of all right, title, claim, and interest in the vehicle or personal property.
      E.   A statement that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property
is deemed consent for the police authority or private entity to sell the
vehicle at a public auction or dispose of the vehicle to a demolisher and to
dispose of the personal property by sale or destruction.
   3.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity
without a police authority’s initiative, the notice shall state that the
private entity may claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90,
Subsection 1, of the Code of Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the
vehicle.
   4.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a police authority
or by a private entity hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that
any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who
disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police
authority or private entity, or of the assessment of fees and charges provided
by this section, may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority
to contest those matters.
   5.   If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise
their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the 10-day
reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders, or claimants shall no longer have
any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal
property.
   6.   A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right,
title, claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders, or claimants after the
expiration of the 10-day reclaiming period.
   7.   If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the
identities and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders,
notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area
where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of
notice under Subsection 2 of this section. The published notice may contain
multiple listings of abandoned vehicles, but shall be published within the same
time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed
notice in Subsection 2 of this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3])
80.04   RECLAMATION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
Prior to driving an abandoned vehicle away from the premises, a person who
received (or who is reclaiming the vehicle on behalf of a person who received)
notice under Section 80.03 shall present to the police authority or private
entity, as applicable, the person’s valid driver’s license and proof of
financial liability coverage as provided in Section 321.20B of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.05   FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.
The owner, lienholder, or claimant shall pay $50.00 if claimed within five days
of impounding, plus $20.00 for each additional day within the reclaiming period
plus towing charges, if stored by the City, or towing and storage fees, if
stored in a public garage, whereupon said vehicle shall be released. The amount
of towing charges, and the rate of storage charges by privately owned garages,
shall be established by such facility. Vehicles that are impounded and held for
evidentiary purposes or held pursuant to the execution of a search warrant will
not be charged impound or storage fees during the time they are being held in
police custody. However, the owner shall be responsible for towing and storage
fees once the vehicle has been released from the police hold, unless fees are
waived by the Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.06   DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the police
authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether or not the
motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall dispose of
the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.07   DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found any
abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle whose
title certificate is faulty, lost, or destroyed, may dispose of such motor
vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without notification
procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more wheels or
other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police
authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant
shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate and shall
surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
80.08   PROCEEDS FROM SALES.
Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the expense
of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification required, in
accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner of the motor
vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days, and then shall be deposited in the
State Road Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the
amount necessary to meet costs the police authority shall apply for
reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.09   DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.
Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor vehicle
for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise demolish such motor
vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or demolish a
vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for
the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
CHAPTER 81
RAILROAD REGULATIONS
 
81.01 Definitions         81.03 Crossing Maintenance
81.02 Obstructing Streets
 
 
81.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation, or other
association that owns, operates, drives, or controls a railroad train.
   2.   “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
81.02   OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
Operators shall not operate any train in such a manner as to prevent vehicular
use of any highway, street, or alley for a period of time in excess of 10
minutes except:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)
   1.   Comply with Signals. When necessary to comply with signals affecting
the safety of the movement of trains.
   2.   Avoid Striking. When necessary to avoid striking any object or person
on the track.
   3.   Disabled. When the train is disabled.
   4.   Safety Regulations. When necessary to comply with governmental safety
regulations including, but not limited to, speed ordinances and speed
regulations.
   5.   In Motion. When the train is in motion except while engaged in
switching operations.
   6.   No Traffic. When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the
crossing.
An employee is not guilty of a violation of this section if the employee’s
action was necessary to comply with the direct order or instructions of a
railroad corporation or its supervisors. Guilt is then with the railroad
corporation.
81.03   CROSSING MAINTENANCE.
Operators shall construct and maintain good, sufficient, and safe crossings
over any street traversed by their rails.
(Bourett vs. Chicago and N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 [1943])
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)
 
[The next page is 707]
 
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 Definitions                     90.11 Installation of Water Service Pipe
90.02 Director of Public Works Duties 90.12 Responsibility for Water Service
                                      Pipe
90.03 Mandatory Connection to Public  90.13 Failure to Maintain
Water System and Use Of Private Wells
90.04 Abandoned Connections           90.14 Curb Valve
90.05 Permit                          90.15 Interior Valve
90.06 Fee for Permit and Connection   90.16 Inspection and Approval
Charge
90.07 Compliance with Plumbing Code   90.17 Completion by the City
90.08 Plumber Required                90.18 Shutting Off Water Supply
90.09 Excavations                     90.19 Operation of Curb Stop
90.10 Tapping Mains                   90.20 Hydrants
                                      90.21 Right to Limit Use
 
90.01   DEFINITIONS.
The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this Code of
Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:
   1.   “Combined service account” means a customer service account for the
provision of two or more utility services.
   2.   “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water service
from the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties
the duties, responsibilities, liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed
shall be joint and several.
   3.   “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or community
use.
   4.   “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the building
served.
   5.   “Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for
securing, collecting, storing, pumping, treating, and distributing water.
90.02   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS DUTIES.
The Director of Public Works shall supervise the installation of water service
pipes and their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations
pertaining to water services in the City in accordance with this chapter. This
chapter shall apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well
as to new ones. The Director of Public Works shall make such rules, not in
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed
operation of the water system, subject to the approval of the Council. In the
event of an emergency, the Director of Public Works may make temporary rules
for the protection of the system until due consideration by the Council may be
had.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
90.03   MANDATORY CONNECTION TO PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM AND USE OF PRIVATE WELLS.
   1.   Connection to the Public Water System. Except as otherwise provided
herein, all residences and business establishments within the City using water
for human habitation or occupancy shall connect to the public water system.
Water is used for human habitation or occupancy if it is used in the plumbing
system of a residence or a business occupied by humans.
   2.   Exceptions. A residence or business establishment within the City using
water for human habitation or occupancy may obtain its water from a private
well as follows:
      A.   Existing Wells. A well in existence on the effective date of the
ordinance codified by this section may continue to obtain water from a private
well as follows:
         (1)   For irrigation of grass and landscape planting upon the property
for so long as desired;
         (2)   For human habitation or occupancy until the date established at
Section
90.03(2) herein.
      B.   New Wells. A well may be drilled only upon property that does not
have access to the City water system within 300 feet of the property (property
lines), and use of the well for human habitation or occupancy may continue
until the date established at Section
90.03(2) herein.
         (1)   Permit. No person shall install or maintain a private well after
the date of enactment of the ordinance codified by this section, or own or use
a private well within the City after such date, unless the person has
registered such well and obtained a permit for same from the City. The
registration and permit process shall be completed on forms provided by the
City. Permit and registration fees shall be set by resolution.
         (2)   Contaminated Area. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
which permits a private well to remain in existence within the City, neither
shall a new private well be drilled nor shall repairs to an existing private
well be made after the date of enactment of the ordinance codified by this
section, if the well is located within a contaminated area.
         (3)   Variance. The City Council, upon recommendation of the Director
of Public Works or the Director of Public Works’ designated assistant or agent,
may consider a variance or exception to this section on application to the
City.
         (4)   Termination of Use of Existing Wells. The use of any private
well not permitted to continue under this section shall cease and the well
shall be plugged in accordance with rules of the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources on July 1, 2005, or 90 days after the date the public water system is
extended to within 300 feet of the affected property, whichever is later.
         (5)   Definitions. For use in this section the following terms are
defined:
            a.   “Contaminated area” means a point within an area that has
groundwater contamination or that, in accordance with design models of the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources, may become contaminated due to percolation of
groundwater contamination in the vicinity of the well site.
            b.   “Human habitation or occupancy” means use of water in the
plumbing system of a residence or business used or occupied by humans.
            c.   “Private well” means any groundwater well, except a monitoring
well used as a part of a remediation system, used both for drinking water and
for non-drinking water purposes, including a groundwater well which is not
properly plugged in accordance with rules of the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources.
90.04   ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.
When an existing water service is abandoned or a service is renewed with a new
tap in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains shall be turned off
at the corporation stop and made absolutely watertight.
90.05   PERMIT.
Before any person makes a connection with the public water system, a written
permit must be obtained from the Building Official for residential developments
and from the Director of Public Works for commercial developments. The
application for the permit shall be filed with the Building Official or
Director of Public Works on blanks furnished by the City to include the name of
the property owner, the name and address of the person who will do the work,
and the general uses of the water. No different or additional uses will be
allowed except by written permission of the Building Official or Director of
Public Works. The Building Official or Director of Public Works shall sign and
issue the permit and state the time of issuance, if the proposed work meets all
the requirements of this chapter and if all fees required under this chapter
have been paid. Work under any permit must begin within six months after it is
issued. The Building Official or Director of Public Works may at any time
revoke the permit for any violation of this chapter and require that the work
be stopped.
90.06   FEE FOR PERMIT AND CONNECTION CHARGE.
Before any permit is issued the person who makes the application shall pay the
Clerk a fee set by resolution to cover the cost of issuing the permit and the
cost of supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work. An additional fee for
three-quarter inch and one inch water taps and corporation cocks set by
resolution is payable to the Clerk. For taps larger than one inch, the fee
shall be determined by the Director of Public Works and approved by the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
90.07   COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE.
The installation of any water service pipe and any connection with the water
system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether
regulatory, procedural, or enforcement provisions, of the State Plumbing Code.
90.08   PLUMBER REQUIRED.
All installations of water service pipes and connections to the water system
shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
90.09   EXCAVATIONS.
All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required in making a connection
shall be performed in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and the
provisions of
Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
90.10   TAPPING MAINS.
All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the direct supervision of
the Director of Public Works and in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Independent Services. No more than one house, building, or premises
shall be supplied from one tap unless special written permission is obtained
from the Director of Public Works and unless provision is made so that each
house, building, or premises may be shut off independently of the other.
   2.   Sizes and Location of Taps. All mains six inches or less in diameter
shall receive no larger than a three-fourths inch tap. All mains of over six
inches in diameter shall receive no larger than a one-inch tap. Where a larger
connection than a one-inch tap is desired, two or more small taps or saddles
shall be used, as the Director of Public Works shall order. All taps in the
mains shall be made in the top half of the pipe, at least 18 inches apart. No
main shall be tapped nearer than two feet of the joint in the main.
   3.   Corporation Stop. A brass corporation stop, of the pattern and weight
approved by the Director of Public Works, shall be inserted in every tap in the
main. The corporation stop in the main shall be of the same size as the service
pipe.
   4.   Location Record. An accurate and dimensional sketch showing the exact
location of the tap shall be filed with the Building Official in such form as
the Building Official shall require, which shall then be provided to the Water
Department by the Building Official.
90.11   INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE.
Water service pipes from the main to the meter setting shall be copper water
tube, type K, soft temper, for underground service, conforming to A.S.T.M. B-88
and B-251. The pipe shall be marked with the manufacturer’s name or trademark
and a mark indicative of the type of pipe. The outside diameter of the pipe and
minimum weight per foot of the pipe shall not be less than that listed in
A.S.T.M. B-251, Table 11. Other service pipe material may be used with prior
approval of the City. Pipe must be laid sufficiently waving, and to such depth,
as to prevent rupture from settlement or freezing. All corporation stops and
curb valves shall be fabricated of brass and shall be provided with outlets
suitable for copper connections. Curb stops shall be of the round-way type.
Fittings for service pipe shall be copper and of the compression or flared
type.
90.12   RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and maintenance
of the water service pipe from the main to the building served shall be borne
by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or maintenance,
including labor and materials, of said water service pipe.
90.13   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
When any portion of the water service pipe which is the responsibility of the
property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance and the owner fails to
correct such nuisance, the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to the
property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a and h])
90.14   CURB VALVE.
All service pipes shall be provided with a curb valve so placed as to be easily
accessible between the sidewalk and curb or curb line and provided with a
metallic box of approved manufacture and so arranged that the supply of water
can be entirely cut off from the premises served.
90.15   INTERIOR VALVE.
There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service pipe inside the
building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible
and so located that the water can be shut off conveniently. Where one service
pipe supplies more than one customer within the building, there shall be
separate valves for each such customer so that service may be shut off for one
without interfering with service to the others.
90.16   INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
All water service pipes and their connections to the water system must be
inspected and approved in writing by the Director of Public Works before they
are covered, and the Building Official shall keep a record of such approvals.
If the Director of Public Works refuses to approve the work, the plumber or
property owner must proceed immediately to correct the work. Every person who
uses or intends to use the municipal water system shall permit the Building
Official to enter the premises to inspect or make necessary alterations or
repairs at all reasonable hours and on proof of authority.
90.17   COMPLETION BY THE CITY.
Should any excavation be left open or only partly refilled for 24 hours after
the water service pipe is installed and connected with the water system, or
should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the right to finish or
correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs to the property owner
or the plumber. If the plumber is assessed, the plumber must pay the costs
before receiving another permit. If the property owner is assessed, such
assessment may be collected with and in the same manner as general property
taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a and h])
90.18   SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY.
The Director of Public Works may shut off the supply of water to any customer
because of any violation of the regulations contained in these Water Service
System chapters that is not being contested in good faith. The supply shall not
be turned on again until all violations have been corrected and the Director of
Public Works has ordered the water to be turned on.
90.19   OPERATION OF CURB STOP.
It is unlawful for any person except the Water Department or a plumber to turn
water on at the curb stop, and said plumber shall take no action contrary to
the orders of the Director of Public Works. Plumbers installing water service
pipes shall close the curb stop and leave it closed until the completion of
their work.
90.20   HYDRANTS.
All hydrants in the streets shall be securely closed and protected against
general use, and it is unlawful for any person except the Utilities Lead
Person, the Water Treatment Plant Operator, the Fire Chief, or other member of
the Fire Department to take any water from any public hydrant, except for fire
purposes or for such other purpose as the Council or the Director of Public
Works may direct.
90.21   RIGHT TO LIMIT USE.
The City reserves the right to limit the use of water when, in the opinion of
the Council, the conditions of the water supply warrant the limitation.
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS
 
91.01 Purpose                           91.06 Meter Costs
91.02 Water Use Metered                 91.07 Meter Repairs
91.03 Fire Sprinkler Systems; Exception 91.08 Right of Entry
91.04 Location of Meters                91.09 Failure of Meter
91.05 Meter Setting
 
91.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water and
facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among
customers.
91.02   WATER USE METERED.
All water furnished customers shall be measured through meters furnished by the
City and installed by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
91.03   FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS; EXCEPTION.
Fire sprinkler systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection
without meters under the direct supervision of the Director of Public Works. No
other open, unmetered connection shall be incorporated in the system, and there
shall be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance to the building
which must be sealed open.
91.04   LOCATION OF METERS.
All meters shall be so located that they are easily accessible to meter readers
and repairmen and protected from freezing.
91.05   METER SETTING.
The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and fittings for proper
setting of the meter including a valve on the discharge side of the meter.
Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the Director of Public Works and
shall be of a design and construction approved by the Director of Public Works.
91.06   METER COSTS.
The full cost of any meter larger than the three-quarter inch required meter
for a single-family residence shall be paid to the City by the property owner
or customer prior to the installation of any such meter by the City, or, at the
sole option of the City, the property owner or customer may be required to
purchase and install such meter in accordance with requirements established by
the City. Three-quarter inch lawn water meters or larger are provided to the
customer upon request for a sum equal to the City’s cost to purchase, install,
and inspect the meter.
91.07   METER REPAIRS.
Whenever a water meter owned by the City is found to be out of order, the
Director of Public Works shall have it repaired. If it is found that damage to
the meter has occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or
property owner, or the meter is not owned by the City, then the property owner
shall be liable for the cost of repairs.
91.08   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The Water Department employees shall be permitted to enter the premises of any
customer at any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter, or for the
purpose of installing or changing a remote outside register. Water service to a
customer may be discontinued for failure of the customer to permit Water
Department employees reasonable access to water meter equipment.
(Iowa Administrative Code, Sec. 21.4(7)d)
91.09   FAILURE OF METER.
The customer will be charged with the average monthly consumption if a meter is
out of order, needs repair, or fails to register properly. No reduction in
charge will be made on account of leakage after the water has passed through
the meter.
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES
 
92.01 Service Charges           92.06 Lien Exemption
92.02 Rates For Service         92.07 Lien Notice
92.03 Billing for Water Service 92.08 Customer Deposits
92.04 Service Discontinued      92.09 Temporary Vacancy
92.05 Lien for Nonpayment
 
92.01   SERVICE CHARGES.
Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the City based upon use
of water as determined by meters provided for in Chapter 91. Each location,
building, premises, or connection shall be considered a separate and distinct
customer whether owned or controlled by the same person or not.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.02   RATES FOR SERVICE.
Water service shall be furnished at the following monthly rates within the
City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   First 2,000 gallons used per month @ $12.63 (minimum bill).
   2.   Next 2,000 gallons used per month @ $5.57 per 1,000 gallons.
   3.   Next 5,000 gallons used per month @ $4.78 per 1,000 gallons.
   4.   Next 741,000 gallons used per month @ $4.18 per 1,000 gallons.
   5.   All over 750,000 gallons used per month @ $l.86 per 1,000 gallons.
   In addition there will be a monthly meter charge for all commercial meters
larger than one inch as follows:
      A.   1 ½ inch or 2 inch commercial meter shall have a meter charge of
$2.00 per month.
      B.   3 inch commercial meter shall have a meter charge of $3.00 per
month.
      C.   4 inch commercial meter shall have a meter charge of $4.00 per
month.
      D.   5 inch commercial meter shall have a meter charge of $5.00 per
month.
      E.   6 inch commercial meter shall have a meter charge of $6.00 per
month.
      F.   Larger than 6 inch meters shall have a meter charge of $10.00 per
month.
(Section 92.02 - Ord. 2025-01 - Jun. 25 Supp.)
92.03   BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE.
Water service shall be billed as part of a combined service account, payable in
accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Bills Issued. The Billing Clerk shall prepare, date, and issue bills
for combined service accounts. Bills shall be deemed issued as of the date
indicated on the bills.
   2.   Bills Payable. Bills for combined service accounts shall be due by the
last day of the same month and payable at the office of the Billing Clerk in
the City Hall, or elsewhere in the City, as the Council may by resolution
designate,.
   3.   Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be considered
delinquent. Bills not paid after the last day of the month in which they are
due shall have an added penalty of the greater of the following amounts: five
percent of the amount of the bill for water service or $5.00. When the last day
of the month falls on Saturday or Sunday, the Clerk shall accept payment on the
next office day without penalty. Accounts shall also be delinquent in the event
the customer fails to comply with the terms of the payment agreement.
92.04   SERVICE DISCONTINUED.
Water service to delinquent customers shall be discontinued or disconnected in
accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Notice. The Billing Clerk shall notify each delinquent customer that
service will be discontinued or disconnected if payment of the combined service
account, including late payment charges, is not received by the date specified
in the notice of delinquency. Such notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to the
customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred and shall inform
the customer of the nature of the delinquency and afford the customer the
opportunity for a hearing prior to the discontinuance or disconnection.
   2.   Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or
landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the
notice of delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord. If the
customer is a tenant and requests a change of name for service under the
account, such request shall be sent to the owner or landlord of the property if
the owner or landlord has made a written request for notice of any change of
name for service under the account to the rental property.
   3.   Hearing. If a hearing is requested by noon of the day preceding the
shut off, the City Administrator shall conduct an informal hearing and shall
make a determination as to whether the discontinuance or disconnection is
justified. The customer has the right to appeal the City Administrator’s
decision to the Council, and if the Council finds that discontinuance or
disconnection is justified, then such discontinuance or disconnection shall be
made, unless payment has been received.
   4.   Fees. A turn-on fee herein-after set by resolution shall be charged at
the time of the turn-off where separate turn-off and turn-on trips are made
necessary before payment is rendered and the service is restored to a
delinquent customer. No turn-on fee or service fee shall be charged for the
usual or customary trips in the regular changes in occupancies of property.
92.05   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises. Water
service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon
the property or premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.06   LIEN EXEMPTION.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Water Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to
charges for water service to a residential or commercial rental property where
water service is separately metered and the rates or charges for the water
service are paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives
written notice to the City that the property is residential or commercial
rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The
City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of 90 days of such
services to be paid to the City. When the tenant moves from the rental
property, the City shall refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in
full. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs
related to any of the services.
   2.   Other Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall also not apply
to the charges for any of the services of sewer systems, stormwater drainage
systems, sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal for
a residential rental property where the charge is paid directly to the City by
the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the property
is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or
charges for such service. The City may require a deposit not exceeding the
usual cost of 90 days of such services to be paid to the City. When the tenant
moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if all
service charges are paid in full. The lien exemption does not apply to
delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.
   3.   Written Notice. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name of
the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the residential or
commercial rental property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the
occupancy begins. Upon receipt, the City shall acknowledge the notice and
deposit. A change in tenant for a residential rental property shall require a
new written notice to be given to the City within 30 business days of the
change in tenant. A change in tenant for a commercial rental property shall
require a new written notice to be given to the City within 10 business days of
the change in tenant. A change in the ownership of the residential rental
property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the City
within 30 business days of the completion of the change of ownership. A change
in the ownership of the commercial rental property shall require written notice
of such change to be given to the City within 10 business days of the
completion of the change of ownership.
   4.   Mobile Homes, Modular Homes, and Manufactured Homes. A lien for
nonpayment of utility services described in Subsections 1 and 2 of this section
shall not be placed upon a premises that is a mobile home, modular home, or
manufactured home if the mobile home, modular home, or manufactured home is
owned by a tenant of and located in a mobile home park or manufactured home
community and the mobile home park or manufactured home community owner or
manager is the account holder, unless the lease agreement specifies that the
tenant is responsible for payment of a portion of the rates or charges billed
to the account holder.
92.07   LIEN NOTICE.
A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to the
County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is
given to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. If
the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property or
premises has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given
to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons
by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to certification of the lien to
the County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.08   CUSTOMER DEPOSITS.
All new water users are required to deposit with the Clerk the sum of $150.00.
The deposit shall be deposited in the official banking depository of the City
to draw the current rate of interest. The deposit shall be refunded to owners
after 24 consecutive months of prompt payment, unless the City has evidence to
indicate that the deposit is necessary to ensure payment of bills for service.
The deposit shall be refunded to tenants after they have closed their account,
unless the City has evidence to indicate that the deposit is necessary to
ensure payment of bills for service. A new or additional deposit may be
required from a customer when a deposit has been refunded or is found to be
inadequate. Written notice shall be mailed advising the customer of any new or
additional deposit requirement. The customer shall have not less than 12 days
from the date of mailing to comply. Should a user move from the City prior to
the expiration of the 24-month period, the deposit shall be returned, plus
accrued interest, if any, less any amount due the City for the final unpaid
combined service account, if any.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.09   TEMPORARY VACANCY.
A property owner may request water service be temporarily discontinued and shut
off at the curb stop when the property is expected to be vacant for an extended
period of time. There is a $25.00 fee for restoring service. During a period
when service is temporarily discontinued as provided herein there shall be no
monthly minimum service charge. The City will not drain pipes or pull meters
for temporary vacancies.
CHAPTER 93
CONNECTION FEE PROCEDURE
 
93.01 Definitions                93.06 Disconnection
93.02 Fee; Purpose and Intent    93.07 West Lake Street Water Connection Fee
93.03 Public Hearing; Notice     93.08 Springbrook Improvement Water Connection
                                 Fee
93.04 Eligibility for Connection
93.05 Application; Fee
 
93.01   DEFINITIONS.
The definitions of
Chapters 90 and
95 apply to this chapter.
93.02   FEE; PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The City has determined the necessity of establishing a policy and a procedure
to be utilized to recover the cost of designing and constructing sanitary sewer
facilities and water main facilities in those instances in which a significant
number of the properties to be benefited by such facilities are not
sufficiently developed to permit the recovery of those costs through the
special assessment process as provided in Chapter 384, Division IV, Title IX of
the Code of Iowa, or the size of the project does not justify the expense
associated with proceeding through the special assessment process. The City
hereby declares its intent to utilize connection fees as provided for in
Chapter 384.38 of the Code of Iowa as an option, as herein provided, to recover
the costs of designing and constructing such sanitary sewer facilities and
water main facilities from property owners who connect to such facilities. It
is the intent of this chapter to set forth the method of recovery of
proportional cost shares from those property owners who connect their
properties to sanitary sewer facilities and water main facilities, so that in
the event that all property, other than street and road right-of-way, which
lies within the benefited district is connected to the major sanitary sewer
facilities and major water main facilities during their expected useful life,
then those properties shall bear, in the aggregate, up to 100 percent of the
cost of designing and constructing such facilities, including legal,
administrative, and interest expenses associated therewith.
93.03   PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE.  
   1.   In the event the Council determines the necessity of constructing a
sanitary sewer facility or water main facility, and determines that the
utilization of a connection fee is the most efficient and equitable method in
which to recover the City’s costs associated therewith, the Council shall cause
a “Notice of Public Hearing on the Proposed Adoption of an Ordinance to
Establish a Benefited District and a Connection Fee” to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the City as hereinafter provided. In
addition to indicating the date, time, and place of the public hearing, the
notice shall:
      A.   Indicate the nature and extent of the sanitary sewer facility or
facilities, or water main facility or facilities under consideration for
construction, as well as the estimated cost or costs for the design and
construction of same;
      B.   Identify by general description the proposed benefited district to
be served by the sanitary sewer facility or facilities, or water main facility
or facilities; and
      C.   Set forth the proposed schedule of connection fees to be paid by
property owners within the benefited district who connect to said facilities,
expressed in dollars per acre of land area served or such other method as the
City shall determine to be equitable for the benefited district.
   2.   The notice shall also state that the proposed connection fee ordinance
is on file, along with a plat of the area to be served, and both are available
for public inspection in the office of the Clerk. The notice shall be published
not more than 45 days and not less than 20 days prior to the scheduled date of
the public hearing as shown by the records of the County Auditor.
      A.   At the public hearing, owners of property within the proposed
benefited district shall be heard and may offer comments or objections as to:
      B.   The necessity for the project;
      C.   The calculation of the area benefited by the proposed major sanitary
sewer facilities or major water main facilities;
      D.   The estimated cost of the proposed facilities; and
      E.   The proposed connection fee.
   3.   Upon concluding the hearing the Council shall rule upon the objections
presented during the hearing and may consider the adoption of the proposed
connection fee ordinance. Upon consideration of the proposed connection fee
ordinance, the Council may:
      A.   Adopt the ordinance as proposed;
      B.   Delete elements or portions of the proposed major sanitary sewer
facilities and major water main facilities from the proposed project and the
properties served thereby from the benefited district proposed, or
      C.   Amend the ordinance to revise the connection fee.
93.04   ELIGIBILITY FOR CONNECTION.
    1.   The connection fee ordinance may provide, at the Council’s discretion,
a determination of the amount each household will pay within the benefited
district at the time of initial connection to the sewer or water service and
may defer portions of the connection fee until development has occurred.
   2.   The connection fee ordinance may also provide, at the Council’s
discretion, that sanitary sewer service or water service can be provided to
recreational and park facilities, and to commercial and industrial parcels and
facilities, in the same manner and under the same procedures set forth in this
chapter for single-family residences within the benefited district.
93.05   APPLICATION; FEE.  
   1.   After adoption, publication, and recording by the Clerk, in each county
where property in the benefited district is located, of a connection fee
ordinance for a benefited district, all owners of those properties within the
benefited district whose properties are eligible for connection, and who
propose to connect such properties directly or indirectly to the major sanitary
sewer facility or water main facility, shall make application to the City for
such connection. The submittal of construction plans to the City for sanitary
sewer improvements and/or water main improvements on property being subdivided
for development shall constitute an application to the City for purposes of
this section. The sewer connection fee or water connection fee shall be due and
payable at the time application is made to the City for connection to the
sanitary sewer facility or water main facility. No connection shall be made to
a sanitary sewer facility or water main facility until such application has
been approved and until the required connection fee has been paid. The sewer
connection fee and/or water connection fee required by this section shall be
paid, or suitable other arrangements have been made, before the City will
approve the final plat of property subject to the connection fee.
   2.   The sewer connection fee or water connection fee shall be in an amount
equal to the maximum acre area of contiguous property, or fraction thereof,
within the benefited district under common ownership which can be lawfully
served through such proposed connection, multiplied by the per acre connection
fee or such other fee basis as determined for the benefited district
established in the connection fee ordinance for that benefited district. The
connection fee ordinance may provide for a graduated connection fee, with
annual interest adjustments, such that property owners who connect in later
years pay interest on the connection fee for their property. The rate of
interest applicable to the connection fee established in each benefited
district shall not exceed the rate of interest applicable to special
assessments pursuant to Chapter 74A and Section 384.60(3), Title IX, of the
Code of Iowa in effect on the date that the connection fee was established for
that district by enactment of a connection fee ordinance.
   3.   The sewer connection fee or water connection fee required by this
section are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fees for connection
required under the Plumbing Code or other provisions of this Code of
Ordinances.
   4.   The sewer connection fee or water connection fee required by this
section shall be due and payable to the City.
93.06   DISCONNECTION.
In the event any property owner connects their property within a benefited
district to a sanitary sewer facility or water main facility without having
made application therefor, or without having received approval therefor or
without having paid the required connection fee established by a connection fee
ordinance, the City shall be entitled to disconnect such private sewer
connection or private water connection until such time as the property owner
has made and received approval of the application, or has paid the required
connection fee and satisfied all of the requirements of Sections
93.04 and
93.05.
93.07   WEST LAKE STREET WATER CONNECTION FEE.  
The purpose of this section is to establish water service connection fees where
such fees are necessary to allow the City the ability to recoup the costs for
water main extensions.
   1.   General Project Description. The West Lake Street Water Main Extension
Project was the extension of a six-inch water main adjacent to Lake Street
1,100 feet to the west from a point just to the west of the City’s south water
tower, including the addition of two fire hydrants on the water main.
   2.   Project Purpose. The purpose of the project is to serve two new homes
being built on Lake Street, any potential subdivisions in the area, and the
existing homes on Lake Street. Additionally, it is an effort to reduce the
installation of new water wells within the City, which is a recommendation of
the Water Vulnerability Act.
   3.   City Council Approval. Resolution 2004-104, approved on October 4,
2004, approved the plans and specifications for the West Lake Street Water Main
Extension Project. Resolution 2004-110, approved on October 18, 2004, awarded
the project to Horsfield Construction for an amount of $33,060.00. Horsfield
Construction was the lowest responsible bidder.
   4.   Total Project Costs. The construction cost for the project was
$36,327.86, the permit costs for the project were $1,132.00, and the legal and
administrative costs of the project were $76.54. The total actual project cost
certified by the Director of Finance is $37,536.40.
   5.   Area Benefited. The West Lake Street Water Main Extension Project
benefits an area of 95.14 acres. In particular it benefits the following
property owners: Gary and JoEllen Friedmen (16 acres), DN Investments (54
acres), Ralph and Judy Henningsen (23 acres), and Bruce and Barbara Brock (six
acres). A map of the area is on file at City Hall.
   6.   Calculations of Water Connection Fee. The water connection fee for the
properties benefited by the West Lake Street Water Main Extension Project shall
be based on a per acre basis. The fee shall be based on a fee of $394.54 per
acre. The following are the Total Connection Fees that will be placed as a lien
on the identified benefiting properties:
      A.   Friedmen - 12.02 acres at $394.54 per acre = $4,742.37
      B.   DN Investments - 53.92 acres at $394.54 per acre = $21,273.60
      C.   Henningsen - 23 acres at $394.54 per acre = $9,074.72
      D.   Brock – 6.2 acres at $394.54 per acre = $2,446.15
   7.   Payment of Water Connection Fee.
      A.   Each parcel shall have designated a homestead parcel of six acres.
Upon a single connection to an existing residential structure on the
aforementioned Parcels 6.A, 6.B, 6.C, and 6.D, a water connection fee for the
homestead parcel shall be due and payable in an amount $2,367.24. The fee shall
be payable to the Clerk and due upon the permit for the water connection.
      B.   Fifteen years from the date of the substantial acceptance by the
City of the West Lake Street Water Main Extension Project (April 4, 2005), the
water connection fee for the homestead parcel ($2,367.54). The fee shall be due
regardless of connection to the West Lake Street water main. The fee shall be
payable to the Clerk by April 4, 2020.
      C.   The remainder of the Lake Street Water Connection Fee shall be due
upon the sale of development of any parcel, portion, or subdivision of the
benefited properties or parcels. The amount due shall be $394.54 per acre
developed, sold, or subdivided. The water connection fee shall be due prior to
the sale of the property being recorded and regardless of the connection to the
West Lake Street Water Main. The fee shall be payable to the Clerk.
93.08   SPRINGBROOK IMPROVEMENT WATER CONNECTION FEE.  
   1.   General Project Description. The Springbrook Improvement Water Main
Extension Project was the extension of a six-inch water main to service the
east five homes of the Springbrook Improvement Property.
   2.   Project Purpose. The purpose of the project is to serve one new and
four existing homes on the Springbrook Improvement Company Property.
Additionally, it is an effort to reduce the installation of new water wells
within the City, which is a recommendation of the Water Vulnerability Act.
   3.   City Council Approval. On October 4, 2010, the Council approved the
extension of the City’s water main to service properties on the Springbrook
Improvement Company Property. The Council directed the City’s Public Works
forces to complete the project.
   4.   Total Project Costs. The construction cost for the project was
$11,510.08; this cost includes all materials, construction, administration,
legal, and permit fees. The Director of Finance certified $11,510.08 as the
cost of this project.
   5.   Area Benefited. The Springbrook Improvement Water Main Extension
Project benefits five homes on the Springbrook Improvement Company Property. In
particular it benefits the following property owners: John Peavey at 2309 17th
Avenue, Dr. C.F. Barrett at 2301 17th Avenue, Joe Kellenberger at 2201 17th
Avenue, Gordon Berst at 2127 17th Avenue, and Michael Rollings at 2121 17th
Avenue. A map of the area is on file at City Hall.
   6.   Calculations of Water Connection Fee. The water connection fee for the
properties benefited by the Springbrook Improvement Water Main Extension
Project shall be based on a residential unit basis. The proposed fee is
$2,000.00 per residential unit. The following are the Total Connection Fees for
the benefiting properties:
      A.   Peavey = $2,000.00
      B.   Rollings = $2,000.00
      C.   Barrett = $2,000.00
      D.   Kellenberger = $2,000.00
      E.   Berst = $2,000.00
   7.   Payment of Water Connection Fee.
      A.   The water connection fee shall be due upon the sale of any parcel,
portion, or subdivision of the benefited properties. The amount due shall be
$2,000.00 per residential unit sold. The water connection shall be due prior to
the sale of the property being recorded. The fee shall be payable to the Clerk.
      B.   The water connection fee shall be due upon the “tapping on” to the
Springbrook Improvement Water Main. The amount due shall be $2,000.00 per
residential unit. The fee shall be payable to the Clerk.
      C.   15 years from the date of the final acceptance by the City of the
Springbrook Improvement Water Main Extension Project (3-05-2012), any remaining
balance from the Total Water Connection Fees set forth in Subsection 6 for the
benefiting property is due in full. The fee shall be payable to the Clerk.
      D.   The Springbrook Improvement Water Main Connection Fee may be prepaid
in part or in full any time before due as set forth above.
      E.   The payment of the Springbrook Improvement Water Connection Fee does
not relieve any property owner from paying the water permit as set forth by
Section
90.06.
CHAPTER 94
WELL PROTECTION
 
94.01 Definitions 94.03 Exception
94.02 Application 94.04 Nonconforming Uses
94.01   DEFINITIONS.
The following terms are defined as used in this chapter:
   1.   “Aquifer” means a rock formation, group of rock formations, or part of
a rock formation that contains enough saturated permeable materials to yield
significant quantities of water.
   2.   “Contamination” means the presence of any harmful or deleterious
substances in the water supply.
   3.   “Deep public well” means a public well located and constructed in such
a manner that there is a continuous layer of low permeability soil or rock at
least five feet thick located at least 25 feet below the normal ground surface
and above the aquifer from which the water is drawn.
   4.   “Shallow public well” means a public well located and constructed in
such a manner that there is not a continuous layer of low permeability soil or
rock at least five feet thick located at least 25 feet below the normal ground
surface and above the aquifer from which the water is drawn.
   5.   “Well” means a pit or hole sunk into the earth to reach a resource
supply such as water.
94.02   APPLICATION.
No structure or facility of the enumerated types set out in the following
Table A shall be located within the distances set forth in said Table from
public wells within the City.
94.03   EXCEPTION.
Proscriptions set forth in
Table A apply to all public water wells existing within the City except public
water wells formerly abandoned for use by resolution of the Council.
94.04   NONCONFORMING USES.
The use of structures or facilities existing at the time of enactment of
Ordinance No. 2005-02 may be continued even though such use may not conform to
the regulations in this chapter; in other words, such uses may be located
within the distances set forth. However, such structure or facility that is not
in conformance with the terms of this chapter may not be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed, or substituted subsequent to the such date.
TABLE A: SEPARATION DISTANCES
SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION REQUIRED MINIMUM LATERAL DISTANCE FROM WELL AS
                        HORIZONTAL ON THE GROUND SURFACE, IN FEET
                       Deep Well1 Shallow Well1
SOURCE OF     REQUIRED MINIMUM LATERAL DISTANCE FROM WELL AS HORIZONTAL ON THE
CONTAMINATION GROUND SURFACE, IN FEET
             Deep Well1              Shallow Well1
WASTEWATER STRUCTURES:
Point of Discharge to Ground Surface
Sanitary and
industrial    400                     400
discharges
Water
treatment     50                      50
plant wastes
Well house    5                       5
floor drains
Sewers and Drains2
              0 – 25 feet: prohibited
Sanitary and  25 – 75 feet if water 0 – 25 feet: prohibited
storm sewers, main pipe               25 – 75 feet if water main pipe
drains        75 – 200 feet if      75 – 200 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe
              sanitary sewer pipe
              0 – 75 feet: prohibit0 – 75 feet: prohibited
Sewer force   75 – 400 feet if water75 – 400 feet if water main pipe
mains         main pipe               400 – 1,000 feet if sanitary sewer main
              400 – 1,000 feet if   pipe
              sanitary sewer pipe
Water plant
treatment     0 – 5 feet: prohibited
process       5 – 50 feet if sanitar0 – 5 feet: prohibited
wastes that   sewer pipe              5 – 50 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe
are treated
onsite
Water plant   0 – 25 feet: prohibited
wastes to     25 – 75 feet if water 0 – 25 feet: prohibited
sanitary      main pipe               25 – 75 feet if water main pipe
sewer         75 – 200 feet if      75 – 200 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe
              sanitary sewer pipe
              0 – 25 feet: prohibited
Well house    25 – 75 feet if water 0 – 25 feet: prohibited
floor drains  main pipe               25 – 75 feet if water main pipe
to sewers     75 – 200 feet if      75 – 200 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe
              sanitary sewer pipe
Well house    0 – 5 feet: prohibite0 – 5 feet: prohibited
floor drains  5 – 50 feet if sanitar5 – 50 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe
to surface    sewer pipe
Land Disposal of Treated Wastes
Irrigation of  200   400
wastewater
Land
application of 200   400
solid wastes3
Other
Cesspools and
earth pit      200   400
privies
Concrete
vaults and     100   200
septic tanks
Lagoons        400   1,000
Mechanical
wastewater     200   400
treatment
plants
Soil
absorption     200   400
fields
CHEMICALS:
Chemical
application to 100   200
ground surface
Chemical &
mineral        100   200
storage above
ground
Chemical &
mineral        200   400
storage on or
under ground
Transmission
pipelines
(such as
fertilizer,    200   400
liquid
petroleum, or
anhydrous
ammonia)
ANIMALS:
Animal         50    50
pasturage
Animal         200   400
enclosure
Earthen silage
storage trench 100   200
or pit
Animal Wastes
Land
application of 200   400
liquid or
slurry
Land
application of 200   400
solids
Solids         200   400
stockpile
Storage basin  400   1,000
or lagoon
Storage tank   200   400
MISCELLANEOUS:
Basements,     10    10
pits, sumps
Cemeteries     200   200
Cisterns       50    100
Flowing
streams or     50    50
other surface
water bodies
GHEX loop      200   200
boreholes
Railroads      100   200
Private wells  200   400
Solid waste
landfills and  1,000 1,000
disposal
sites4
1   Deep and shallow wells, as defined in IAC 567-40.2(455B):  A deep well is a
well located and constructed in such a manner that there is a continuous layer
of low permeability soil or rock at least five feet thick located at least 25
feet below the normal ground surface and above the aquifer from which water is
to be drawn.  A shallow well is a well located and constructed in such a manner
that there is not a continuous layer of low permeability soil or rock (or
equivalent retarding mechanism acceptable to the department) at least five feet
thick, the top of which is located at least 25 feet below the normal ground
surface and above the aquifer from which water is to be drawn.
2   The separation distances are dependent upon two factors:  the type of
piping that is in the existing sewer or drain, as noted in the table, and that
the piping was properly installed in accordance with the standards.
3   Solid wastes are those derived from the treatment of water or wastewater. 
Certain types of solid wastes from water treatment processes may be land-
applied within the separation distance on an individual, case-by-case basis.
4   Solid waste means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded
solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such materials
resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities.
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
 
95.01 Purpose                         95.06 Service Outside the City
95.02 Definitions                     95.07 Right of Entry
95.03 Director of Public Works Duties 95.08 Use of Easements
95.04 Prohibited Acts                 95.09 Special Penalties
95.05 Sewer Connection Required       95.10 Abandoned Sewer Lines
 
95.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Sanitary
Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and
disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
95.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the following terms are defined:
   1.   “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20?, expressed in milligrams per liter or
parts per million.
   2.   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
   3.   “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the
building wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment
portion of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the
drainage of one building site.
   4.   “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and
sewage.
   5.   “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial, or industrial waste that is directly or indirectly discharged into
the public sewer system.
   6.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage,
and sale of produce.
   7.   “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   8.   “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect
and approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the
public sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
   9.   “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
   10.   “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment
and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment,
and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other
facilities serving the equivalent of 15 persons (1,500 gpd) or less.
   11.   “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
   12.   “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   13.   “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories, or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and
industrial waste.
   14.   “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   15.   “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.
   16.   “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
   17.   “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
   18.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   19.   “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees
levied against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of
said customers by said sewer system.
   20.   “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste that
in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   21.   “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer that carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
   22.   “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of,
or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and that are removable
by laboratory filtering.
   23.   “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
95.03   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS DUTIES.
The Director of Public Works shall exercise the following powers and duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City sewage system.
   2.   Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure
compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
   3.   Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage
connections, and manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof.
95.04   PROHIBITED ACTS.
No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
   1.   Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment that is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
   2.   Surface Run-Off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout, sump pump,
exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   3.   Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by
authority of the Director of Public Works.
   4.   Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the City, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste.
   5.   Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage
except as provided in these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
   6.   Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City,
or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes,
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
95.05   SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.
The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in
the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required
to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a
building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the proper public
sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters, such compliance to be completed within six months
after date of official notice from the City to do so provided that said public
sewer is located within 300 feet of the property line of such owner and is of
such design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed
to it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin the date of official
notice to connect to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
95.06   SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.
The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the City so situated
that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the Council for
permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions
stipulated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 and 3])
95.07   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The Building Official and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
The Building Official or representatives shall have no authority to inquire
into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic,
paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the
kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
95.08   USE OF EASEMENTS.
The Building Official and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
95.09   SPECIAL PENALTIES.
The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters:
   1.   Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of
these chapters except Subsections 1, 3, and 4 of Section
95.04, shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   2.   Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the time limit provided for in Subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation
of this Code of Ordinances. Each day in which any such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   3.   Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these
chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the City by reason of such violation.
95.10   ABANDONED SEWER LINES.  
When an existing sanitary sewer service is abandoned or a service is renewed
with a new connection in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains
shall be capped off and made absolutely watertight.
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
 
96.01 Permit                           96.07 Sewer Tap
96.02 Permit Fee and Connection Charge 96.08 Inspection Required
96.03 Plumber Required                 96.09 Property Owner’s Responsibility
96.04 Excavations                      96.10 Abatement of Violations
96.05 Connection Requirements          96.11 Tap On Fee for the Silver Creek
                                       Sanitary Sewer Project
96.06 Interceptors Required
 
96.01   PERMIT.  
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into,
use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the City. The application for the permit shall
set forth the following information:
   1.   The location and description of the property to be connected with the
sewer system.
   2.   The purpose for which the sewer is to be used.
   3.   Plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Director of Public Works or Building Official.
The permit shall require the owner to complete construction and connection of
the building sewer to the public sewer within 30 days after the issuance of the
permit, except that when a property owner makes sufficient showing that due to
conditions beyond the owner’s control or peculiar hardship, such time period is
inequitable or unfair, an extension of time within which to comply with the
provisions herein may be granted. Any sewer connection permit may be revoked at
any time for a violation of these chapters.
96.02   PERMIT FEE AND CONNECTION CHARGE.
   1.   The person who makes the application shall pay a fee as established by
resolution to the Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the permit and
supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work. In addition, there shall be a
connection charge in the amount as established by resolution paid to reimburse
the City for costs borne by the City in making sewer service available to the
property served.
   2.   Silver Creek Interceptor. For lots created as a result of a subdivision
pursuant to the subdivision laws of the City, after July 1, 1993, and abutting
the Silver Creek Interceptor or its extensions, the connecting charge shall be
an amount equal to 50 percent of the costs, at the rate not to exceed $30.00
per lineal foot, or installing an eight inch sanitary sewer line through the
building lot on the same route as the Silver Creek Interceptor. Such frontage
and cost shall be determined by the Director of Public Works and frontage
extended to the center of an intersection for corner lots.
96.03   PLUMBER REQUIRED.
All installations of building sewers and connections to the public sewer shall
be made by a State-licensed plumber.
96.04   EXCAVATIONS.
All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required for the installation of a
building sewer shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the
State Plumbing Code and the provisions of Chapter 135 of this Code of
Ordinances.
96.05   CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
Any connection with a public sanitary sewer or repair or partial or total
replacement of a private sewer lateral that connects to a public sewer must be
made under the direct supervision of the Director of Public Works or Building
Official and in accordance with the following:
   1.   Old Building Sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test conducted by
the owner and observed by the Building Official, to meet all requirements of
this chapter.
   2.   Separate Building Sewers. A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every occupied building; except where one building stands
at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court,
yard, or driveway. In such cases the building sewer from the front building may
be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
   3.   Installation. All sewer drain pipes connecting with a sewer shall be
watertight and shall have a check valve to prevent backup. The check valve
shall have a clean-out mechanism. That portion of the connection located in the
street, and under the curb line and driveways shall be ductile iron. Schedule
40 PVC may be used in lieu of ductile iron in houses and buildings, including
under concrete flooring in a house or building, and under yards. All sewer
drain pipe connections shall be made with a watertight rubber boot with
stainless steel straps.
   4.   Water Lines. When possible, building sewers should be laid at least 10
feet horizontally from a water service. The horizontal separation may be less,
provided the water service line is located at one side and at least 12 inches
above the top of the building sewer.
   5.   Size. Building sewers shall be sized for the peak expected sewage flow
from the building with a minimum building sewer size of four inches.
   6.   Alignment and Grade. All building sewers shall be laid to a straight
line to meet the following:
      A.   Recommended grade at one-fourth inch per foot.
      B.   Minimum grade of one-eighth inch per foot.
      C.   Minimum velocity of two and one half feet per second with the sewer
half full.
      D.   Deviations: any deviation in alignment or grade shall be made only
with the written approval of the Building Official and shall be made only with
properly curved pipe and fittings.
   7.   Depth. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth of cover above the
sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
   8.   Sewage Lifts. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low
to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the
building sewer.
   9.   Pipe Specifications. Building sewer pipe shall be free from flaws,
splits, or breaks. Materials shall be as specified in the State Plumbing Code
except that the building sewer pipe, from the property line to the public
sewer, shall comply with the current edition of one of the following:
      A.   Extra heavy cast iron soil pipe – A.S.T.M. A-74.
      B.   Cast and ductile iron water pipe - A.S.T.M. A-377. Ductile pipe is
required under streets for sewer.
      C.   P.V.C. – DWV - A.S.T.M. D-2665.
   10.   Bearing Walls. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within
three feet of any bearing wall that might thereby be weakened.
   11.   Jointing. Fittings, type of joint, and jointing material shall be
commensurate with the type of pipe used, subject to the approval of the
Building Official.
   12.   Unstable Soil. No sewer connection shall be laid so that it is exposed
when crossing any watercourse. Where an old watercourse must of necessity be
crossed or where there is any danger of undermining or settlement, cast iron
soil pipe or vitrified clay sewer pipe thoroughly encased in concrete shall be
required for such crossings. Such encasement shall extend at least six inches
on all sides of the pipe. The cast iron pipe or encased clay pipe shall rest on
firm, solid material at either end.
   13.   Preparation of Basement or Crawl Space. No connection for any
residence, business or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be made
unless the basement floor is poured, or in the case of a building with a slab
or crawl space, unless the ground floor is installed with the area adjacent to
the foundation of such building cleared of debris and backfilled. The backfill
shall be well compacted and graded so that the drainage is away from the
foundation. Prior to the time the basement floor is poured, or the first floor
is installed in buildings without basements, the sewer shall be plugged and the
plug shall be sealed by the Building Official. Any accumulation of water in any
excavation or basement during construction and prior to connection to the
sanitary sewer shall be removed by means other than draining into the sanitary
sewer.
96.06   INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
Grease, oil, sludge, and sand interceptors shall be provided by gas and service
stations, convenience stores, car washes, garages, and other facilities when,
in the opinion of the Building Official, they are necessary for the proper
handling of such wastes that contain grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable waste, sand, or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. When required,
such interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the following:
   1.   Design and Location. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
as specified in the State Plumbing Code, to be approved by the Building
Official, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
   2.   Construction Standards. The interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped
with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and watertight.
   3.   Maintenance. All such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at
the owner’s expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient operations at
all times.
96.07   SEWER TAP.
Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the “Y”
branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly
located “Y” branch is available, a saddle “Y” shall be installed at the
location specified by the Building Official. The public sewer shall be tapped
with a tapping machine and a saddle appropriate to the type of public sewer
shall be glued or attached with a gasket and stainless steel clamps to the
sewer. At no time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a
manhole unless special written permission is received from the Building
Official and in accordance with the Director of Public Work’s direction if such
connection is approved.
96.08   INSPECTION REQUIRED.
All connections with the sanitary sewer system, including repair or replacement
of private sewer laterals that connect to the public sewer system, before being
covered shall be inspected and approved, in writing, by the Director of Public
Works or Building Official. As soon as all pipe work from the public sewer to
inside the building has been completed, and before any backfilling is done, the
Director of Public Works or Building Official shall be notified and the
Director of Public Works or Building Official shall inspect and test the work
as to workmanship and material; no sewer pipe laid underground shall be covered
or trenches filled until after the sewer has been so inspected and approved. If
the Director of Public Works or Building Official refuses to approve the work,
the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the work.
96.09   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building sewer, from the main to the building served, shall
be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
96.10   ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines, whether located upon the
private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which construction
or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter,
shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within 30 days after date of
official notice from the Council of such violation. If not made within such
time, the Council shall, in addition to the other penalties herein provided,
have the right to finish and correct the work and assess the cost thereof to
the property owner. Such assessment shall be collected with and in the same
manner as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])
96.11   TAP ON FEE FOR THE SILVER CREEK SANITARY SEWER PROJECT.
   1.   General Project Description. The Silver Creek Sanitary Sewer is a trunk
sanitary sewer serving the west area for the City within the Silver Creek
Economic Development District which included the construction of one lift
station, 57 manholes and 19,415 lineal feet of sewer pipe ranging in size from
eight inches in diameter to 24 inches in diameter. The Council has determined
that installation of the project would facilitate development of the area
generally located within the westerly portion of the City, because that area
was not expected to develop due to the lack of sanitary sewer within the area.
   2.   Actions Taken by the Council in Approving the Project. The Council, by
motion on February 15, 1993, authorized Beling Consultants to design the sewer.
On July 5th, 1993, the Council held a public hearing on the plans,
specifications, form of contracting, and costs estimates. Following the public
hearing, the Council passed resolution No. 93-43 approving the plans and
specifications of the project authorizing advertisement for bids. The City
awarded the Silver Creek Interceptor Sewer Project to Langman Construction,
Inc. on August 9, 1993, by resolution No. 93-44. The Council authorized the
issuance of General Obligation Bonds as financing to pay the construction costs
of the project.
   3.   Total Project Costs. The total actual cost of the project as certified
by the City Finance Clerk is $2,441,784.96 plus interest of $977,082.50 for a
grand total of $3,418,867.46.
   4.   Total Area Benefited. At present the Silver Creek Sanitary Sewer
Project benefits a total of approximately 2,198 acres, and there is a total of
19,415 lineal footage of sewer.
   5.   Formula for Calculation of Tap On Fee. The cost of an eight-inch sewer
line in the Silver Creek Interceptor Sewer Project is determined to be $30.00
per lineal foot. The benefit allocated to property owners is commensurate with
the cost of an eight-inch sewer line in that a line of such dimension is
considered to be a normal service line and would be the cost that a developer
would occur in the installation of a sewer line such that the involved real
estate may be developed. The tap on fees should therefore be based upon a
$30.00 per lineal foot charge to be paid by the property owner in those
instances where the sewer line is situated in the interior of the property
owner’s tract and $15.00 per lineal foot when the tract of the respective
property owner fronts the sewer line. These fees should be paid by property
owners at the time the sewer line is tapped, or a building permit is granted,
if it includes plans to tap on to the Silver Creek Interceptor sewer. No fee
would be paid other than the normal connection fee for residential or small
commercial users who do not abut the sewer as they will incur expense in the
construction of lines to service their properties and to connect to the sewer.
The tap on fee is in addition to the ordinary connection fee.
   6.   Real Estate Serviced and the Tap On Fee to be Charged Upon Hookup. The
following table lists the connection fee for the described properties. The
calculation is based upon the City Engineer’s determination of the lineal
footage of interior and frontage sewer in each of the indicated tracts. The
legal description of the respective parcels are separately attached and
incorporated herein by reference. The properties are referred to in the
attachments by titleholder and property reference number. The Clerk shall not
be required to publish the legal descriptions of the properties as set out in
the attachments, as each of the affected property owners have been notified by
mail prior to the adoption of the ordinance. All attachments to the ordinance
including the legal descriptions of the properties shall be recorded in the
office of the County Recorder and maintained on file and available for
inspection in the Clerk’s office.
Title Holder and Interior Sewer Frontage Sewer Connection Fee Assessment
Property Number
                 $30.00 per ft. $15.00 per ft.
Title Holder and         Interior Sewer Frontage Sewer Connection Fee
Property Number                                        Assessment
                         $30.00 per ft. $15.00 per ft.
1. DeWitt Land and Farm  3,918          2,294          $151,950.00
Co.
2. Silver Valley         1,892          1,291          $76,125.00
Develop. L.C.
3.Tri-County Farm Equip.                569            $ 8,535.00
Co.
4. Timothy Clark         150            450            $11,250.00
5. Glen J. Karpinske     330                           $9,900.00
6. John E. and Connie M.                320            $4,800.00
Cressey
7. Custom Pak, Inc.                     1,039          $15,585.00
8. Rittmer, Inc.                        745            $11,175.00
9. N.A.P.A Des Moines                   419            $6,285.00
Warehouse
10. Dan Kanakares        135                           $4,050.00
11. Darwin J. and Judy                  160            $2,400.00
Kilburg
12. Rebecca Rittmer      180            230            $8,850.00
13. Jacque and Alice                    720            $10,800.00
Faur
14. Alyn E. and Shirley  785                           $23,550.00
Rittmer, #1
15. Alyn E. and Shirley  150                           $4,500.00
Rittmer, #2
16. Mobile World L.C.    274                           $8,220.00
17. Rollie W. and Eileen 70             1,189          $19,935.00
Schneckloth
18. Lucille Otey         1,777          1,184
Divided into two tracts
as follows:
Tract A (23 acres)                                     $17,576.00
Tract B (70 acres)                                     $53,310.00
(See Subparagraph (8)(A)
for special procedures
concerning Tract B)
19. Jack Seeser/Eastern
Iowa Grain and                          1,358          $20,370.00
Fertilizer Ltd.
20. Springbrook          80             102            $3,930.00
Sportsmens Club
21. Burton F. and Gloria                185            $2,775.00
A. Fletcher
22. Michael Martin                      120            $1,800.00
23. Iowa District
Council of the                          220            $3,300.00
Assemblies of God Church
24. Tim A. and Vonda G.                 230            $3,450.00
Jacques
   7.   Payment of Tap On Charge. The total tap on charge or applicable
percentage thereof as determined in accordance with Section 96.11(7)(A)(B) is
due and payable prior to the grant of a building permit, the plans for which
contemplate tapping on to the Silver Creek sewer or a connection to the Silver
Creek sewer. In no case will a building permit be granted which contemplates
connection to the Silver Creek sewer or sewer connection to the Silver Creek
sewer until the owner of any lot or parcel situated in or a part of the tracts
of real estate described in Section 96.11(6) has paid to the Clerk the amount
set forth in Section 96.11(6) determined in accordance with Section 96.11(7)(A)
and (B).
      A.   Residential or Small Commercial Users. If the original owner of the
property as delineated in Section
96.11(6) divides the property into one or more additional lots or parcels for
residential or small commercial uses of three acres or less, and if the plan or
division is approved by the Council, then the owner of the individual lots
shall be allowed to connect to the Silver Creek sewer line upon payment of an
amount equal to $15.00 per lineal foot for lots which abut the sewer line and
$30.00 per lineal foot where the lot is situated in the interior of the lot. In
making this calculation the frontage shall be extended to the intersection for
corner lots. In its discretion the Council may require the payment of a tap on
fee calculated at the above mentioned rate in those instances where the Council
determines that the developer and/or owner are situating the lot or lots a
short distance from the sewer line so as to avoid payment of a tap on fee. In
such a case the City may collect the tap on fee only once for that specific
portion of the sewer line as is being levied against the respective lot or
lots.
      B.   Industrial and Large Commercial Use. In the case of an industrial
use property or commercial use of greater than three acres, the property owner
shall pay to City at the time of the grant of a building permit which
contemplates tapping onto the Silver Creek sewer or at the time of tapping onto
the sewer, whichever first occurs, the sum set out in Section
96.11(6) for the respective parcel. However, if the owner divides the parcel
into two or more lots and if the plan of division is approved by the Council,
then the total tap on fee applicable to the entire tract may be prorated to
each individual lot by calculating a per acre average cost arrived at by
allocating the total tap on fee as provided in Section
96.11(6) by the number of acres in the original tract then applying this per
acre cost to the tract or area to be served by the connection. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, at such time as there shall be five hookups or connections
within the overall original tract then the entire unpaid balance of the amount
of the connection charge as set out in Section
96.11(6) as against such parcel shall be paid in full.
   8.   Agreements with Developers. The City, may, in its discretion, enter
into agreements with developers subdividing property in the benefited area, to
allow equalization of the tap on fees along the lots in the subdivision,
including agreements for the prepayment of tap on fees, the payment of tap on
fees on a per lot basis and development sequencing. Such agreements shall not
in any way alter the requirements regarding building permits.
      A.   Special procedure. The Council has determined it appropriate to
divide parcel number 18 into two tracts so as to equitably address the issue of
the prospective sewerability of Tract B. This will eliminate the prospect that
five tap ons involving real estate situated entirely within Tract A could
trigger payment of the entire tap on fee which would in the absence of division
of the tracts include fees for real estate situated within Tract B which the
property owner asserts as not presently sewerable. In the event a portion of
Tract A consisting of less than three acres would be combined with a portion of
Tract B and such combined tract would be connected to the Silver Creek sewer,
the tap on fee then payable shall be a prorated share of the total tap on fee
allocable to both Tract A and B in proportion to which the number of acres in
Tract A and B bears to the total number of acres the tract to be served by the
connection.
   9.   Maps and Illustrations. There are attached hereto on file in the
Clerk’s office and incorporated herein by this reference the following
documents:
      A.   Map illustrating the general location of the project area in
relation to the City Comprehensive Plan.
      B.   Map or Plat of the Silver Creek Sanitary Sewer project.
      C.   A map showing the property served by the Silver Creek Sanitary Sewer
Project.
      D.   The legal description of the properties serviceable by the Silver
Creek Sanitary Sewer Project by Titleholder as referred to in Section
96.11(6).
      E.   Director of Finance’s Project Cost Certification.
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
 
97.01 Stormwater               97.05 Restricted Discharges; Powers of Building
                               Official
97.02 Surface Waters Exception 97.06 Special Facilities
97.03 Prohibited Discharges    97.07 Control Manholes
97.04 Restricted Discharges    97.08 Testing of Wastes
 
97.01   STORMWATER.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
that are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved by the Building Official. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Building
Official, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
97.02   SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION.
Special permits for discharging surface waters to a public sanitary sewer may
be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the Building Official where
such discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing, but
any permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to
be in the best interests of the sewer system.
97.03   PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   1.   Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel
oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
   2.   Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant,
including but not limited to cyanides (CN) in excess of two milligrams per
liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
   3.   Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
   4.   Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities
or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   5.   Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow.
      A.   Any waters or wastes:
         (1)   Having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300
parts per million by weight; or
         (2)   Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids; or
         (3)   Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the
average sewage flow of the City, shall be subject to the review of the Building
Official.
      B.   Where necessary in the opinion of the Building Official, the owner
shall provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to:
         (1)   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by
weight; or
         (2)   Reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight;
or
         (3)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes.
      C.   Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating
to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Building Official, and no construction of such facilities shall
be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
97.04   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the Building Official that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Building Official will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances restricted are:
   1.   High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150? (65?).
   2.   Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or 600
milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble matter.
   3.   Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances that may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 (0 to 65).
   4.   Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to
such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than
one-half inch in any dimension.
   5.   Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not.
   6.   Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the Building Official for such materials.
   7.   Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste
or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits that may
be established by the Building Official as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of State, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
   8.   Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-
life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Building Official
in compliance with applicable State or federal regulations.
   9.   Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
   10.   Unusual Wastes. Materials that exert or cause:
      A.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
      B.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
      C.   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
      D.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
   11.   Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable
of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into
sewers for their maintenance and repair.
   12.   Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials, or substances that
react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases,
develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable
concentration, or create any other condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
   13.   Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances that are
not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
97.05   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES; POWERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section
97.04 and which in the judgment of the Building Official may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Building Official may:
   1.   Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public
sewage system;
   2.   Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
   3.   Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or
   4.   Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling
and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of
Chapter 99.
97.06   SPECIAL FACILITIES.
If the Building Official permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Building Official and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary
treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
by the owner at the owner’s expense.
97.07   CONTROL MANHOLES.
When required by the Building Official, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Building
Official. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s expense,
and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.
97.08   TESTING OF WASTES.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained
from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from
periodic grab samples.)
CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
 
98.01 When Prohibited             98.05 Discharge Restrictions
98.02 When Required               98.06 Maintenance of System
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.07 Systems Abandoned
98.04 Permit Required             98.08 Disposal of Septage
 
98.01   WHEN PROHIBITED.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02   WHEN REQUIRED.
When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section
95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are employed shall
be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system
complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
98.03   COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and
requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and
with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the
County Board of Health.
(567 IAC 69.1[3 and 4])
98.04   PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of Health.
98.05   DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.
It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater treatment
and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch, stream, pond,
lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the surface of the
ground.
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
98.06   MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall operate
and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to
the City.
98.07   SYSTEMS ABANDONED.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an on-
site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section
95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with
these Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.08   DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.
No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at any
location except an approved disposal site.
CHAPTER 99
SEWER USER CHARGE SYSTEM
 
99.01 Sewer Rental Required      99.06 Special Rates
99.02 Definitions                99.07 Private Water Systems
99.03 User Charge System         99.08 Payment of Bills
99.04 Actual User Rate Structure 99.09 Lien for Nonpayment
99.05 User Charge System Review  99.10 Special Agreements Permitted
 
99.01   SEWER RENTAL REQUIRED.
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection
of the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience of the City to collect
charges from all users who contribute wastewater to the City’s treatment works.
The proceeds of such charges so derived will be used for the purpose of
operating, maintaining, and retiring the debt for such public wastewater
treatment works.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.02   DEFINITIONS.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
   1.   “BOD” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Centigrade, expressed in
milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   2.   “Normal domestic wastewater” means wastewater that has a BOD
concentration of not more than 220 mg/l, a suspended solids concentration of
not more than 250 mg/l and an Ammonia Nitrogen concentration of not more than
30 mg/l.
   3.   “Operation and maintenance” means all expenditures during the useful
life of the treatment works for materials, labor, utilitie,s and other items
which are necessary for the managing and maintaining the treatment works to
achieve the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and
constructed.
   4.   “Replacement” means expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful
life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which
such works were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance”
includes replacement.
   5.   “Residential contributor” means any contributor to the City’s treatment
works whose lot, parcel of real estate, or building is used for domestic
dwelling purposes only.
   6.   “SS” (denoting Suspended Solids) means solids that either float on the
surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which
are removable by laboratory filtering.
   7.   “Treatment works” means any devices and systems used for the storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage, or
liquid industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers,
sewage collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power, and other
equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvement, remodeling,
additions, and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable
recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and
any works, including site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part
of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting
from such treatment (including land for composting sludge, temporary storage of
such compost, and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land
treatment systems before land application); or any other method or system for
preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating, or disposing of
municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined stormwater and
sanitary sewer systems.
   8.   “Useful life” means the estimated period during which a treatment works
will be operated.
   9.   “User charge” means that portion of the total wastewater service charge
which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of
operation, maintenance, and replacement of the wastewater treatment works.
   10.   “Water meter” means a water volume measuring and recording device,
furnished and/or installed by the City or furnished and/or installed by a user
and approved by the City.
99.03   USER CHARGE SYSTEM.
   1.   The user charge system shall generate adequate annual revenues to pay
costs of annual operation and maintenance including replacement and costs
associated with debt retirement of bonded capital associated with financing the
treatment works which the City may, by ordinance, designate to be paid by the
user charge system. That portion of the total user charge which is designated
for operation and maintenance, including replacement of the treatment works,
shall be established by this chapter.
   2.   That portion of the total user charge collected which is designated for
operation and maintenance including replacement purposes as established in
Section
99.04 shall be deposited in a separate non-lapsing fund known as the Operation,
Maintenance, and Replacement Fund and will be kept in two primary accounts as
follows:
      A.   An account designated for the specific purpose of defraying
operation and maintenance costs (excluding replacement) of the treatment works
(Operation and Maintenance Account).
      B.   An account designated for the specific purpose of ensuring
replacement needs over the useful life of the treatment works (Replacement
Account). Deposits in the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR)
Replacement Account shall be made monthly from the operation, maintenance, and
replacement revenue in the amount of $4,037.00 per month.
Appendix A demonstrates a schedule of the replacement needs for the treatment
works.
      C.   There is hereby created a special fund to be known and designated as
the Improvement and Extension Fund (hereinafter referred to as the “Improvement
Fund”) into which there shall be set apart and paid from the balance of the Net
Revenues remaining, the sum of $1,500.00 on the first day of each month each
year until such time as there has been accumulated in the Improvement Fund the
sum of $500,000.00 – (the Required Improvement Fund Balance). All money
credited to the Improvement Fund shall be used and is hereby pledged solely and
only to pay the cost of capital improvements and extension of the utility.
   3.   Fiscal and year-end balances in the Operation and Maintenance Account
and the Replacement Account shall be carried over to the same accounts in the
subsequent fiscal year, and shall be used for no other purposes than those
designated for these accounts. Moneys which have been transferred from other
sources to meet temporary shortages in the Operation, Maintenance, and
Replacement Fund shall be returned to their respective accounts upon
appropriate adjustment of the user charge rates for operation, maintenance, and
replacement. The user charge rates shall be adjusted such that the transferred
moneys will be returned to their respective accounts within the fiscal year in
which the moneys were borrowed.
99.04   ACTUAL USER RATE STRUCTURE.
   1.   Each user shall pay for the services provided by the City based on the
user’s use of the treatment works as determined by water/sewer meter(s)
acceptable to the City.
   2.   For residential contributors, monthly user charges will be based on
water used during the current month. For industrial and commercial
contributors, user charges shall be based on water used during the current
month. If a commercial user or industrial contributor has a consumptive use of
water, or in some other manner uses water which is not returned to the
wastewater collection system, the user charge for that contributor may be based
on a wastewater meter or separate water meter installed and maintained at the
contributor’s expense, and in a manner acceptable to the City.
   3.   Each contributor shall pay a monthly billing and collection cost of
$3.33 a monthly cost to treat infiltration/inflows of $4.73 per month, and a
user charge rate (minimum of 2,000 gallons) for operation, maintenance and
replacement of $4.18 per 1,000 gallons of water (minimum of 2,000 gallons) as
determined in the preceding section, plus a capital finance charge of:
      A.   First 2,000 gallons per month @ $2.61 per 1,000 gallons (minimum
rate based on minimum usage of 2,000 gallons - minimum monthly sewer charge of
$21.64)
      B.   Next 2,000 gallons per month @ $1.05 per 1,000 gallons
      C.   Next 5,000 gallons per month @ $.71 per 1,000 gallons
      D.   Next 491,000 gallons per month @ $.37 per 1,000 gallons
      E.   Over 500,000 gallons per month @ no charge.
   4.   As of March 1, 2023, a surcharge in addition to the normal user charge
will be collected for those contributors who contribute wastewater, the
strength of which is greater than normal domestic sewage. The extra strength
surcharge for operation, maintenance and replacement is:
      A.   $.50 per pound B.O.D. over 300 mg/1 strength
      B.   $.52 per pound SS over 250 mg/1 strength
      C.   $1.53 per pound NH3-N over 35 mg/1 strength
   5.   Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase
in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the City’s treatment
works or any user which discharges any substance which singly or by interaction
with other substances causes identifiable increases in the costs of operation,
maintenance or replacement of the treatment works shall pay for such increased
costs. The charge to each such user shall be as determined by the responsible
plant operating personnel.
   6.   The user charge rates established in this chapter apply to all users of
the City’s treatment works regardless of the users’ location.
(Section 99.04 – Ord. 2024-04– Jun. 24 Supp.)
99.05   USER CHARGE SYSTEM REVIEW.
   1.   The City will review the user charge system every two years at a
minimum and revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system
generates adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance,
including replacement, and that the system continues to provide for the
proportional distribution of operation and maintenance, including replacement,
costs among users and user classes.
   2.   The City will notify each user at least annually, in conjunction with a
regular bill, of the rate being charged for operation and maintenance,
including replacement of the treatment works.
99.06   SPECIAL RATES.
Where, in the judgment of the Council, special conditions exist surrounding use
of the City water to the extent that the application of the service charges,
rentals, or rates specified herein would be inequitable or unfair to either the
City or the customers, the Council may establish a special rate applying to
such customers. Such special rates, when adopted by ordinance by the Council,
shall apply to all customers to the sanitary utilities of the City under like
circumstances. Special rates may include, among other, the following cases:
   1.   Where the nature of the use of the City water is such that the
resulting sewage or industrial waste discharged into the sanitary sewer system
of the City has characteristics making it more or less difficult to treat than
ordinary domestic waste.
   2.   Where the monthly City water use exceeds 25,000 gallons and a
substantial portion of such water consumed is not polluted and is not
discharged into or does not reach the sanitary sewer system.
   3.   Where privately produced water supplies are discharged directly or
indirectly into the sanitary sewer system of the City, the service rental shall
be on an equal basis as may be with the rates which were applied to an equal
quantity in character of waste originating through the use of City water.
99.07   PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS.
Customers whose premises are served by a private water system shall pay sewer
rentals based upon the water used as determined by the City either by an
estimate agreed to by the customer or by metering the water system at the
customer’s expense. Any negotiated, or agreed upon sales or rentals shall be
subject to approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.08   PAYMENT OF BILLS.
All sewer rentals shall be due and payable under the same terms and conditions
provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in Section
92.03 of this Code of Ordinances. Sewer service may be discontinued in
accordance with the provisions contained in Section
92.04 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section
92.07 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
99.09   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
Except as provided for in Section
92.06 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for sewer
service charges to the premises. Water service charges remaining unpaid and
delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the property or premises served and
shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the
same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.10   SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED.
No statement in these chapters shall be construed as preventing a special
agreement, arrangement or contract between the Council, and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted subject to special conditions, rate and cost as established by the
Council.
CHAPTER 100
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM DISTRICT UTILITY
 
100.01 Purpose                            100.04 Rates
100.02 Definitions                        100.05 Payment of Bills
100.03 Stormwater Drainage System Utility 100.06 Lien for Nonpayment
Established
100.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Stormwater Drainage System
District Utility and provide a means of funding the construction, operation,
and maintenance of stormwater management facilities including, but not limited
to, detention and retention basins, stormwater sewers, inlets, ditches and
drains, and cleaning of streets. The Council finds that the construction,
operation, and maintenance of the City’s storm and surface water drainage
system should be funded through charging users of property which may connect or
discharge directly, or indirectly, into the storm and surface water drainage
system.
100.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Connection” means the physical act or process of tapping a public
stormwater sewer or drainage line, or joining onto an existing storm sewer, for
the purpose of connecting private impervious surface or other storm and surface
water sources or systems to the public storm and surface water system. It also
includes creation or maintenance of impervious surface that causes or is likely
to cause an increase in the quantity or decrease in quality or both from the
natural state of stormwater runoff, and which drains, directly or indirectly,
to the storm and surface water system.
   2.   “Storm and surface water drainage system” means any combination of
publicly owned storm and surface water quantity and quality facilities,
pumping, or lift facilities, storm and secondary drain pipes and culverts, open
channels, creeks and ditches, force mains, laterals, manholes, catch basins and
inlets, including the grates and covers thereof, detention and retention
facilities, laboratory facilities and equipment, and any other publicly owned
facilities for the collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal of storm and
surface water system within the City, to which sanitary sewage flows are not
intentionally admitted.
   3.   “Unit” means each household, each place of commerce/education/
government/religion, or each industry, whether in a single building on a single
lot or in a multiple-use building on a single lot or multiple lot complex. Each
unit shall be charged individually, but where the complex is billed under one
combined service account, the recipient of that bill shall be deemed the user
and receive the total combined stormwater drainage system district charge for
that complex.
   4.   “User” means any person who uses property that maintains connection to,
discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the City for stormwater
management. The occupant of occupied property is deemed the user. If the
property is not occupied, the person who has the right to occupy it shall be
deemed the user.
100.03   STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM UTILITY ESTABLISHED.
Pursuant to the authority of Section 384.84[5] of the Code of Iowa, the entire
City is hereby declared a Stormwater Drainage System District for the purpose
of establishing, imposing, adjusting, and providing for the collection of rates
for the operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities. The
entire City, as increased from time to time by annexation, shall constitute a
single Stormwater Drainage System District.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[5])
100.04   RATES.
Each user shall pay for storm and surface water drainage system service
provided by the City. The rates for the operation and maintenance of the
stormwater management facilities shall be collected by imposing a monthly rate
on each residential, commercial, and industrial user within the City. The
service charges shall be billed as part of a combined service account which
means a customer service account for the provision of two or more utility
services. The Council may adopt rules, charges, rates, and fees for the use of
the City’s storm and surface water system, and for services provided by the
City relating to that system. Such rules may include delinquency and interest
charges and penalties. Such charges and fees shall be just and equitable based
upon the actual costs of operation, maintenance, acquisition, extension, and
replacement of the City’s system, the costs of bond repayment, regulation,
administration, and services of the City. The rates for the foregoing functions
shall be collected by imposing a monthly rate of $3.00 on every residential
unit, $7.50 on every commercial, educational, governmental, religious unit, and
$13.00 on every industrial unit. Agricultural use of land is exempt from the
requirements of this chapter.
100.05   PAYMENT OF BILLS.
All Stormwater Drainage System District charges shall be due and payable under
the same terms and conditions provided for payment of a combined service
account as contained in Section
92.03 of this Code of Ordinances. All City services may be discontinued in
accordance with the provisions contained in Section
92.04 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section
92.07 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[2b] and [2d])
100.06   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
Except as provided for in Section
92.06 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for stormwater
service charges to the premises. Water service charges remaining unpaid and
delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the property or premises served and
shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the
same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
CHAPTER 101
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
101.01 Purpose                101.09 Construction
101.02 Definitions            101.10 Maintenance
101.03 Design Criteria        101.11 Easements
101.04 Applicability          101.12 Procedure
101.05 Runoff Calculation     101.13 Erosion Control
101.06 Storm Sewers           101.14 Waiver and Appeal
101.07 Release Rate           Appendix A Runoff Coefficients
101.08 Detention Requirements Appendix B Rainfall Intensities
101.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce or eliminate the hazards to the public
health and safety caused by excessive stormwater runoff, reduce the effects of
soil erosion and sedimentation caused by development, reduce economic losses to
individuals and the community at large, enhance broader social and economic
objectives, and protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land
and water resources.
101.02   DEFINITIONS.
When used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this section.
   1.   “Control structure” means a structure designed to control the flow of
stormwater runoff that passes through it during a specific length of time.
   2.   “Detention facility” means an area designed to store excess stormwater.
   3.   “Development” means the improvement of the land from its original state
(unimproved and prior to any development) such as a structure, impervious
surface being placed or constructed or agricultural crops thus increasing the
amount of rainwater or surface water runoff.
   4.   “Dry bottom stormwater storage area” means a facility designed to be
normally dry and contain water only when excess stormwater runoff occurs.
   5.   “Erosion” means the loss of natural soils by the action of wind and/or
water.
   6.   “Excess stormwater” means that portion of stormwater which exceeds the
transportation capacity of storm sewers or natural drainage channels serving a
specific watershed.
   7.   “Excess stormwater passageway” means a channel formed in the topography
of the earth’s surface to carry stormwater runoff through a specific area.
   8.   “Natural drainage” means channels formed by the existing surface
topography prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
   9.   “Stormwater runoff” means the flow of water resulting from
precipitation which is not absorbed by the soil or plant material.
   10.   “Stormwater runoff release rate” means the rate at which stormwater
runoff is released from dominant to subservient land.
   11.   “Tributary watershed” means all of the area that contributes
stormwater runoff to a given point.
   12.   “Wet bottom stormwater storage area” means a facility designed to be
maintained as a pond or free water surface and which has the capacity to
contain excess stormwater runoff.
   13.   “‘X’-year storm” means the average recurrence intervals within which a
rainfall of given intensity and duration will be equaled or exceeded only once.
A 100-year storm would have an intensity of rainfall which would, on the
average, be equaled or exceeded only once in 100 years. This does not imply
that it will occur in 100 years, or having occurred, will not happen again for
100 years.
101.03   DESIGN CRITERIA.
The design of stormwater runoff systems, structures, and facilities shall be
based on the following minimum standards, which do not preclude the use of
higher design standards.
101.04   APPLICABILITY.
The provisions of Sections
101.05 through
101.13 shall apply to any of the following areas under development:
   1.   All new residential developments of two acres or more and all
commercial and industrial developments in excess of one acre.
   2.   Any development where the percentage of the impervious area of the lot
is 50 percent or greater.
   3.   Any development which, in the opinion of the City’s Engineer, lacks an
adequate internal or external excess stormwater passageway.
101.05   RUNOFF CALCULATION.
Design flows will be calculated using the “Rational” Method. The “Rational”
Method is defined as:
Q = CIA
where:
“Q” = Resultant runoff rate in cubic feet per second.
“C” = Runoff coefficient (see
Appendix A for values).
“I” = Intensity of rainfall (see
Appendix B for values).
“A” = Tributary watershed in acres.
101.06   STORM SEWERS.
Storm sewers and intakes shall be designed for a 10-year frequency storm in
such a manner that the flooded street width shall not exceed:
Allowable Flooded Width
Street Width Width Each Side Flooded Lanes
Allowable Flooded Width
Street Width Width Each Side Flooded Lanes
27 feet      8 feet          1 - 10’ lane
31 feet      10 feet         1 - 10’ lane
35 feet      9 feet          2 - 8’ lanes
41 feet      10 feet         2 - 10’ lanes
45 feet      11 feet         2 - 11’ lanes
49 feet      12 feet         2 - 12’ lanes
The maximum allowable distance between storm sewer manholes is 400 feet.
101.07   RELEASE RATE.
The stormwater runoff release rate from any detention basin required under this
chapter shall not exceed the stormwater runoff rate from the drainage area from
a five-year frequency storm having a runoff coefficient “C” of 0.15. The City
may require a lesser release rate when the downstream outlet is insufficient to
safely convey the release rate as determined.
101.08   DETENTION REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   Storage Volume. The volume of storage potential provided in stormwater
detention facilities shall be sufficient to control the excess stormwater
runoff, as determined to be the difference between the stormwater quantity from
the site in its developed state for a 100-year frequency rainfall less the
allowable release rate as set forth in Section
101.07.
   2.   Detention storage may be provided as a dry bottom or wet bottom storage
area.
      A.   Dry bottom stormwater storage areas may be designed to serve a
secondary purpose for recreation, open space, parking, or other types of uses
that will not be adversely affected by intermittent flooding.
         (1)   A method of carrying the low flow through these areas shall be
provided in addition to a system of drains to prevent soggy areas.
         (2)   Outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as
possible and shall require little or no attention for proper operation. Each
stormwater storage area shall be provided with a method of emergency overflow
in the event that a storm in excess of the 100-year frequency storm occurs.
This emergency overflow facility shall be designed to function without
attention. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all design
features.
         (3)   Both outlet control structures and emergency overflow facilities
shall be designed and constructed to fully protect the public health, safety,
and welfare. Stormwater runoff velocities shall be kept at a minimum and
turbulent conditions at an outlet control structure will not be permitted
without complete protection for the public safety. The use of fences shall be
kept to a minimum and used only as a last resort when no other method is
feasible.
         (4)   Parking lot surfaces that are to serve as stormwater storage
areas and rooftop storage shall be designed with permanent-type control
outlets. Emergency overflow areas shall be provided.
      B.   Wet bottom stormwater storage areas shall be designed with all of
the items required for dry bottom stormwater storage areas, except that the
provisions of Subsection 2(A)(1) shall not be required. However, the following
additional conditions shall be complied with:
         (1)   Water surface area shall not exceed 1/15 of the tributary
drainage area.
         (2)   Facilities shall be provided to lower the pond elevation by
gravity flow for cleaning purposes and shoreline maintenance. Shoreline
protection shall be provided to prevent erosion.
         (3)   Minimum normal water depth shall be four feet. If fish are to be
maintained, some portion of the pond area should be a minimum of nine feet
deep. The Council may impose a requirement for suitable fencing to provide for
the safety of citizens.
         (4)   Control structures for stormwater release shall be designed to
operate with only a minor increase in water surface level when the design
storage capacity has been exceeded. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted
to substantiate all design features.
         (5)   Only that portion of the detention area above the normal water
level shall be used in calculating the storage capacity.
101.09   CONSTRUCTION.
   1.   Where development of a property presents the threat of flooding or
damage by flash runoff to downstream residents, the facilities for stormwater
runoff control shall be construed as a part of the first phase of construction
of that project.
   2.   The construction of the stormwater control system shall be accomplished
as part of the cost of land development for each individual lot.
   3.   All flood control items such as earthen embankments, conduits, outlet
structures, flood control structures, spillways, excess stormwater passageway
channels, etc., shall be built as permanent facilities and all materials and
their manner of construction shall be assembled to accomplish as much
permanency as is possible.
   4.   Storm sewer piping shall adhere to the City Specifications for type and
installation.
101.10   MAINTENANCE.
All plans submitted for stormwater detention systems shall describe an adequate
procedure of normal maintenance for the detention system. Any failure of the
stormwater detention system, due to inadequate normal or capital maintenance,
shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which the detention
system is located. It shall also be the property owner’s responsibility to
remedy any negligence in maintenance that resulted in the failure of the
system. The submittal of plans for such a system or the purchase of property on
which such system is located shall be deemed as acceptance of responsibility
for normal and capital maintenance of the system. In the event that maintenance
is not provided, the City Administrator shall notify the party responsible for
maintenance to perform the work and set a reasonable time for its completion.
If said party refuses or is unable to comply with said order, the City
Administrator shall cause the maintenance to be completed at the expense of
said party.
101.11   EASEMENTS.
   1.   Drainage easements shall be provided for all areas of the detention
basin, including the outlet structures and emergency spillway.
   2.   No structures (with the exception of drainage structures) shall be
constructed in the easement areas, nor any filling, fencing, or other
obstacles, which will impede its intended use or capacity.
   3.   The developer shall provide reasonable public easements reserving the
land for use as a stormwater detention facility providing the City with the
right to inspect the facility and for ingress and egress.
101.12   PROCEDURE.
   1.   Plans, specifications, and all calculations for stormwater runoff
control shall be submitted for City review and approval prior to the approval
of a final plat (in the case of a subdivision) or issuance of a building permit
(in case of commercial or industrial construction). All plans, specifications,
and calculations shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer
registered in the State.
   2.   No Certification of Occupancy for any building in the development will
be issued until the stormwater detention facilities are constructed, inspected,
and approved.
101.13   EROSION CONTROL.
   1.   All developments shall have a temporary and permanent erosion control
system designed in such a way as to do and accomplish the following:
      A.   Provide that all loosened earthen materials, vegetative debris,
construction debris and/or rubbish caused by construction or erection of any
building, structure, or parking lot or construction of streets be contained
within the boundaries of the development during the period of construction.
Permanent erosion controls are established by settling basins, berms, silt
control fences or other standard recognized methods of permanently controlling
erosion prior to removal of temporary erosion control.
      B.   Provide that all stormwater outlets or drainage ways be constructed
with controls to control erosion of material both on and adjacent to the
developed tract of land. Erosion controls shall be provided such that
velocities of stormwater discharged from outlets and into natural drainage ways
be limited to provide a non-erosive velocity flow of three feet per second or
less. Means of controlling erosion shall include, but not be limited to: energy
dissipaters, settling basins, riprap or fabric slope protection and
establishment of permanent vegetation.
      C.   Off-site vehicle tracking of sediments shall be minimized.
   2.   A Certificate of Occupancy or acceptance of a subdivision shall not be
issued until all erosion control facilities are completed and approved by the
City Engineer. The cost of said review shall be paid for by the developer.
101.14   WAIVER AND APPEAL.
   1.   Higher Release Rate. The Council may permit a higher stormwater runoff
release rate from a development than is otherwise permissible under this
chapter, provided that the Council determines, after review and recommendation
from the City Engineer, that all of the following criterion have been met and
that the proposed stormwater runoff release rate:
      A.   Will not adversely affect properties in the downstream portion of
the drainage system;
      B.   Will not adversely affect the drainage system or any water course;
      C.   Will not adversely affect the environment;
      D.   Will not be contrary to the goal and general objectives of this
chapter and will not adversely affect public health, safety, and welfare;
      E.   There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in
carrying out the strict letter of this chapter.
   2.   Procedure to Obtain Waiver. A developer/owner may request a waiver from
the requirements of this chapter by submitting an application in writing to the
City Administrator. This application shall identify the name of the developer/
owner of the property, a description and drawing of the proposed development,
location to the proposed development, calculations for water runoff rate prior
to any development,p and runoff rate calculations after the proposed
development has been completed, those facts that the developer/owner contends
support the grant of a waiver, together with any other information requested by
the City Administrator and City Engineer that are reasonably necessary to
evaluate the proposed development. A fee of $150.00 shall accompany the
application. The applicant shall further pay all engineering costs incurred by
the City in reviewing the application.
APPENDIX A
RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
TYPE OF DRAINAGE AREA SURFACES   RUNOFF COEFFICIENT “C”
   ROOFS                  0.95
   PAVEMENTS
      Asphalt               0.85
      Concrete               0.95
      Gravel (clean and loose)         0.50
      Gravel (clayey and compact)         0.65
   EARTH SURFACES
      Bare                  0.40
      Light Vegetation            0.30
      Dense Vegetation            0.20
APPENDIX B
RAINFALL INTENSITIES
                         (24 hour) 1440 0.16   0.19    0.27
                         (12 hour) 720  0.29   0.33    0.47
                         (6 hour) 360   0.48   0.57    0.80
                         (3 hour) 180   0.85   0.93    1.35
                         (2 hour) 120   1.15   1.31    1.85
                         90             1.53   1.76    2.50
                         60             1.95   2.22    3.15
Storm Duration (minutes) 50             2.14   2.46    3.50
                         40             2.45   2.82    4.00
                         30             3.06   3.52    5.00
                         20             3.82   4.40    6.25
                         15             4.41   5.07    7.20
                         10             5.23   6.02    8.55
                         5              6.79   7.81    11.10
                                        5 year 10 year 100 year
                         Storm Frequency
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
105.01 Purpose                           105.15 Unlawful Placement of Refuse
105.02 Definitions                       105.16 Pollution of Water, Streets
105.03 Container Specifications          105.17 Incinerators Prohibited
105.04 Toxic and Hazardous Waste         105.18 Authority to Contract for Solid
                                         Waste and Recyclables Collection
105.05 Health and Fire Hazard            105.19 Exclusive Rights of City
                                         Collection
105.06 Private Landfill Operation        105.20 Right to Refuse to Collect
105.07 Composting                        105.21 Protection Required
105.08 Separation of Yard Waste Required 105.22 Frequency of Collection
105.09 Open Burning Restricted           105.23 Disposal Site Requirement
105.10 Location of Containers for        105.24 Failure to Deliver as Required
Collection of Contents
105.11 Right of Entry                    105.25 Collection Fees
105.12 Storage Area Regulations          105.26 Lien for Nonpayment
105.13 Treatment and Sorting Pending     105.27 Penalty
Collection
105.14 Interference with Containers
 
105.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the sanitary storage, collection,
and disposal of solid waste and the collection of recyclable materials in order
to protect the citizens of the City from such hazards to their health, safety,
and welfare as may result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.
105.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Agency” means the Clinton County Area Solid Waste Agency.
   2.   “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from
public and private places.
   3.   “Composting” means a controlled microbial degradation of organic waste
to produce a relatively nuisance-free product of potential value as a soil
conditioner.
   4.   “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit, or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
   5.   “Disposal Site” means a sanitary landfill or transfer station or other
facility for receiving or disposing of solid waste.
   6.   “Dwelling Unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a
structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used,
or are intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
   7.   “Executive Director” means the executive director of the State
Department of Natural Resources or any designee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.101[2b])
   8.   “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and
vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing,
serving, and consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all
offal, excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all such
substances from all public and private establishments and from all residences.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   9.   “Landscape Waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage.
The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds,
leaves, grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
   10.   “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials,
or debris not exceeding 10 pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume. Litter
includes, but is not limited, to empty beverage containers, cigarette butts,
food waste packaging, other food or candy wrappers, handbills, empty cartons,
or boxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
   11.   “Open Burning” means any burning of combustible materials where the
products of combustion are emitted into the open air without passing through a
chimney or stack.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   12.   “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person
residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating, or transacting business in
any premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities,
liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
   13.   “Premises” means the private property inside the property lines owned
by person or persons.
   14.   “Recyclable Materials” means materials that are separated from refuse
for the purpose of recycling and includes aluminum recyclables, can
recyclables, corrugated cardboard recyclables, glass container recyclables,
paper recyclables, plastic container recyclables #1 and #2, magazines and
newspapers which may include slick advertising circulars or inserts.
   15.   “Recycling” means the process of collecting and preparing recyclable
materials and reusing the materials in their original form or reusing them in
manufacturing processes.
   16.   “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste including, but
not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street
cleanings, market and industrial solid waste and sewage treatment waste in dry
or semisolid form.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   17.   “Residential Premises” means single-family dwellings, condominiums,
duplexes, and townhouses.
   18.   “Residential Waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a
result of residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on
the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires,
or trade waste.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
   19.   “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible
and non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   20.   “Sanitary Disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it
does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   21.   “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances
(including all real and personal property connected with such facilities) that
are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved,
extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid
waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and
which are approved by the Director of the State Department of Natural
Resources. “Sanitary disposal project” does not include a pyrolysis or
gasification facility as defined in Section 455B.301 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
   22.   “Solid Waste” means useless, unwanted, or discarded materials
resulting from commercial, industrial, domestic, and agricultural operations
and normal community activities. Wastes which are solid or semisolid containing
insufficient liquid to be free flowing are considered to be solid waste and
include in part the following: garbage, rubbish, ashes and other residue of
incineration, street refuse or sweepings, abandoned automobiles, agricultural,
commercial and industrial wastes and solid residue. The following items are
specifically excluded from the solid waste classification:
      A.   Furniture and appliances, including box springs and mattresses;
      B.   Dead animals;
      C.   Animals or human waste;
      D.   Vehicle parts, oil, grease, gasoline, and other petroleum products;
      E.   Construction debris, paint, thinners, solvents, toxic and
radioactive materials;
      F.   Trees, dirt, rubble, and yard waste;
      G.   Ammunition and hazardous waste including materials classified as
hazardous by the U.S. Federal Government, the State and/or the Agency.
      H.   Hazardous waste regulated under the federal Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
      I.   Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411, except to the extent
that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes have been adopted by
the Commission.
      J.   Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
      K.   Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable
State or federal standards.
      L.   Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing
process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as a
discarded material.
   23.   “Yard waste” means organic debris such as grass clippings, leaves,
garden waste, prunings, weeds, brush, and trees which are produced as a part of
yard and garden development and maintenance. Yard waste does not include tree
stumps.
105.03   CONTAINER SPECIFICATIONS.
The City or the City’s selected solid waste contractor may provide solid waste
containers that must be used for residential solid waste collection. Any solid
waste container proposed by a contractor shall be approved by the City. All
garbage placed in the container shall be bagged. Garbage not bagged may be
refused to be collected by the City or the solid waste contractor. Items not in
the solid waste containers shall not be collected. Items that will not fit in
the approved containers must be collected by a special pick up arranged by the
property owner. Items to be recycled must be placed in recycling containers
provided by the City. Property owners may request additional solid waste or
recycling containers. The City may provide additional solid waste and recycling
containers if they are available. Property owners with more than one solid
waste or recycling container shall pay for an additional account for the
additional container.
105.04   TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.
No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for
collection any toxic or hazardous solid waste. Hazardous materials include:
explosive materials, rags or otherwise soaked in volatile or inflammable
materials, drugs, poisons, radioactive materials, highly combustible materials,
soiled dressings, clothing, bedding and/or other waste contaminated by
infection or contagious diseases, and other materials which may present a
special hazard to collection or disposal personnel or equipment or to the
public. Such materials shall be transported and disposed of as prescribed by
the Executive Director.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
(IAC, 567-102.14[2] and 400-27.14[2])
105.05   HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.
It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved
or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste, either in
containers or not, that constitute a health, sanitation, or fire hazard.
105.06   PRIVATE LANDFILL OPERATION.
No person shall operate or permit the operation of a disposal site in the City
for the disposal of solid waste of any kind from any source other than
construction or demolition activities. If any private disposal operation within
the corporate limits of the City is found contrary to provisions of this
chapter, the City may proceed to abate such nuisance in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in district court.
105.07   COMPOSTING.
Backyard composting of yard waste is encouraged. Information on this process is
available at the County Extension Service. Owners and occupants are encouraged
to accumulate upon property under their respective control such quantities of
leaves and/or yard debris as can be properly composted without creating
offensive odors, litter, fire, or vector problems. Such composting so carried
out shall be deemed to be an alternative disposition of the disposal of yard
waste and satisfaction of any requirements of this chapter. Backyard composting
shall be limited to yard waste produced on the property where the composting is
taking place.
105.08   SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED.
All yard waste which is not composted on the owner’s premises shall be
separated from all other solid waste accumulated on the premises. Property
owners may dump yard waste at the City composing site.
105.09   OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED.
   1.   Statement of Public Policy. The Council declares it to be the policy of
the City that the quality of air must be maintained at a high level to protect
the health and welfare of its citizens. It is recognized that many residents
have respiratory or allergic medical conditions that are made life threatening
when the air quality is reduced by the introduction of irritants or pollutants
including fires burning without containment or adequate control. In order to
achieve this public purpose of maintaining air quality, burning within the City
limits shall be restricted as provided within this chapter.
   2.   Acts Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation, or other entity alone or in conjunction with others to dispose of
or participate in the disposal of any paper, cardboard, cartons, furniture,
waste, garbage, tires, or any other non-organic material within the corporate
limits of the City by fire.
   3.   Burning Restrictions. The following restrictions apply to burning:
      A.   Burning of leaves, grass clippings, pine needles, garden waste, and
other similar organic debris is prohibited except as provided below.
      B.   Burning of brush, sticks, branches, trees, and shrubs (excluding
garden waste) is allowed on properties being legally used for single-family and
two-family residential purposes.
      C.   All burning must take place no closer than 50 feet from an adjoining
or neighboring residential dwelling.
      D.   Burning is prohibited in the public right-of-way or any public
easement area.
      E.   Property owners/tenants must be present at all times while the fire
is burning.
   4.   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following:
      A.   Outdoor charcoal or wood broiler grills, fireplaces, and chimneys
burning untreated wood or charcoal, used only for the preparation of food or
social activities. It shall be unlawful for these installations to be utilized
for the disposal of any other objects, material, or matter by fire.
      B.   A controlled fire of untreated wood or coal for enjoyment of
fraternal, religious, educational, or other similar organizations when
application for exemption is made upon forms approved by the City Administrator
and approved by the Council.
      C.   Disposal of waste occurring by reason of severe storm or other
community disaster declared to be an emergency by resolution of the Council.
The type of waste, the manner in which it can be disposed, and the period of
time for disposal shall be specified in the resolution.
      D.   Prairie maintenance (reestablishment and creation) and agricultural
field maintenance shall be allowed subject to the rules, regulations, and
public notification requirements established by Clinton County. The City shall
be provided a copy of the approved Clinton County permit prior to the burn, if
a permit is required.
   5.   Violation and Enforcement. A violation of this section shall be a
simple misdemeanor each day that a violation of this chapter occurs or is
committed by the same individual or entity during a two-year period shall
constitute a separate offense. However, in addition to or in lieu of any
criminal prosecution, the City shall have the power to issue a civil infraction
for any violation of this chapter and shall be entitled to any fines,
injunctive relief, and other remedies allowed the City under the civil
infraction provisions of the Chapter 3.
   6.   Review. The Council shall review this section two years after passage
to determine how effective it is in meeting the burning and health and safety
needs of the community.
105.10   LOCATION OF CONTAINERS FOR COLLECTION OF CONTENTS.
Containers of residential solid waste or recyclable materials which are
awaiting collection shall be placed at the curb or edge of street pavement by
the owner or occupant of the premises served on the day of collection. For the
purpose of this chapter, a day is defined as that period of time from sundown
on the day preceding the collection of solid waste and recyclables to sundown
of the day of collection. Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curb or
alley separate from solid waste in a manner consistent with rules, regulations,
and procedures adopted by the collectors as approved by the City.
105.11   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for
the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this chapter;
however, solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other
residential buildings.
105.12   STORAGE AREA REGULATIONS.
No trash storage facilities shall be placed within the front yard setback area,
within 15 feet of side yard lot lines of a corner lot, or within the limits of
any street or alley. All trash containers shall be stored and maintained in a
neat manner complimentary to the area and the neighborhood. Trash containers
may be placed in these areas only on days appointed for trash pickup.
105.13   TREATMENT AND SORTING PENDING COLLECTION.
Within the corporate limits of the City, all solid waste consisting of waste
animal and vegetable matter which attracts flies, dogs, or rodents shall be
drained of all excess liquid, wrapped in paper or disposable containers, and
placed or stored until collection in covered suitable containers. Recyclables
shall be sorted separate from other solid waste and placed in a plainly marked
container which shall conform to the requirements of Section
105.03.
105.14   INTERFERENCE WITH CONTAINERS.
   1.   It is unlawful for any person other than the owner, occupant, or
members of said persons’ families, or agents of said persons, or the City, to
deposit, remove, deface, destroy, or disturb trash containers, recycling
containers, or bulky wastes.
   2.   From time of placement of recyclables at the curb or alley for
collection in accordance with the terms of this chapter, items shall be and
become property of the City or its authorized agent. It is in violation of this
chapter for any person not authorized by the City to collect or pick up or
cause to be collected or picked up any such items. Any and each such collection
in violation hereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
105.15   UNLAWFUL PLACEMENT OF REFUSE.
   1.   It is unlawful for any person to sweep or deposit any refuse or litter
in any public place or public way except in public trash containers provided
for such purposes. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk
and any right-of-way bordering their property free of litter.
   2.   It is unlawful for any person to deposit any residential refuse in any
public place or trash container.
   3.   It is unlawful for any person to place or maintain paper, litter,
excelsior, garbage, trash, or rubbish of any kind whatever in open deposits on
the ground or in open containers which do not meet the requirements of this
chapter.
   4.   It is unlawful to use any non-approved container in violation of the
provisions of this chapter. Such containers may be confiscated and disposed of
by the City.
   5.   It is unlawful for any person to place or maintain garbage, rubbish,
recyclables, or trash for curbside or alley collection in violation of this
chapter.
   6.   It is unlawful for any person to place or deposit residential refuse in
any commercial container.
105.16   POLLUTION OF WATER, STREETS.
   1.   No person shall throw, place or deposit, or cause to be deposited, any
garbage, refuse, litter, manure, carrion, dead animals, offal, or putrid or
unwholesome substances upon the margin, banks, or into any stream or water or
upon any street, alley, ditch, or public grounds or upon any property of
another within the limits of the City.
   2.   No person shall allow or permit any litter, other offensive substance,
or noxious matter of any kind to run or fall from or out of any building or
vehicle into or upon any street, alley, ditch, or public grounds, or upon any
property of another within the limits of the City. When litter is discarded
from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for
the act in any case where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor
vehicle actually discarded the litter.
105.17   INCINERATORS PROHIBITED.
   1.   It is unlawful for any person within the City to sell, or offer for
sale, or install, or offer to install any device intended for use as a
household solid waste burner or incinerator, except when the intended user of
such device has secured permission to operate or use such device from the City
or where the device will be operated by or for the City.
   2.   It is unlawful for any occupant of residential property as defined in
this chapter, to burn or incinerate or permit the burning or incineration of
any solid waste within the City. This section does not apply to any burning
conducted under the direction of the Fire Department of the City.
105.18   AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT FOR SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLES COLLECTION.
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing
or disposing of solid waste from residential premises for the City without
first entering into a contract with the City. This section does not prohibit an
owner from transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises owned, occupied,
or used by such owner, provided such refuse is disposed of properly in an
approved sanitary disposal project. Furthermore, a contract is not required for
the removal, hauling, or disposal of earth and rock material from grading or
excavation activities, provided that all such materials are conveyed in tight
vehicles, trucks, or receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the
material being transported is spilled upon any public right-of-way.
105.19   EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS OF CITY COLLECTION.
Any solid waste and recyclables generated by any residential dwelling unit and
placed at the curb for collection shall be collected solely and exclusively by
the City or its officially designated solid waste disposal contractor.
105.20   RIGHT TO REFUSE TO COLLECT.
The City or its contractor may refuse to collect any solid waste which does not
comply with the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
noncompliance with the requirements for separation of yard waste and recyclable
materials. Any materials refused by the City or its contractor shall be
promptly returned to the proper place of storage by the owner or occupant of
the premises until the materials or their containers are brought into
compliance with this chapter.
105.21   PROTECTION REQUIRED.
No person shall haul any solid waste or recyclables upon the streets, alleys,
or public places of the City unless the same is in an approved container
securely fastened to prevent spillage or in a totally enclosed watertight
vehicle. If, however, material is a dry type material, it may be hauled in a
totally enclosed vehicle or open vehicle which is covered with a suitable tight
fitting cover to prevent spillage. All vehicles used for the collection and
removal of solid waste shall be kept in a clean, inoffensive, and sanitary
condition. All solid waste shall be hauled in such a way as to prevent the
scattering, spilling, or leakage of same, and if spilled, the collector shall
be responsible to pick up such spilled material.
105.22   FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
All solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at least once each
week and from commercial, industrial, and institutional premises as frequently
as may be necessary, but not less than once each week.
105.23   DISPOSAL SITE REQUIREMENT.
No person shall haul or cause to be hauled any solid waste or recycling
material of any kind to any disposal place or recycling center or site or area
unless such place, site or area is first licensed by the City or operated by
the County Area Solid Waste Agency in addition to complying with all applicable
health and zoning ordinances of the City.
105.24   FAILURE TO DELIVER AS REQUIRED.
Each person charged with responsibility for the ultimate disposition of solid
waste and recyclables shall cause said solid waste and recyclables to be
delivered to a permittee as hereinabove described or to deliver the same in
person or as agent to a solid waste disposal or recycling site owned or
controlled by the Agency or approved by the City. Failure to do so shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
105.25   COLLECTION FEES.
The collection and disposal of solid waste, recyclables, and compost area
maintenance are declared to be beneficial to the property served or eligible to
be served and there shall be levied and collected fees therefor in accordance
with the following:
(Goreham vs. Des Moines, 1970, 179 NW 2nd, 449 [Iowa 1970])
   1.   Schedule of Fees. The fee for solid waste and recyclable collection
shall be as set forth below:
      A.   The per household rate for solid waste collection (a 95-gallon cart
collected weekly) and co-mingled recycling collection (65-gallon cart collected
every other week) is $18.10 per month.
      B.   The per household rate for one additional solid waste cart (a 95-
gallon cart collected weekly) and co-mingled recycling collection cart (65-
gallon cart collected every other week) is an additional $18.10 per month for a
total of $36.20 per month.
   2.   Exemption. If a dwelling is vacant or the owner has requested the water
service discontinued and shut off at the curb for a temporary vacancy as
provided in Section
92.09 of this code, there will be no charge for solid waste and recyclable
collection fees during that period of temporary vacancy.
   3.   Payment of Bills. All fees are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section
92.03 of this Code of Ordinances. Solid waste collection service may be
discontinued in accordance with the provisions contained in Section
92.04 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section
92.07 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
105.26   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
Except as provided for in Section
92.06 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof are jointly and severally liable for fees for solid
waste collection and disposal. Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall
constitute a lien upon the property or premises served and shall be certified
by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as
property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
105.27   PENALTY.
In addition to the standard penalty, any failure to comply with the provisions
of this chapter by owners of residential premises shall relieve the City of any
obligation to collect solid waste, recyclables, or yard waste from such
premises until such time as the owner is in full compliance with all the
provisions of this chapter.
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
 
110.01 Interstate Power and Light Company
 
110.01   INTERSTATE POWER AND LIGHT COMPANY. † 5
   1.   There is hereby granted to Interstate Power and Light Company,
hereinafter referred to as the “Company,” its successors and assigns, the
right, franchise, and privilege for the term of 25 years subject to a limited
right of cancellation at the end of the 10th and 20th year anniversaries of the
anniversary date as defined within; from and after the passage, adoption,
approval, and acceptance of this ordinance, to lay down, maintain, and operate
the necessary pipes, mains, and other conductors and appliances in, along, and
under the streets, avenues, alleys, and public places in the City of DeWitt,
Clinton County, Iowa, as now or hereafter constituted, for the purpose of
distributing, supplying, and selling gas to said City and the residents thereof
and to persons and corporations beyond the limits thereof; also the right of
eminent domain as provided in Section 364.2 of the Code of Iowa. The term “gas”
as used in this franchise shall be construed to mean natural gas only.
   2.   The mains and pipes of the Company must be so placed as not to
interfere unnecessarily with water pipes, drains, sewers, and fire plugs which
have been or may hereafter be placed in any street, alley, and public places in
said City nor unnecessarily interfere with the proper use of the same,
including ordinary drainage, or with the sewers, underground pipe, and other
property of the City, and the Company, its successors and assigns, shall hold
the City free and harmless from all damages arising from the negligent acts or
omissions of the Company in the laying down, operation, and maintenance of said
natural gas distribution system.
   3.   In making any excavations in any street, alley, avenue, or public
place, Company, its successors and assigns, shall protect the site while work
is in progress by guards, barriers, or signals, shall not unnecessarily
obstruct the use of the streets, shall back fill all openings in such manner as
to prevent settling or depressions in surface, and shall replace the surface,
pavement, or sidewalk of such excavations with same materials, restoring the
condition as nearly as practical and, if defects are caused shall repair the
same.
   4.   The Company shall, at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its
existing facilities or equipment in, on, over, or under any public street or
alley in the City in such manner as the City may at any time reasonably require
for the purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance,
or repair of the street or alley or any public improvement of, in, or about any
such street or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any
such improvement. If the City orders or requests the Company to relocate its
existing facilities or equipment for the primary benefit of a commercial or
private project, or as the result of the initial request of a commercial or
private developer or other non-public entity, and such relocation is necessary
to prevent interference and not merely for the convenience of the City or other
non-public entity, the Company shall receive payment for the cost of such
relocation as a precondition to relocating its existing facilities or
equipment. The City shall consider reasonable alternatives in designing its
public works projects so as not arbitrarily to cause the Company unreasonable
additional expense in exercising its authority under this subsection. The City
shall also provide a reasonable alternative location for the Company’s
facilities. The City shall give the Company reasonable advance written notice
to vacate a public right-of-way. Vacating a public right-of-way shall not
deprive the Company of its right to operate and maintain existing facilities,
until the reasonable cost of relocating the same are paid to the Company.
   5.   Said Company, its successors and assigns, shall throughout the term of
the franchise distribute to all consumers gas of good quality and shall furnish
uninterrupted service, except as interruptible service may be specifically
contracted for with consumers; provided, however, that any prevention of
service caused by fire, act of God, or unavoidable event or accident shall not
be a breach of this condition if the Company resumes service as quickly as is
reasonably practical after the happening of the act causing the interruption.
   6.   The franchise granted by this chapter shall not be exclusive.
   7.   The Company shall maintain liability insurance coverage during the term
of this franchise as is usual and customary in the industry for similarly
situated utility companies. The Company shall provide to the City evidence of
such coverage in the form of a certificate of insurance upon written request.
The Company shall endeavor to provide 30 days’ notice of cancellation or non-
renewal. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the liability
of the Company under this franchise.
   8.   Franchise Fee. In its monthly billing Company shall include a franchise
fee of zero percent on the gross receipts from the distribution, supply, or
sale of natural gas for customers within the limits of the City. The Company
shall commence collecting the zero percent franchise fee on the date of January
1 or July 1, following six months from the date the acceptance of this
franchise by the Company is filed with the Clerk. The franchise fee may be
increased or decreased by the City on or after January 1, 2007, and shall be
limited to a maximum fee of five percent. The Grantor shall give the Company a
minimum six-month notice prior to the request to implement an increase or
decrease in the franchise fee. Grantor shall be solely responsible for the
proper use of any amounts collected as franchise fees, and shall only use such
fees as collected for a purpose as allowed by applicable law. Collection of the
franchise fee shall cease at the earlier of the City’s repeal of the franchise
fee or the end of the franchise term.
   9.   The franchise fee shall be applied to all customers’ bills in
accordance with Chapters 364.2(f), 423B.5, and 423E.2(3) of the Code of Iowa.
The Company shall not grant exemptions or refunds of the franchise fee beyond
that granted by the Code of Iowa. If at any time the Iowa Utilities Board, or
another authority having proper jurisdiction, prohibits the collection or
payment of a franchise fee, the Company shall be relieved of its obligation to
collect and pay to the City the franchise fee.
   10.   The franchise fee shall include an additional charge not to exceed
0.06 percent on the gross receipts from the distribution, supply, or sale of
gas for customers within the limits of the City. Said additional charge will
cover the administrative and related expenses incurred by Company to
accommodate City’s franchise fee and shall only apply when a franchise fee is
being collected pursuant to Subsection 8.
   11.   City agrees that Company’s obligations related to the franchise fee
are limited to those obligations set forth in Subsections 8, 10, and 13 herein.
City further agrees to bear all costs (including attorney fees), and to defend,
indemnify, and hold Company harmless from any and all liability, claims, or
causes of action associated with disputes related to the billing and/or
collection of the franchise fee, provided that the City shall not be obligated
to bear such costs or to defend, indemnify, and hold Company harmless if such
disputes arise from claims of inaccurate billing by the Company.
   12.   Upon receipt of a final and unappealable order or approval authorizing
annexation, or changes in the limits of said City, the Clerk shall provide
written notification to an officer of Company of such annexation or change in
the limits of said City, and the Company shall apply the franchise fee to its
customers who are affected by the annexation or change in the limits of the
City, commencing six months from receipt of the written notice.
   13.   The sum of such additional charges for the franchise fee and any
additional charges related to Subsection 8 and/or 10 above shall be shown
separately on the utility bill to each customer.
   14.   The Company shall remit collected franchise fees to the City on a
quarterly basis, within 30 days after last day of the last revenue month of the
quarter.
   15.   That said franchise fee shall be in lieu of any other payments to the
City for the Company’s use of streets, avenues, alleys, and public places in
the said City and other administrative or regulatory costs with regard to said
franchise; and said pipes, mains, and other conductor and appliances in, along,
and under the streets, avenues, alleys, and public places in the said City for
the purpose of distributing, supplying, and selling gas to said City and the
residents thereof and to persons and corporations beyond the limits thereof
shall be exempt from any special tax, assessment, license, or rental charge
during the entire term of this franchise.
   16.   The term of the franchise granted by this chapter and the rights
granted thereunder shall continue for the period of 25 years from and after its
acceptance by the Company, as herein provided. The City may cancel this
franchise on the 10th or 20th year anniversary of the anniversary date of this
franchise by notifying Company in writing of its desire to do so, said
notification to be given within 30 days of the 10th or 20th anniversary
respectively of this franchise. If Company is not notified of the cancellation
by the 10th or 20th anniversary, then this franchise shall continue without
cancellation until the 25th year. The anniversary date shall be the date this
franchise is filed with the Clerk or otherwise effective by operation of law.
   17.   This chapter sets forth and constitutes the entire agreement between
the Company and the City with respect to the rights contained herein, and may
not be superseded, modified, or otherwise amended without the approval and
acceptance of the Company. Upon acceptance by the Company, this chapter shall
supersede, abrogate, and repeal the prior gas system ordinance between the
Company and the City as of the date this franchise is accepted by the Company.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the City enact any ordinance
or place any limitations, either operationally or through the assessment of
fees, that create additional burdens upon the Company or which delay utility
operations.
 
Notes
5 † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 2007-02, adopting a natural gas franchise for the
  City, was passed and adopted on August 20, 2007.
CHAPTER 111
NATURAL GAS SYSTEM
111.01 Franchise Granted              111.11 Information
111.02 Rights and Privileges          111.12 Iowa Utilities Board Regulations
111.03 Natural Gas Service Restricted 111.13 Quantity and Quality
111.04 Right to Excavate              111.14 Police Regulations
111.05 Relocation                     111.15 Franchise Fee
111.06 Excavation                     111.16 Management Fee
111.07 Operate and Maintain           111.17 Termination
111.08 Relocation Not Required        111.18 Severability
111.09 Relocation Reimbursement       111.19 Litigation
111.10 Indemnification                111.20 Publication
111.01   FRANCHISE GRANTED.
There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa corporation,
(hereinafter called “Company,”) and to its successors and assigns the right and
non-exclusive franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain, and operate in
the City of DeWitt, Iowa, (hereinafter called the “City,”) a gas distribution
system, to furnish natural gas along, under and upon the right-of-way, streets,
avenues, alleys, and public places to serve customers within that portion of
the City described in Section
111.03, and to furnish and sell natural gas to the City and its inhabitants.
This franchise shall be effective for a 25 year period from and after the
effective date of this ordinance.† 6
 
Notes
6 † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 2020-07, adopting a natural gas system for the
  City, was passed and adopted on December 21, 2020.
111.02   RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES.
The rights and privileges hereby granted are subject to the restrictions and
limitations of Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa 2019, or as subsequently amended
or changed.
111.03   NATURAL GAS SERVICE RESTRICTED.
The furnishings of natural gas service by the Company to said City and its
inhabitants (but not the location of Company facilities) is restricted by the
terms of this chapter to that portion of the City which now or in the future
may exist as described below:
The northwest quarter (NW¼) of the southwest quarter (SW¼), and the west
quarter (W ¼) of the northeast quarter (NE ¼) of the northeast quarter (NE¼),
of the southwest quarter (SW¼) of Section 17, Township 81 North, Range 4 East
of the 5th P.M. in Clinton County, Iowa; and
The west quarter (W ¼) of the southeast quarter (SE¼) of the southwest quarter
(SW¼) of Section 17, Township 81 North, Range 4 East of the 5th P.M. in Clinton
County, Iowa; and
The southwest quarter (SW¼) of the southwest quarter(SW ¼) of Section 17,
Township 81 North, Range 4 East of the 5th P.M. in Clinton County, Iowa; and
The northwest quarter (NW¼) of Section 20, Township 81 North, Range 4 East of
the 5th P.M. in Clinton County, Iowa; and
That portion of the City which is annexed after passage of this ordinance.
111.04   RIGHT TO EXCAVATE.
Company shall have the right to excavate in any public street for the purpose
of laying, relaying, repairing, or extending gas pipes, mains, conduits, and
other facilities provided that the same shall be so placed as not to
unreasonably interfere with any above or below ground utility services or
facilities which have been or may hereafter be located by or under authority of
the City.
111.05   RELOCATION.
The Company shall, excluding facilities located in private easements (whether
titled in Company exclusively or in Company and other entities), in accordance
with Iowa law including Company's tariff on file with and made effective by the
Iowa Utilities Board as may subsequently be amended (“Tariff,”) at its cost and
expense, locate and relocate its existing facilities or equipment in, on, over,
or under any public street or alley in the City in such a manner as the City
may reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction
reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of the street or alley. If the City has
a reasonable alternative route for the street, alley, or public improvements or
an alternative construction method, which would not cause the relocation of the
Company installations, the City and Company shall work together to consider
said alternative route or construction method. The City shall be responsible
for surveying and staking the right-of-way for City projects that require the
Company to relocate Company facilities. If requested, the City shall provide,
at no cost to the Company, copies of its relocation plan and profile and cross-
section drawings. If tree and vegetation removal must be completed by the City
as part of the City’s project and are necessary whether or not utility
facilities must be relocated, the City, at its own cost shall be responsible
for said removals. If the timing of the tree/vegetation removal does not
coincide with the Company facilities relocation schedule and Company must
remove trees/vegetation that are included in the City’s portion of the project,
the City shall either remove the material, at its cost, or reimburse the
Company for the expenses incurred to remove said vegetation or trees. If
project funds from a source other than the City are available to pay for the
relocation of utility facilities, the City shall attempt to secure said funds
and provide them to the Company to compensate the Company for the costs of
relocation.
111.06   EXCAVATION.
In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys, and public places for
the installation of gas pipes, conduits, or apparatus, Company shall not
unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets and shall replace the surface,
restoring it to the condition as existed immediately prior to excavation.
Company agrees any replacement of road surface shall conform to current City
Code regarding its depth and composition. The Company shall not be required to
restore or modify public right-of-way, sidewalks, or other areas in or adjacent
to the Company project to a condition superior to its immediate previously
existing condition or to a condition exceeding its previously existing
condition to the extent any alterations are required for the City to comply
with City, State, or federal rules, regulations, or laws.
111.07   OPERATE AND MAINTAIN.
The City’s vacating a street, avenue, alley, public ground, or public right-of-
way shall not deprive the Company of its right to operate and maintain existing
facilities on, below, above, or beneath the vacated property. Prior to the City
abandoning or vacating any street, avenue, alley, or public ground where the
Company has facilities in the vicinity, the City shall provide Company with not
less than 60 days advance notice of the City’s proposed action and, upon
request, grant the Company a utility easement covering existing and future
facilities and activities. If the City fails to grant the Company a utility
easement for said facilities prior to abandoning or vacating a street, avenue,
alley, or public ground, the City shall, at its cost and expense, obtain
easements for the existing Company facilities.
111.08   RELOCATION NOT REQUIRED.
The Company shall not be required to relocate, at its cost and expense, Company
facilities in the public right-of-way that have been relocated at Company
expense at the direction of the City at any time during the previous 10 years.
111.09   RELOCATION REIMBURSEMENT.
Pursuant to relocation of Company facilities as maybe required hereunder, if
the City orders or requests the Company to relocate its existing facilities or
equipment in order to directly or indirectly facilitate the project of a
commercial or private developer or other non-public entity, City shall
reimburse or the City shall require the developer or non-public entity to
reimburse the Company for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to
relocation. The Company shall not be required to relocate in order to
facilitate such private project at its expense.
111.10   INDEMNIFICATION.
The Company shall indemnify and save harmless the City from any and all claims,
suits, losses, damages, costs, or expenses, on account of injury or damage to
any person or property, to the extent caused or occasioned by the Company's
negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation, or
maintenance of the natural gas facilities authorized by this franchise;
provided, however, that the Company shall not be obligated to defend,
indemnify, and save harmless the City for any costs or damages to the extent
arising from the negligence of the City, its officers, employees, or agents.
111.11   INFORMATION.
Upon reasonable request, the Company shall provide the City, on a project
specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location, relative to
boundaries of the right-of-way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it
has control that is located in the public right-of-way, including documents,
maps, and other information in paper or electronic or other forms
(“Information”). The Company and City recognize the information may, in whole
or part, be considered a confidential record under state or federal law or
both. Upon receipt of a request from a third party for information concerning
information about the Company’s facilities within the City, the City will
promptly submit same to Company. If the Company believes any of the information
requested constitutes a trade secret which may otherwise be protected from
public disclosure by State or federal law, or otherwise exempt from disclosure
under the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission Critical Energy Infrastructure requirements pursuant to
18 CFR 388.112 and 388.113, or Chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa, as such statutes
and regulations may be amended from time to time, then the Company shall
provide the City with a written explanation of the basis for such assertion of
confidentiality or exemption from disclosure within 10 days.
111.12   IOWA UTILITIES BOARD REGULATIONS.
The Company shall extend its mains and pipes and operate, and maintain the
system in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities
Board or its successors and State law.
111.13   QUANTITY AND QUALITY.
During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish natural gas in the
quantity and quality consistent and in accordance with the applicable
regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board, the Company’s tariff made effective by
the Iowa Utilities Board or its successors, and State law.
111.14   POLICE REGULATIONS.
All reasonable and proper police regulations shall be adopted and enforced by
the City for the protection of the facilities of the Company.
111.15   FRANCHISE FEE.
A franchise fee of zero percent is imposed upon, and shall be collected from,
the natural gas customers of the Company receiving service and located within
the corporate limits of the City. The franchise fee shall be imposed upon the
gross receipts, minus uncollectible accounts, generated from sales of natural
gas and distribution service:
   1.   The City agrees to modify the level of franchise fees imposed only once
in any 24-month period.
   2.   The Company will commence collecting franchise fees on or before the
first Company billing cycle of the first calendar month following 90 days of
receipt of information required of the City to implement the franchise fee,
including the City’s documentation of customer classes subject to, or exempted
from City-imposed franchise fee.
   3.   The City shall be solely responsible for identifying customer classes
subject to or exempt from paying the City imposed franchise fee. The Company
shall have no obligation to collect franchise fees from customers in annexed
areas until and unless such ordinances have been provided to the Company by
certified mail. The Company shall commence collecting franchise fees in the
annexed areas no sooner than 60 days after receiving annexation ordinances from
the City.
   4.   The Company shall not, under any circumstances, be required to return
or refund any franchise fees that have been collected from customers and
remitted to the City. In the event the Company is required to provide data or
information in defense of the City’s imposition of franchise fees, or the
Company is required to assist the City in identifying customers or calculating
any franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual customers, the City shall
reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by the Company to provide such
data or information.
111.16   MANAGEMENT FEE.
Upon implementation of a franchise fee, the City shall not, pursuant to Chapter
480A.6 of the Code of Iowa, impose or charge Company right-of-way management
fees for permits for Company construction, maintenance, repairs, excavation,
pavement cutting, or inspections of Company work sites and projects or related
matters.
111.17   TERMINATION.
Either City or Company (“party”) may terminate this franchise if the other
party shall be materially in breach of its provisions. Upon the occurrence of a
material breach, the non-breaching party shall provide the breaching party with
notification by certified mail specifying the alleged breach. The breaching
party shall have 60 days to cure the breach, unless it notifies the non-
breaching party, and the parties agree upon a shorter or longer period for
cure. If the breach is not cured within the cure period, the non-breaching
party may terminate this franchise. A party shall not be considered to be in
breach of this franchise if it has operated in compliance with State or federal
law. A party shall not be considered to have breached this franchise if the
alleged breach is the result of the actions of a third party or the other
party.
111.18   SEVERABILITY.
If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance shall be adjudged to be
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of
the ordinance as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof not
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
111.19   LITIGATION.
To the fullest extent permitted by law, each of the parties hereto waives any
right it may have to a trial by jury in respect of litigation directly or
indirectly arising out of, under, or in connection with this agreement. Each
party further waives any right to consolidate any action in which a jury trial
has been waived with any other action in which a jury trial cannot be or has
not been waived.
111.20   PUBLICATION.
This ordinance and the rights and privileges herein granted shall become
effective and binding upon its approval and passage in accordance with State
law and the written acceptance by the Company. The City shall provide Company
with an original signed and sealed copy of this ordinance within 10 days of its
final passage. The Company shall, within 30 days after the Council approval of
this ordinance, file in the office of the Clerk, its acceptance in writing of
all the terms and provisions of this ordinance. Following Council approval,
this ordinance shall be published in accordance with the Code of Iowa. The
effective date of this ordinance shall be the date of publication. In the event
that the Company does not file its written acceptance of this ordinance within
30 days after its approval by the Council, this ordinance shall be void and of
no effect.
CHAPTER 112
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
 
112.01 Franchise Granted                112.08 Uninterrupted Service
112.02 Poles and Wires; Indemnification 112.09 Franchise Fee
112.03 Excavations                      112.10 Term of Franchise
112.04 Construction and Maintenance     112.11 Severability
112.05 Utility Easements                112.12 Publication
112.06 Pruning and Vegetation           112.13 Entire Agreement
112.07 System Requirements
112.01   FRANCHISE GRANTED.
There is hereby granted to Interstate Power and Light Company, hereinafter
referred to as the “Company,” its successors and assigns, the right and non-
exclusive franchise to acquire, construct, reconstruct, erect, maintain, and
operate in the City, works and plants for the manufacture and generation of
electricity and a distribution system for electric light, heat, and power and
the right to erect and maintain the necessary poles, lines, wires, conduits,
and other appliances for the distribution of electric current along, under, and
upon the streets, alleys and public places in the said City to supply
individuals, corporations, communities, and municipalities both inside and
outside of said City with electric light, heat, and power for the period of 25
years; also the right of eminent domain as provided in Section 364.2 of the
Code of Iowa.† 7
 
Notes
7 † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 2019-05, adopting an electric franchise for the
  City, was passed and adopted on August 5, 2019.
112.02   POLES AND WIRES; INDEMNIFICATION.
The poles, lines, wires, circuits, and other appliances shall be placed and
maintained so as not to unnecessarily interfere with the travel on said
streets, alleys, and public places in said City nor unnecessarily interfere
with the proper use of the same, including ordinary drainage, or with the
sewers, underground pipe, and other property of the City. The said Company, its
successors and assigns shall hold the City free and harmless from all damages
to the extent arising from the negligent acts or omissions of the Company in
the erection or maintenance of said system.
112.03   EXCAVATIONS.
In making any excavations in any street, alley, or public place, Company, its
successors and assigns, shall protect the site while work is in progress by
guards, barriers, or signals, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the use of the
streets, and shall back fill all openings in such manner as to prevent settling
or depressions in surface, pavement, or sidewalk of such excavations with same
materials, restoring the condition as nearly as practical. The Company shall
not be required to restore or modify public right-of-way, sidewalks, or other
areas in or adjacent to the Company project to a condition superior to its
immediate previously existing condition.
112.04   CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
The Company shall, at its cost, locate and relocate its existing facilities or
equipment in, on, over, or under any public street or alley in the City in such
a manner as the City may, at any time, reasonably require for the purposes of
facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of the
street or alley or any public improvement thereof, in or about any such street
or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such
improvement. If the City requires the Company to relocate facilities in the
public right-of-way that have been relocated at Company expense at the
direction of the City during the previous 10 years, the reasonable costs of
such relocation will be paid by the City. If the City orders or requests the
Company to relocate its existing facilities or equipment for any reason other
than as specified above, or as the result of the initial request for a
commercial, private, or other non-public development, the Company shall receive
payment for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocating its
existing facilities or equipment. The City shall consider reasonable
alternatives in designing its public works projects so as not arbitrarily to
cause the Company unreasonable additional expense in exercising its authority
under this section. The City shall also provide a reasonable alternative
location for the Company’s facilities as part of its relocation request.
112.05   UTILITY EASEMENTS.
Prior to the City abandoning or vacating any street, avenue, alley, or public
ground where the Company has electric facilities, the City shall grant the
Company a utility easement for said facilities. If the City does not grant the
Company a utility easement for said facilities prior to abandoning or vacating
a street, avenue, alley, or public place, the City shall, at its cost and
expense, obtain easements for existing Company facilities.
112.06   PRUNING AND VEGETATION.
The Company is authorized and empowered to prune or remove, at Company expense,
any tree extending into any street, alley, or public grounds to maintain
electric reliability, safety, to restore utility service and to prevent limbs,
branches, or trunks from interfering with the wires and facilities of the
Company. The pruning and removal of trees shall be performed in accordance with
Company’s then current line clearance vegetation plan as filed and approved by
the Iowa Utilities Board, as well as all applicable codes and standards
referenced therein.
112.07   SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.
During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish electric energy in
accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board and the
Company’s tariffs. The Company will maintain compliance with Iowa Utilities
Board regulatory standards for reliability.
112.08   UNINTERRUPTED SERVICE.
Service to be rendered by the Company under this franchise shall be continuous
unless prevented from doing so by fire, acts of God, unavoidable accidents or
casualties, or reasonable interruptions necessary to properly service the
Company’s equipment, and in such event service shall be resumed as quickly as
is reasonably possible.
112.09   FRANCHISE FEE.
There is hereby imposed a franchise fee of zero percent upon the gross revenue
generated from sales of electricity by the Company within the corporate limits
of the City. The Company shall begin collecting the franchise fee upon receipt
of written approval of the required tax rider tariff from the Iowa Utilities
Board. The amount of the franchise fee shall be shown separately on the utility
bill to each customer. The Company shall remit franchise fee receipts to the
City no more frequently than on or before the last business day of the month
following each calendar year quarter. The Company shall not, under any
circumstances be required to return or refund any franchise fees that have been
collected from customers and remitted to the City. In the event the Company is
required to provide data or information in defense of the City’s imposition of
franchise fees or the Company is required to assist the City in identifying
customers or calculating any franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual
customers, the City shall reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by
the Company to provide such data or information.
112.10   TERM OF FRANCHISE.
The term of the franchise granted by this ordinance and the rights granted
thereunder shall continue for the period of 25 years from and after written
acceptance by the Company. The acceptance shall be filed with the Clerk within
90 days from passage of this ordinance.
112.11   SEVERABILITY.
If any section or provision of this ordinance is held invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of any other
provisions of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid
portion or portions and to this end each section and provision of this
ordinance is severable.
112.12   PUBLICATION.
The expense of the publication of this ordinance shall be paid by the Company.
112.13   ENTIRE AGREEMENT.
This ordinance sets forth and constitutes the entire agreement between the
Company and the City with respect to the rights contained herein, and may not
be supplemented, superseded, modified, or otherwise amended without the written
approval and acceptance of the Company. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no
event shall the City enact or maintain any ordinance or place any limitations,
either operationally or through the assessment of fees other than those
approved and accepted by the Company within this ordinance, that create
additional burdens upon the Company, or which delay utility operations.
CHAPTER 115
ELMWOOD CEMETERY
 
115.01 Elmwood Cemetery         115.05 Trusteeship
115.02 Rules and Regulations    115.06 Perpetual Care Registry
115.03 Sale of Interment Rights 115.07 Elmwood Cemetery Closed
115.04 Perpetual Care
115.01   ELMWOOD CEMETERY.
The Council is to be responsible for the maintenance and operation of the
municipal cemetery known as Elmwood Cemetery, to provide grounds for human
interments.
115.02   RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The Council shall have the power to make rules and regulations for the use and
operations of the cemetery. These include, but not limited to, the following:
   1.   To regulate the burial of the dead.
   2.   To provide places for the interment of the dead.
   3.   To cause any body interred contrary to such regulations to be taken up
and buried in accordance therewith.
115.03   SALE OF INTERMENT RIGHTS.
The sale or transfer of interment rights in the cemetery shall be evidenced by
a certificate of interment rights or other instrument evidencing the conveyance
of exclusive rights of interment signed and executed by the Mayor and the Clerk
for and on behalf of the City, and it is the duty of the Clerk to collect the
purchase price for any interment rights before delivering the certificate of
interment rights for the same. The payment of all fees and charges shall be
made at the City Hall where receipts will be issued for all amounts paid. Said
fees and charges shall be based upon the charges as set out in the rules and
regulations then in effect as adopted by the Council. The certificate of
interment rights shall disclose all information required by the Iowa Cemetery
Act, including the amount or percentage of money to be place in the perpetual
care cemetery fund.
115.04   PERPETUAL CARE.
A perpetual trust is hereby established for Elmwood Cemetery in accordance with
Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa, the Iowa Cemetery Act. A restricted fund is
created, to be known and designated as the “cemetery perpetual care fund” which
shall be funded by the deposit of an amount equal to 20 percent of the gross
selling price of cemetery lots/interment rights within the cemetery. The fund
shall be administered in accordance with the purposes and provisions of Chapter
523I of the Code of Iowa. The cemetery perpetual care fund shall be maintained
separate from all operating funds of the cemetery and the principal of the fund
shall not be reduced voluntarily except as specifically permitted by the Iowa
Cemetery Act and applicable administrative regulations. The assets of the
perpetual care fund shall be invested as permitted by State law. The Council
shall use the income from such investments in caring for Elmwood Cemetery.
115.05   TRUSTEESHIP.
Pursuant to Section 523I.502 of the Code of Iowa, the City hereby states its
willingness and intention to act as the trustee of the perpetual maintenance of
interment spaces in Elmwood Cemetery.
115.06   PERPETUAL CARE REGISTRY.
The cemetery shall maintain a registry of individuals who have purchased
interment rights in the cemetery subject to the care fund requirements of the
Iowa Cemetery Act, including the amounts deposited in the cemetery perpetual
care fund.
115.07   ELMWOOD CEMETERY CLOSED.
Elmwood Cemetery is closed to the public between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:
00 a.m. No person shall enter or remain in Elmwood Cemetery while it is closed.
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
 
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.04 Action by Council
120.02 General Prohibition        120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03 Investigation              120.06 Amusement Devices
 
120.01   LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for sale,
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a retail alcohol
license, wine permit, or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122, and 123.171)
120.02   GENERAL PROHIBITION.
It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer, or keep for sale, possess,
or transport alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer except upon the terms, conditions,
limitations, and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa,
and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may be
imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39, and 123.50)
120.03   INVESTIGATION.
Upon receipt of an application for a retail alcohol license by the Clerk, it
shall be forwarded to the Police Chief, who shall conduct an investigation and
submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the application
and a recommendation to the Council as to the approval of the license. It is
the duty of the Building Official to inspect the premises to determine if they
conform to the requirements of the City, and no license shall be approved until
or unless an approving report has been filed with the Council by the Building
Official.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04   ACTION BY COUNCIL.
The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of a retail alcohol
license, shall endorse its approval or disapproval on the application, and
shall forward the application with the necessary fee and bond, if required, to
the Iowa Department of Revenue.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])
120.05   PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.
A person holding a retail alcohol license and the person’s agents or employees
shall not do any of the following:
   1.   Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])
   2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage on the premises covered by the
license, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b])
   3.   Sell alcoholic beverages to any person on credit, except with a bona
fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its
members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests, or to
retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center, or
events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])
   4.   Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold, except as
follows:
      A.   Definitions. For use in this subsection the following terms are
defined as follows:
         (1)   “Bar” means an establishment where one may purchase alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises and in which the serving of food is
only incidental to the consumption of those beverages.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2[1])
         (2)   “Restaurant” means eating establishments, including private and
public school cafeterias, which offer food to the public, guests, or employees,
including the kitchen and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere, and including a bar area within a restaurant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2[17])
      B.   This subsection shall not apply if the employer has, on file,
written permission from the parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a person 16
or 17 years of age for the person to sell or serve alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises where sold. However, a person 16 or 17 years of age
shall not work in a bar as defined in Paragraph A.
         (1)   The employer shall keep a copy of the written permission on file
until the person is either 18 years of age or no longer engaged in the sale of
or serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.
         (2)   If written permission is on file in accordance with Paragraph B,
a person 16 or 17 years of age may sell or serve alcoholic beverages in a
restaurant as defined above in Paragraph A during the hours in which the
restaurant serves food.
      C.   A person 16 or 17 years of age shall not sell or serve alcoholic
beverages under this subsection unless at least two employees 18 years of age
or older are physically present in the area where alcoholic beverages are sold
or served.
      D.   If a person employed under this subsection reports an incident of
workplace harassment to the employer or if the employer otherwise becomes aware
of such an incident, the employer shall report the incident to the employee’s
parent, guardian, or legal custodian and to the Iowa Civil Rights Commission,
which shall determine if any action is necessary or appropriate under Chapter
216 of the Code of Iowa.
      E.   An employer that employs a person under this subsection shall
require the person to attend training on prevention and response to sexual
harassment upon commencing employment.
      F.   Prior to a person commencing employment under this subsection, the
employer shall notify the employer’s dramshop liability insurer, in a form and
time period prescribed by the Director, that the employer is employing a person
under this subsection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])
   5.   In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow the
mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine, beer, or any
other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])
   6.   Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])
   7.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises
covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])
   8.   Keep on premises covered by a retail alcohol license any alcoholic
liquor in any container except the original package purchased from the
Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce and except
mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate consumption.
However, mixed drinks or cocktails that are mixed on the premises and are not
for immediate consumption may be consumed on the licensed premises, subject to
rules adopted by the Alcoholic Beverages Division.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])
   9.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or
receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or
adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents, or remaining
contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly
possess any original package that has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])
   10.   Allow any person other than the licensee or employees of the licensee
to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or
other container that is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except
as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])
   11.   Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine that is used to
vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized
form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[21])
120.06   AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
The following provisions pertain to electrical or mechanical amusement devices
possessed and used in accordance with Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa. (Said
devices are allowed only in premises with a retail alcohol license, as
specifically authorized in said Chapter 99B.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.57)
   1.   As used in this section, “registered electrical or mechanical amusement
device” means an electrical or mechanical device required to be registered with
the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals, as provided in Section 99B.53 of
the Code of Iowa.
   2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to participate in the
operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.
   3.   It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing a registered electrical
or mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing a
registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a
person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation of a registered
electrical or mechanical amusement device.
   4.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation
of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under
the age of 21.
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
 
121.01 Definitions             121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required         121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application             121.08 Self-Service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees                    121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
121.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
   1.   “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or
containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or
by any other means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not include cigarettes,
tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug
or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   2.   “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of
tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and
irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored,
adulterated, or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper
or cover made of paper or any other material. However, cigarette shall not be
construed to include cigars.
   3.   “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products are sold, stored, or kept for
the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
   4.   “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes, or offers for
sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption,
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, irrespective of
the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages in the business
of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products to ultimate consumers.
   5.   “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement,
or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of
the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or
employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access
location.
   6.   “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars;
cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and
other smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and
other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and
sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such
manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for
both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
   7.   “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not
contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic
circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of
shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a solution or other
substance. “Vapor product” includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any
cartridge or other container of a solution or other substance, which may or may
not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device. “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a
drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter
V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
121.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   1.   Retail Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a
holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products,
or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit
the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products
within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit
shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be
easily seen by the public and the persons authorized to inspect the place of
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
   2.   Retail Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products at any place of business without first having
received a permit as a retailer for each place of business owned or operated by
the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a
retail tobacco permit. However, if a retailer only holds a retail cigarette
permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the retailer shall
not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products, during such time.
121.03   APPLICATION.
A completed application on forms furnished by the State Department of Revenue
or on forms made available or approved by the Department and accompanied by the
required fee shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed
at least five days prior to the last regular meeting of the Council in June. If
a renewal application is not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is
called to act on the application, the costs of such special meeting shall be
paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
121.04   FEES.
The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
 
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING:    FEE:
July, August, or September     $ 75.00
October, November, or December $ 56.25
January, February, or March    $ 37.50
April, May, or June            $ 18.75
 
121.05   ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.
Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be
issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for
which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of
each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit
to the Iowa Department of Revenue within 30 days of issuance of a permit.
121.06   REFUNDS.
A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the
City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
121.07   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
A person shall not sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any
person under 21 years of age. The provision of this section includes
prohibiting a person under 21 years of age from purchasing tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a
vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the
provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and
hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation,
assess the following:
   1.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty
in the amount of $300.00. Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under
this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period
of 14 days.
   2.   For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall
be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 or the retailer’s permit
shall be suspended for a period of 30 days. The retailer may select its
preference in the penalty to be applied under this subsection.
   3.   For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.
   4.   For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 60 days.
   5.   For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s
permit shall be revoked.
The Clerk shall give 10 days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy
of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a
permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the
time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22, and 453A.36[6])
121.08   SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.
Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as
provided in Section 453A.36[6] of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell
or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
vapor products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09   PERMIT REVOCATION.
Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by the
Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or
any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be
issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person
for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has
expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown
to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail
permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within
30 days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose                  122.10 Time Restriction
122.02 Definitions              122.11 Revocation of License
122.03 License Required         122.12 Hearing
122.04 Application for License  122.13 Record and Determination
122.05 License Fees             122.14 Appeal
122.06 Bond Required            122.15 Effect of Revocation
122.07 License Issued           122.16 Rebates
122.08 Display of License       122.17 License Exemptions
122.09 License Not Transferable 122.18 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
122.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against fraud,
unfair competition, and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by licensing
and regulating peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants.
122.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or
offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to
house or upon the public street.
   2.   “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from
house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any
order for goods, services, subscriptions, or merchandise to be delivered at a
future date.
   3.   “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or
itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires,
leases, or occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or who operates out
of a vehicle that is parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary
association with a local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer, or conduct of
such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any
local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer does not exempt any person from
being considered a transient merchant.
122.03   LICENSE REQUIRED.
Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting, or in the business of a transient
merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein provided is in
violation of this chapter.
122.04   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
An application in writing shall be filed with the Clerk for a license under
this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name, permanent
and local address, and business address if any. The application shall also set
forth the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature
of the applicant’s business, the last three places of such business, and the
length of time sought to be covered by the license. An application fee of
$25.00 shall be paid at the time of filing such application to cover the cost
of investigating the facts stated therein.
122.05   LICENSE FEES.
The following license fees shall be paid to the Clerk prior to the issuance of
any license.
   1.   Solicitors. In addition to the application fee for each person actually
soliciting (principal or agent), a fee for the principal of $100.00 per year.
   2.   Peddlers or Transient Merchants.
      A.   For one day   $25.00
      B.   For one week   $100.00
      C.   For up to six months   $   500.00
      D.   For one year or major part thereof   $750.00
122.06   BOND REQUIRED.
Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant, an
applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed a
bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of
Iowa.
122.07   LICENSE ISSUED.
If the Clerk finds the application is completed in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be correct,
and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued immediately.
122.08   DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all times
while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective
customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements
of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant’s
license in the merchant’s place of business.
122.09   LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in
any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the
application.
122.10   TIME RESTRICTION.
All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said licenses are in
force and effect only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
122.11   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the Clerk may
revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for the following reasons:
   1.   Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in
the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
   2.   Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has
otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
   3.   Endangered Public Welfare, Health, or Safety. The licensee has
conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare,
safety, order, or morals.
The Clerk shall send the written notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local
address. The notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against the
licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated, and
the date, time, and place for hearing on the matter.
122.12   HEARING.
The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any
complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in
the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative,
fail to appear without good cause, the Clerk may proceed to a determination of
the complaint.
122.13   RECORD AND DETERMINATION.
The Clerk shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and
shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the Clerk
finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or
State law.
122.14   APPEAL.
If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall make a part
of the record the reasons for such revocation or refusal. The licensee, or the
applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next
regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify, or affirm the decision of the
Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall
carry out the decision of the Council.
122.15   EFFECT OF REVOCATION.
Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any
license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the
revocation.
122.16   REBATES.
Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled to a
rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it expires.
The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing the total license fee
by the number of days for which the license was issued and then multiplying the
result by the number of full days not expired. In all cases, at least $5.00 of
the original fee shall be retained by the City to cover administrative costs.
122.17   LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.
   1.   Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for, or selling
subscriptions to newspapers.
   2.   Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl
Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America, and similar organizations.
   3.   Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for
sale their own products.
   4.   Students. Students representing the DeWitt School District conducting
projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school.
   5.   Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit
additional business or make special sales.
   6.   Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses
or institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or
institutional use.
   7.   Minor Businesses. An on-site transactional business traditionally
operated exclusively by a person under the age of 18, operated on an occasional
basis for no more than 89 calendar days in a calendar year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[15])
122.18   CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations operating
under the provisions of Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa desiring to solicit
money or to distribute literature are exempt from the operation of Sections
122.04 and
122.05. All such organizations are required to submit to the Clerk in writing
the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought, names
and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period
during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions,
fees, or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof. If
the Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or nonprofit
organization, the Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license containing the
above information to the applicant. In the event the Clerk denies the
exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the
decision to the Council, as provided in Section
122.14 of this chapter.
CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS
 
123.01 House Mover Defined 123.08 Permit Issued
123.02 Permit Required     123.09 Public Safety
123.03 Application         123.10 Time Limit
123.04 Bond Required       123.11 Removal By City
123.05 Insurance Required  123.12 Protect Pavement
123.06 Permit Fee          123.13 Electric Wires
123.07 Cash Deposit
123.01   HOUSE MOVER DEFINED.
A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a building or similar
structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the building or
structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks, dollies, or
any other specialized moving equipment.
123.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover as
herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building,
or similar structure to be moved.
123.03   APPLICATION.
Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the Clerk on
a form provided by the City. The application shall include:
   1.   Name and Address. The applicant’s full name and address and, if a
corporation, the names and addresses of its principal officers.
   2.   Building Location. An accurate description of the present location and
future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
   3.   Routing Plan. A routing plan approved by the Building Official and
public utility officials. The route approved shall be the shortest route
compatible with the greatest public convenience and safety.
123.04   BOND REQUIRED.
The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the sum of not less
than $500.00 or more than $100,000.00, as the City may determine, issued by a
surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the State. The bond shall be
conditioned that the obligors thereof will save, indemnify, and keep harmless
the City from all liability that may accrue against the City by reason of
moving of the building for which the permit is issued.
123.05   INSURANCE REQUIRED.
The applicant shall purchase and maintain such insurance as will protect the
applicant from claims set forth below which may arise out of, or result from
the applicant’s operations under the permit, whether such operation be by the
applicant or by any subcontractor or by anyone directly or indirectly employed
by any of them, or by anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable. The
insurance to be maintained by the applicant shall be written as follows:
   1.   Workers’ Compensation and Employers Liability Insurance as prescribed
by State law or the minimum limits shown below:
      A.   Iowa Benefits         Statutory
      B.   Employers Liability:
         Bodily Injury by Accident    $500,000 each accident
         Bodily Injury by Disease    $500,000 each accident
         Bodily Injury by Disease    $500,000 each employee
      The Workers Compensation policy shall include a waiver of subrogation
clause in favor of the owner.
   2.   Commercial General Liability Insurance combined single limits shown
below covering Bodily Injury, Property Damage and Personal Injury:
      General Aggregate Limit             $2,000,000.00
      Products-Completed Operations Aggregate Limit    $2,000,000.00
      Personal and Advertising Injury Limit       $1,000.000.00
      Each Occurrence Limit            $1,000,000.00
      Fire Damage Limit (for any one fire)       $100,000.00
      Medical Damage Limit (any one person)       $5,000.00
      This insurance must include the following features:
      A.   Coverage for all premises and operations. The policy shall be
endorsed to provide the aggregate per project endorsement.
      B.   Personal and Advertising Injury.
      C.   Operations by independent contractors.
      D.   Contractual liability coverage.
      E.   Coverage for property damage underground or damage by explosion or
collapse (XCU).
   3.   Automobile Liability Insurance covering all owned, non-owned, hired,
and leased vehicles with a minimum combined single limit for Bodily Injury and
Property Damage of $1,000,000.00 per accident. Insurance must include
Contractual Liability.
   4.   Umbrella/Excess Liability Insurance at contractor’s option, the limits
specified may be satisfied with a combination of Primary and Umbrella/Excess
Insurance.
   5.   Additional Insured. The contractor will include the City as additional
insured on all policies except Workers’ Compensation as respects all work
performed.
   6.   Insurance Certificates. Each policy noted above shall be issued by an
insurance company authorized to write such insurance in the State of Iowa and
shall be reasonably acceptable to the City. These insurance policies shall not
be cancelled without at least 30 days prior written notice to the City. A
properly executed Certificate of Insurance showing evidence of these insurance
requirements shall be delivered to the City prior to the permit being issued.
   7.   Government Immunity. The following clauses will be added to all
liability coverages:
      A.   The company and the insured expressly agree and state that the
purchase of this policy of insurance by the insured does not waive any of the
defenses of governmental immunity available to the insured under Section 670.4
of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists and as it may be amended from time to
time.
      B.   The company and the insured further agree that this policy of
insurance shall cover only those claims not subject to the defense of
governmental immunity under Section 670.4 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists
and as it may be amended from time to time.
   8.   Subrogation. To the extent that such insurance is in force and
collectible and to the extent permitted by law, the City and contractor each
hereby release and waive all right of recovery against the other or anyone
claiming through or under each of them by way of subrogation or otherwise. The
forgoing release and waiver shall apply to damage to contractor’s equipment,
tools, and other personal property as well as automobiles.
123.06   PERMIT FEE.
A separate permit fee of $100.00 shall be payable at the time of filing the
application with the Clerk for each house, building, or similar structure to be
moved. The permit fee for moving garages or similar smaller structures is
$25.00.
123.07   CASH DEPOSIT.
No permit shall be granted until the person applying therefor has paid to the
City a deposit not less than $100.00 or more than $10,000.00 as the City may
require, to be held by the City until the building has been moved and said
applicant has restored the streets and alleys and public grounds as necessary
to their original condition and has suitably capped or plugged and filled the
sewer and water service to the initial location of the house or building and
has complied with the other provisions herein specified, and to cover all costs
incurred by the City in the course of moving the building or structure.
123.08   PERMIT ISSUED.
Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate, and
payment of the required permit fee and cash deposit, the Clerk shall issue a
permit.
123.09   PUBLIC SAFETY.
The Building Official shall have entire control and supervision of the moving
of any building along or across any street or alley, and shall have the right
to require such security as said official sees fit to indemnify the City
against any and all claims against the City because of the moving. The Building
Official shall have the right to prescribe rules to minimize inconvenience to
the traveling public as well as rules for the safety of City property.
123.10   TIME LIMIT.
No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to remain
upon any street or other public way for a period of more than 12 hours without
having first secured the written approval of the City.
123.11   REMOVAL BY CITY.
In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation of
Section
123.10, the City is authorized to remove such building or structure and assess
the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the permit
holder’s bond.
123.12   PROTECT PAVEMENT.
It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement,
unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are at
least one inch in width for each 1,000 pounds of weight of such building. If
there is any question as to the weight of a house or building, the estimate of
the City as to such weight shall be final.
123.13   ELECTRIC WIRES.
The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all overhead cables,
wires, and poles are removed when necessary and replaced in good order, and
shall be liable for the costs of the same. The holder of the permit for moving
a building shall give 24 hours’ notice to the owner of any overhead cables or
wires to remove such cables or wires and the owner of such cables or wires may
either remove or direct the removal and replacing of such cables or wires, and
the holder of the permit shall pay the reasonable costs thereof.
CHAPTER 124
RECYCLER
 
124.01 Definition          124.06 Examination of Premises
124.02 License Required    124.07 Destruction of Property
124.03 License Fee         124.08 Concealing Property
124.04 Prohibited Location 124.09 Deposit of Recyclables
124.05 Minors              124.10 No Disorderly Condition
124.01   DEFINITION.
For use in this chapter, the term “recycler” includes any person who keeps,
maintains, operates, or uses any building, lot, parcel of ground or other place
for assembling, collecting, dumping, wrecking, storing, or keeping any old
iron, old automobiles, machinery, rags, paper, refuse, or waste material for
the purpose of salvage or sale of the same.
124.02   LICENSE REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the vocation or occupation of
recycling dealer in the City without first securing a license therefore.
124.03   LICENSE FEE.
The license fee for a recycling dealer is, $25.00 per year, payable in advance
on July 1 of each year.  Any person conducting several or separate places of
business shall pay the license fee and procure a license for each place, but
the proprietor’s license is sufficient for all clerks, agents or employees at
or in connection with the place named in the license.
124.04   PROHIBITED LOCATION.
It is unlawful for any recycling dealer to keep, maintain, operate, or use any
building, lot, parcel of ground, or other place in the City for the conduct of
a recycling business without first securing the written consent of owners of
properties within 150 feet.
124.05   MINORS.
It is unlawful for any recycling dealer in the City to purchase or receive any
property from minors without the written consent of their parents or guardians.
124.06   EXAMINATION OF PREMISES.
Any peace officer shall have the power to examine the premises of any recycling
dealer for the purpose of discovering stolen property and it is unlawful for
any recycling dealer to refuse to allow any peace officer to make such
examination.
124.07   DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
It is unlawful for any recycling dealer to destroy or melt any article or sell
or otherwise dispose of any article until 48 hours after its purchase without
obtaining a written permit from the Police Chief to do so.
124.08   CONCEALING PROPERTY.
It is unlawful for any recycling dealer to conceal or secrete any article
purchased or received by said junk dealer for the purpose of preventing
identification thereof by any peace officer or by any person claiming the
ownership of the same.
124.09   DEPOSIT OF RECYCLABLES.
It is unlawful for any recycling dealer to deposit any recyclables on or within
10 feet of any street, alley, or public place or within 10 feet of adjoining
private property in the City without the consent of the owner thereof.
124.10   NO DISORDERLY CONDITION.
It is unlawful to permit a recyclables yard to be maintained in a disorderly
and unsightly condition.
CHAPTER 125
PLUMBING CONTRACTORS
 
125.01 Purpose          125.04 Apprentices and Helpers
125.02 Definitions      125.05 Insurance
125.03 License Required 125.06 Inspections and Investigations
125.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the licensing of plumbing
contractors in order to protect the public safety, health, and welfare. This
chapter does not apply to City construction projects designed by the City’s
Engineer, bid out for construction, and inspected and approved by the City
Engineer prior to acceptance by the City.
125.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Apprentice” or “plumber helper” means any person who, while learning
the trade of plumbing work, is assisting in the installation, alteration, or
repair of plumbing work and is actually with and in the presence of a plumbing
contractor.
   2.   “Plumbing” has the meaning given in the Uniform Plumbing Code.
   3.   “Plumbing contractor” means any person engaged in planning,
supervising, and contracting for the installation of plumbing and who is
licensed as a plumbing contractor.
125.03   LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall engage in the business of plumbing work in connection with the
City’s waterworks and/or sanitary sewer systems unless licensed as a plumbing
contractor as set forth by the Code of Iowa.
125.04   APPRENTICES AND HELPERS.
Apprentices and helpers employed to assist a licensed plumbing contractor need
not be licensed, provided, however, that such apprentices and helpers perform
their work under the direct supervision of a licensed plumbing contractor.
125.05   INSURANCE.
Upon the request for an application to do plumbing work that includes any of
the following activities: uncover, make any connection with or opening into,
use, alter, repair, partially replace or disturb any public sewer, or
appurtenance thereof, including a private sewer lateral that connects to a
public sewer; the installation, connection, or maintenance of the water service
pipe from the main to the building served.
   1.   The applicant shall purchase and maintain such insurance as will
protect the applicant from claims set forth below which may arise out of, or
result from the applicant’s operations under the permit, whether such operation
be by the applicant or by any subcontractor or by anyone directly or indirectly
employed by any of them, or by anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable.
The insurance to be maintained by the applicant shall be written as follows:
      A.   Workers’ Compensation and Employers Liability Insurance as
prescribed by State law or the minimum limits shown below:
         (1)   State Benefits         Statutory
         (2)   Employers Liability:
            Bodily Injury by Accident    $500,000.00 each accident
            Bodily Injury by Disease    $500,000.00 each accident
            Bodily Injury by Disease    $500,000.00 each employee
The Workers Compensation policy shall include a waiver of subrogation clause in
favor of the owner.
      B.   Commercial General Liability Insurance combined single limits shown
below covering Bodily Injury, Property Damage, and Personal Injury:
         General Aggregate Limit             $2,000,000.00
         Products-Completed Operations Aggregate Limit    $2,000,000.00
         Personal and Advertising Injury Limit       $1,000,000.00
         Each Occurrence Limit             $1,000,000.00
         Fire Damage Limit (for any one fire)       $100,000.00
         Medical Damage Limit (any one person)       $5,000.00
      This insurance must include the following features:
         (1)   Coverage for all premises and operations. The policy shall be
endorsed to provide the aggregate per project endorsement.
         (2)   Personal and Advertising Injury.
         (3)   Operations by independent contractors.
         (4)   Contractual liability coverage.
         (5)   Coverage for property damage underground or damage by explosion
or collapse (XCU).
      C.   Automobile Liability Insurance covering all owned, non-owned, hired,
and leased vehicles with a minimum combined single limit for Bodily Injury and
Property Damage of $1,000,000.00 per accident. Insurance must include
Contractual Liability.
      D.   Umbrella/Excess Liability Insurance at contractor’s option, the
limits specified may be satisfied with a combination of Primary and Umbrella/
Excess Insurance.
      E.   Additional Insured. The contractor will include the City as
additional insured on all policies except Workers’ Compensation as respects all
work performed.
      F.   Insurance Certificates. Each policy noted above shall be issued by
an insurance company authorized to write such insurance in the State of Iowa
and shall be reasonably acceptable to the City. These insurance policies shall
not be cancelled without at least 30 days prior written notice to the City. A
properly executed Certificate of Insurance showing evidence of these insurance
requirements shall be delivered to the City prior to the permit being issued.
      G.   Government Immunity. The following clauses will be added to all
liability coverages:
         (1)   The company and the insured expressly agree and state that the
purchase of this policy of insurance by the insured does not waive any of the
defenses of governmental immunity available to the insured under Section 670.4
of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists and as it may be amended from time to
time.
         (2)   The company and the insured further agree that this policy of
insurance shall cover only those claims not subject to the defense of
governmental immunity under Section 670.4 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists
and as it may be amended from time to time.
      H.   Subrogation. To the extent that such insurance is in force and
collectible and to the extent permitted by law, the City and contractor each
hereby release and waive all right of recovery against the other or anyone
claiming through or under each of them by way of subrogation or otherwise. The
forgoing release and waiver shall apply to damage to contractor’s equipment,
tools, and other personal property as well as automobiles.
125.06   INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
It is the duty of the Building Official or Director of Public Works to make any
investigations or inspections which he or she believes necessary or any
investigations or inspections required or requested by the Council to carry out
the purposes of this chapter.
CHAPTER 126
HOTEL MOTEL TAX
 
126.01 Definitions    126.04 Collection
126.02 Tax Imposed    126.05 Use of Revenues
126.03 Tax Exemptions
126.01   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Lodging” means rooms, apartments, or sleeping quarters in a hotel,
motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house, or manufactured or mobile home
which is tangible personal property, or in a tourist court, or in any place
where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent,
whether with or without meals. Lodging does not include rooms that are not used
for sleeping accommodations.
   2.   “Renting” or “rent” means a transfer of possession or control of
lodging for a fixed or indeterminate term for consideration and includes any
kind of direct or indirect charge for such lodging or its use.
   3.   “Sales price” means the consideration for renting of lodging and means
the same as the term is defined in Section 423.1 of the Code of Iowa.
All other words and phrases used in this chapter and defined in Section 423.1
of the Code of Iowa have the meaning given them by Section 423.1 for the
purposes of this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.2)
126.02   TAX IMPOSED.
There is hereby imposed a seven percent local hotel and motel tax upon the
sales price from the renting of lodging within the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.4)
126.03   TAX EXEMPTIONS.
All of the following are exempted from the provisions of this chapter and from
the computation of any amount of tax imposed by Section
124.02:
   1.   The sales price from the renting of lodging to a person where the
lodging is rented by the same person for a period of more than 31 consecutive
days, except as provided in Subsection 2 of this section.
   2.   The sales price from the renting of lodging to a person where the
lodging is rented by the same person for the period beginning after 90
consecutive days of rental by such person, if the rental is a room, apartment,
or sleeping quarter in a hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, or rooming
house, or in any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to a
transient guest.
   3.   The sales price of lodging furnished to the guests of a religious
institution if the property is exempt under Section 427.1[8] of the Code of
Iowa, and the purpose of renting is to provide a place for a religious retreat
or function and not a place for transient guests generally.
   4.   The sales price from the renting of sleeping rooms in dormitories and
in memorial unions at all universities and colleges located in the City.
   5.   The sales price of lodging furnished to the guests of a nonprofit
lodging provider and the purpose of renting is to provide a place for the
friends and family of a hospital patient during a time of medical need of the
patient and the length of stay is based upon the needs of the friends, family,
or patient. For purposes of this subsection, “nonprofit lodging provider” means
a nonprofit entity which is exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code that maintains an established
facility that provides lodging to friends and family of a hospital patient
during a time of medical need of the patient.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.5)
126.04   COLLECTION.
The tax imposed in this chapter shall be remitted by the person or company
liable for same to the State Director of Revenue in the manner required by
State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.6)
126.05   USE OF REVENUES.
All revenue received by the City from the imposition of the hotel and motel tax
shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City and shall be used as
follows:
   1.   At least 50 percent of the revenue derived from the hotel and motel tax
shall be spent for the acquisition of sites for, or constructing, improving,
enlarging, equipping, repairing, operating, or maintaining of recreation,
convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities including but not limited to
memorial buildings, halls and monuments, civic center convention buildings,
auditoriums, coliseums, and parking areas or facilities located at those
recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities or the payment of
principal and interest, when due, on bonds or other evidence of indebtedness
issued by the City for those recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment
facilities; or for the promotion and encouragement of tourist and convention
business in the City and surrounding areas.
   2.   The remaining revenues may be spent by the City for any City operation
authorized by law as a proper purpose for the expenditure within statutory
limitations of City revenue derived from ad valorem taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.7)
CHAPTER 127
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 2025-02 – Jun. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
 
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.08 Burning Prohibited
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing    135.09 Excavations
135.03 Placing Debris On          135.10 Property Owner’s Responsibility for
                                  Maintenance
135.04 Playing In                 135.11 Failure to Maintain
135.05 Traveling On Barricaded    135.12 Dumping of Snow
Street or Alley
135.06 Use for Business Purposes  135.13 Driveway Culverts
135.07 Washing Vehicles           135.14 Driveway Approaches
135.01   REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.
It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy, or carry
away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard, or other article or
things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon for
the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said street
or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02   OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface or injure any street or alley
in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03   PLACING DEBRIS ON.
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any
glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, leaves, grass, or any other debris likely to be washed into the storm
sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any person,
animal, or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04   PLAYING IN.
It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets or
alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05   TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.
It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or
alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed thereon
by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer, or member
of the Fire Department.
135.06   USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.
It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any
machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale, or offering
same for sale, without permission of the Council.
135.07   WASHING VEHICLES.
It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street, or alley for
the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does
not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or
equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
135.08   BURNING PROHIBITED.
No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or other combustible material
in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09   EXCAVATIONS.
No person shall dig, excavate, or in any manner disturb any street, parking, or
alley except in accordance with the following:
   1.   Permit Required. No excavation shall be commenced without first
obtaining a permit. A written application for such permit shall be filed with
the City and shall contain the following:
      A.   An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in
front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
      B.   A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is
to be made;
      C.   The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and
restoration of the street or alley surface; and
      D.   Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
   2.   Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner
that will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the
uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street.
   3.   Barricades, Fencing, and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing, and
warning lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be so placed as to
protect the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or
maintaining adequate barricades, fencing, or warning lights shall be paid to
the City by the permit holder/property owner.
   4.   Guarantee. The minimum cash deposits required for issuance of permits
for excavations or openings in public ways or public places are as follows:
      A.   For any surfacing on a concrete or a brick pavement      $1,000.00
      B.   For any surfacing of bituminous stone or asphalt      $500.00
The deposit of a larger sum in any of the above cases may be required if the
estimated cost of the replacement and maintenance, as determined by the
Director of Public Works, is greater than the minimum amount as set forth
above. The deposit as above set forth shall guarantee the cost of maintenance
of the street surface in a condition suitable and safe for traffic, placing
barricades and flashers when necessary, for the entire period of time from the
date of the issuance of the permit up to the date of the release of the cash
deposit by the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall
file at the time of the release a statement of all costs, if any, incurred by
reason of the failure of the party holding the permit to comply with any of the
above regulations. Said costs shall be deducted from the deposit made at the
time of the issuance of the permit. In case the said deposit is not sufficient
to cover the said charges, the Clerk shall render a statement to the holder of
the permit of the amount due the City for additional costs and expenses. No
further permits shall be issued to the said party until said costs have been
paid in full. The cash deposit shall in no way be construed to release the
party holding the permit from penalties or liabilities for or on account of
failure to provide for the public safety, for damage to sewers, utilities, or
other structures during the progress of the work.
   5.   Insurance Required. The applicant shall purchase and maintain such
insurance as will protect the applicant from claims set forth below which may
arise out of, or result from the applicant’s operations under the permit,
whether such operation be by the applicant or by any subcontractor or by anyone
directly or indirectly employed by any of them, or by anyone for whose acts any
of them may be liable. The insurance to be maintained by the applicant shall be
written as follows:
      A.   Workers’ Compensation and Employers Liability Insurance as
prescribed by State law or the minimum limits shown below:
         (1)   State Benefits    Statutory
         (2)   Employers Liability:
            Bodily Injury by Accident    $500,000.00 each accident
            Bodily Injury by Disease    $500,000.00 each accident
            Bodily Injury by Disease    $500,000.00 each employee
      The Workers Compensation policy shall include a waiver of subrogation
clause in favor of the owner.
      B.   Commercial General Liability Insurance combined single limits shown
below covering Bodily Injury, Property Damage and Personal Injury:
         General Aggregate Limit    $2,000,000.00
         Products-Completed Operations Aggregate Limit    $2,000,000.00
         Personal and Advertising Injury Limit    $1,000,000.00
         Each Occurrence Limit    $1,000,000.00
         Fire Damage Limit (for any one fire)   $100,000.00
         Medical Damage Limit (any one person)   $5,000.00
      This insurance must include the following features:
         (1)   Coverage for all premises and operations. The policy shall be
endorsed to provide the aggregate per project endorsement.
         (2)   Personal and Advertising Injury.
         (3)   Operations by independent contractors,
         (4)   Contractual liability coverage.
         (5)   Coverage for property damage underground or damage by explosion
or collapse (XCU).
      C.   Automobile liability insurance covering all owned, non-owned, hired,
and leased vehicles with a minimum combined single limit for bodily injury and
property damage of $1,000,000.00 per accident. Insurance must include
contractual liability.
      D.   Umbrella/Excess Liability Insurance at contractor’s option, the
limits specified may be satisfied with a combination of primary and umbrella/
excess insurance.
      E.   Additional Insured. The Contractor will include the City as
additional insured on all policies except workers’ compensation as respects all
work performed.
      F.   Insurance Certificates. Each policy noted above shall be issued by
an insurance company authorized to write such insurance in the State of Iowa
and shall be reasonably acceptable to the City. These insurance policies shall
not be cancelled without at least 30 days prior written notice to the City. A
properly executed Certificate of Insurance showing evidence of these insurance
requirements shall be delivered to the City prior to the permit being issued.
      G.   Government Immunity. The following clauses will be added to all
liability coverages:
         (1)   The company and the insured expressly agree and state that the
purchase of this policy of insurance by the insured does not waive any of the
defenses of governmental immunity available to the insured under Section 670.4
of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists and as it may be amended from time to
time.
         (2)   The company and the insured further agree that this policy of
insurance shall cover only those claims not subject to the defense of
governmental immunity under Section 670.4 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists
and as it may be amended from time to time.
      H.   Subrogation. To the extent that such insurance is in force and
collectible and to the extent permitted by law, the City and contractor each
hereby release and waive all right of recovery against the other or anyone
claiming through or under each of them by way of subrogation or otherwise. The
forgoing release and waiver shall apply to damage to contractor’s equipment,
tools, and other personal property as well as automobiles.
   6.   Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the
condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner
satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the permit holder or property
owner.
   7.   Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City.
Backfill shall not be deemed completed, and no resurfacing of any improved
street or alley surface shall begin, until such backfill is inspected and
approved by the City. The permit holder or property owner shall provide the
City with notice at least 24 hours prior to the time when inspection of
backfill is desired.
   8.   Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be
discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of 24 hours after the
approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the City
has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and charge any expenses
for such work to the permit holder or property owner.
   9.   Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the
excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner. The
permit holder and owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
   10.   Notification. At least 48 hours prior to the commencement of the
excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, the person
performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and
provide the center with the information required under Section 480.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
   11.   Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application and filing of bond and
insurance certificate, a permit shall be issued. A separate permit shall be
required for each excavation.
   12.   Permit Exemption. Utility companies are exempt from the permit
application requirement of this section. They shall, however, comply with all
other pertinent provisions and shall post with the City a yearly bond in the
amount of $1,000.00 to guarantee such compliance.
135.10   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
The abutting property owner shall maintain all property outside the lot and
property lines and inside the curb lines upon public streets and shall keep
such area in a safe condition, free from nuisances, obstructions, and hazards. 
In the absence of a curb, such property shall extend from the property line to
that portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes. The
abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead
wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes, but
is not limited to, timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up
litter and debris; cleaning and clearing drainage ditches of growth, grass
clippings, leaves, other yard waste or debris and silt which would interfere
with or impede the flow of water in the drainage ditches. The abutting property
owner may be liable for damages caused by failure to maintain the publicly
owned property or right-of-way.† 8   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
 
Notes
8 † EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Section 136.04 relating to property owner’s
  responsibility for maintenance of sidewalks.
135.11   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the
above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required
action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the
same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12   DUMPING OF SNOW.
It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be thrown,
pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters,
or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a
hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial
drives in the Business District it is absolutely necessary to move the snow
onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed
promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt removal of
such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.13   DRIVEWAY CULVERTS.
The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert deemed
necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s property, and
before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the City.
In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall
be the responsibility of the property owner to make such repairs, and, in the
event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the right to make the
repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for the cost of said
repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer and specially
assessed against the property as by law provided.
135.14   DRIVEWAY APPROACHES.
   1.   Order to Alter. Where the use, convenience, and necessity of the public
require, the Director of Public Works shall have the authority to order the
owners or agents in charge of property adjacent to which curb cuts are
maintained to alter the curb cut in such manner as the Director finds
reasonably necessary under the circumstances. The notice of alteration order
shall require compliance by the permittee within 10 days of the notice and
shall be in writing and served upon the permittee as required by law.
   2.   Permit. Any person may make application to the Building Official for
permission to make a driveway approach, not to exceed 36 feet in width, for the
purpose of installing, relocating, or expanding a driveway or property.
   3.   Permit Fee. A separate permit fee, the amount hereinafter set by
resolution, shall be payable at the time of filing the application with the
Building Official for each driveway approach.
   4.   Issuance. The Building Official shall review an application for a
driveway approach permit. If the Building Official is satisfied that the
request is in conformance with the requirements of this Code of Ordinances and
other pertinent laws and ordinances, the Building Official shall endorse in
writing or stamp “Approved” on the application and forward it to the Director
of Public Works. The Director of Public Works, upon receipt of an application
marked “Approved” by the Building Official, shall review the same and, if the
Director of Public Works finds the application to be in compliance with the
laws and ordinances under the jurisdiction of the Director of Public Works,
shall give final approval for issuance of the curb cut permit.
   5.   Appeal. An appeal may be taken to the Council by any person affected by
a decision of the Building Official or the Director of Public Works to deny the
issuance of a driveway approach permit.
   6.   No more than one driveway approach per lot shall be permitted without
prior Council approval. Curb cuts shall not be permitted on four inch roll-over
curbs.
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose                              136.12 Interference with Sidewalk
                                            Improvements
136.02 Definitions                          136.13 Awnings
136.03 Sidewalk Standards                   136.14 Encroaching Steps
136.04 Sidewalk Requirements                136.15 Openings and Enclosures
136.05 Sidewalk Loan Fund                   136.16 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
136.06 Permits For Construction and Removal 136.17 Defacing
136.07 Inspection of Private Work; Remedies 136.18 Debris on Sidewalks
136.08 City May Order Repairs               136.19 Merchandise Display
136.09 Sidewalk Construction Ordered        136.20 Sales Stands
136.10 Barricades and Warning Lights        136.21 Removal of Snow, Ice, and
                                            Accumulations
136.11 Failure to Repair or Barricade
136.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement, or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner
and to minimize the liability of the City.
136.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   "Broom Finish" means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the
sidewalk when it is hardening to create a skid resistant surface.
   2.   "Concrete" means Portland cement with a minimum 4,000 PSI.
   3.   “Defective sidewalk” means any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more
of the following characteristics:
      A.   Vertical separations equal to one-fourth inch or more.
      B.   Horizontal separations equal to one-half inch or more.
      C.   Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more and at
least four inches in diameter.
      D.   Spalling over 50 percent of a single square of the sidewalk with one
or more depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more.
      E.   Spalling over less than 50 percent of a single square of the
sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more.
      F.   Any scored section or square of sidewalk that is more than 50
percent broken into pieces that are less than one square foot.
      G.   A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth.
      H.   A change from the design or construction grade equal to or greater
than three-fourths inch per foot.
      I.   Changes in level.
         (1)   Vertical. Changes in level of one-fourth inch high maximum shall
be permitted to be vertical.
         (2)   Beveled. Changes in level between one-fourth inch high minimum
and one-half high maximum shall be a beveled slope no steeper than 1:2.
         (3)   Ramps. Changes in level greater than one-half inch high shall be
ramped and shall have a running slope not steeper than 1:12.
         (4)   Slope. Ramp runs shall have a running slope not steeper than 1:
12.
   4.   “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the
particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
   5.   “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete
is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
   6.   “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any
sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification
required herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.
   7.   “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or
suburban areas.
   8.   “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement, or removal of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling, or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
   9.   “Spalling” means breaking into flakes, chips, or fragments.
   10.   “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing
the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
136.03   SIDEWALK STANDARDS.  
Sidewalks repaired, replaced, or constructed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards:
   1.   Concrete. Air-entrained Portland cement with a minimum 4,000 PSI shall
be used in the construction and repair of sidewalks.
   2.   Construction. Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction.
   3.   Sidewalk Base. Concrete may be placed directly on compacted and well-
drained soil. Where soil is not well-drained, a three inch sub-base of compact,
clean, coarse gravel, sand, or cinders shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil
drainage is to be determined by the Building Official.
   4.   Joint Filler. A one-half inch non-extruding type expansion joint shall
be provided between all sidewalks and adjoining backs of curbs and between
intersecting sidewalks and between sidewalks and driveways.
   5.   Sidewalk Bed. The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the constructed
sidewalk will be at established grade.
   6.   Valves Boxes and Manholes. All water valve boxes and manholes shall be
adjusted flush with the sidewalk.
   7.   Length, Width and Depth. Length, width and depth requirements are as
follows:
      A.   Residential sidewalks:
         (1)   In existing subdivisions where sidewalks are predominantly four
feet wide, sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and four inches thick,
and each section shall normally be scored at four-foot intervals, but in no
case more than six-foot intervals. However the Building Official can require
five feet by five feet panels be installed where necessary to meet ADA
requirements including adjacent to the driveway at the driveway approach.
         (2)   In subdivisions under development as of January 2014,
specifically, Hickory Bend 2nd Addition, Hickory Bend 3rd Addition, Garden
Green Estates, and Cobblestone Estates, sidewalks shall be at least four feet
wide and four inches thick, and each section shall normally be scored at four
foot intervals, but in no case more than six-foot intervals. However, at the
driveway, adjacent to the driveway approach, sidewalk shall be installed at
least five feet wide and four inches thick, and each section shall normally be
scored at five-foot intervals, but in no case more than six foot intervals.
         (3)   In subdivisions developed after January 2014, sidewalks shall be
installed at least five feet wide and four inches thick, and each section shall
normally be scored at five-foot intervals, but in no case more than six-foot
intervals.
         (4)   Repairs of sidewalk may be made using the same sidewalk width as
is predominantly present on that specific lot, however the Building Official
can require five feet by five feet panel be installed where necessary to meet
ADA requirements.
      B.   Downtown business district sidewalks shall extend from the property
line to the curb. Each section shall be four inches thick and no more than six
feet in length.
      C.   Driveway areas shall be not less than four inches thick for
residential applications and not less than six inches in thickness for all
other applications including alley crossings.
   8.   Location. Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge
(edge nearest the abutting private property) one foot from the property line,
unless the Council establishes a different distance due to circumstances such
as for the preservation of existing trees or meeting ADA requirements.
   9.   Grade. Curb tops shall be on level with the correct centerline of the
street which shall be at the established grade.
   10.   Elevations. The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation
even with the curb at the curb where sidewalks adjoin the curb and one-half
inch above the curb for each foot between the curb and the sidewalk elsewhere.
   11.   Slope. All sidewalks shall slope one-quarter inch per foot toward the
curb.
   12.   Finish. All sidewalks shall be finished with a “broom” finish to
provide a non-skid surface.
   13.   Curb Ramps for Persons with Disabilities. If a street, road, or
highway is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be
constructed or installed at each intersection of the street, road, or highway
with a sidewalk or path. If a sidewalk or path is newly built or reconstructed,
a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed or installed at each
intersection of the sidewalk or path with a street, highway, or road. Curb
ramps and sloped areas that are required pursuant to this subsection shall be
constructed or installed in compliance with applicable federal requirements
adopted in accordance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act,
including (but not limited to) the guidelines issued by the Federal
Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)
136.04   SIDEWALK REQUIREMENTS.  
Sidewalks are necessary to provide a safe surface for pedestrian traffic to
move about within the City. Therefore, the following sidewalk requirements are
established within the City:
   1.   Installation of new sidewalks shall be required with the issuance of a
building permit for the construction of a single-family home, a multi-family
home, an apartment, a business or commercial structure, or a garage and the
installation of sidewalk shall be required with the issuance of a building
permit for an addition to a single-family home, including a deck or porch, a
multi-family home, an apartment, a business or commercial structure, or a
garage. Construction adding useable space shall be considered an addition. An
extension may be granted by the City Administrator who shall report the same to
the Council. These extensions may be granted for special circumstances only
(such as waiting for appropriate weather to do final grading of property) for a
period not to exceed 12 months. Where an extension is granted, the property
owner shall be required to provide proof of intent to install sidewalk or a
bond in the appropriate amount to cover the cost of sidewalk construction.
Property owner’s failing to install sidewalk as required by this section shall
be subject to Section
136.09.
   2.   On a periodic basis sidewalks within the City shall be inspected by the
City and notice shall be sent to property owners whose sidewalks are in need of
repair pursuant to Section
136.07 below.
   3.   The property owner shall pay for surveying when required.
   4.   Those businesses with concrete or blacktop aprons shall mark sidewalk
location on the apron in a manner approved by the Building Official. Snow shall
be removed from the marked sidewalk.
   5.   Responsibility for Maintenance. It is the responsibility of the
abutting property owners to repair, replace, or reconstruct, or cause to be
repaired, replaced, or reconstructed, all broken or defective sidewalks, and to
maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalk outside the lot and
property lines and inside the curb lines or traveled portion of the public
street.    
(Subsection 5 – Ord. 2024-12 – Dec. 24 Supp.)
136.05   SIDEWALK LOAN FUND.  
The City shall maintain a fund of $2,000 as long as deemed appropriate by the
Council to make first-come, first-served, interest free loans to low and
moderate income (per federal government standards) homeowners who desire to
take advantage of the program. This will be for the repair of existing
sidewalks or the construction of sidewalks in established residential areas
where sidewalks do not now exist. Loan money is not for construction of
sidewalks for new homes, rental units, or businesses.
136.06   PERMITS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND REMOVAL.  
No person shall make any sidewalk improvements, whether ordered by the Council
or not, unless such person obtains a permit from the Building Official. A
permit fee, the amount hereinafter set by resolution, shall be payable at the
time of obtaining the permit. The person obtaining the permit shall agree in
writing that said person will, in making the sidewalk improvements, comply with
the ordinances of the City and with the specifications for sidewalks approved
by the Council and on file in the office of the Clerk and that the work shall
be done under the direction and supervision of the Building Official and
subject to the approval of that officer. All such permits, together with the
written agreement above referred to, shall be filed and preserved in the office
of the Building Official. Before granting any permit to make sidewalk
improvements, the Building Official shall determine the propriety of the same
and shall state in all permits issued when the work is to be commenced and when
the sidewalk work is to be completed. The Building Official may extend the time
of completion for the sidewalk improvements when deemed necessary. All permits
for Council-ordered sidewalk improvements shall be issued in compliance with
the resolution of the Council ordering the improvement. All permits for
sidewalk improvements, not ordered by resolution of the Council, shall be
issued in compliance with this chapter. The Building Official may withhold the
issuance of any permit for any sidewalk improvements for a sufficient period to
determine the necessity for the proposed improvements or when the weather
conditions will adversely affect the sidewalk improvements.
136.07   INSPECTION OF PRIVATE WORK; REMEDIES.  
All sidewalk improvements shall be done under the direction and supervision of
the Building Official and subject to the inspection and approval of the
Building Official. Whenever any sidewalk improvements are made which do not
conform to the provisions of this chapter and with the specifications herein
referred to, or where any sidewalk improvements are made without obtaining a
permit as required by this chapter, or the work is not performed within the
time stated in the permit, the Building Official shall serve upon the property
owner or agent thereof, and upon the contractor doing the work, a notice to
obtain a permit, if not already obtained, or if the sidewalk is in the course
of construction, to stop until a permit is obtained or work is corrected in
compliance with the specifications. If the sidewalk work has been completed,
the owner shall obtain a permit immediately and perform any needed sidewalk
improvement within five days from the receipt of said permit, in the proper
manner and of proper materials as required by the specifications herein
referred to. In case any owner fails to do so, the Building Official shall
cause the sidewalk to be constructed, reconstructed, or repaired in a proper
manner and of proper materials. There shall be returned to the Council an
itemized and verified statement of expenditures of material and of the labor
used in doing such work, and the legal description of the lot, part of lot or
parcel of ground abutting the sidewalk on which such work was performed. The
cost thereof shall be assessed to the property fronting thereon.
136.08   CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.
It is the duty of the abutting property owner at any time, or upon receipt of
45 days’ notice from the City, to repair, replace, or reconstruct or cause to
be repaired, replaced, or reconstructed, all broken and defective sidewalks and
to maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalk outside the lot
and property lines and inside the curb lines or traveled portion of the public
street abutting said owner's property. If, upon the expiration of 45 days as
provided in said notice, the required work has not been done or is not in the
process of completion, the Council may require the sidewalk to be repaired,
replaced, or reconstructed. There shall be returned to the Council an itemized
and verified statement of expenditures of material and of the labor used in
doing such work, and the legal description of the lot, part of lot or parcel of
ground abutting the sidewalk on which such work was performed. The cost thereof
shall be assessed to the property fronting thereon.
136.09   SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.
The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street
or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such improvement to
abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 384 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.10   BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue, highway,
passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when any
sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons
having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or
lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be
deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at
each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in
the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to
keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades
both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using
the street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable
for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act
or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any
misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply
with provisions hereof.
136.11   FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.
It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the
owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of
failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or
erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.12   INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon
any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or
destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove,
destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove, or
deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.13   AWNINGS.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any sidewalk
unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight feet above the
surface of the street or sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck,
canvas, or other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets
securely fastened to the building, without any posts or other device that will
obstruct the sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of
pedestrians.
136.14   ENCROACHING STEPS.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any
building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the
Council.
136.15   OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.
It is unlawful for a person to:
   1.   Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any
cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any
portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the
Council.
   2.   Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault on
any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the
public.
   3.   Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings
on or within six feet of any sidewalk.
136.16   FIRES OR FUELS ON SIDEWALKS.
It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to
place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.17   DEFACING.
It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint, or writing on
any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.18   DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.
It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass,
nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal,
or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal or
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
136.19   MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.
It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods or
merchandise for sale or for display, or a sign advertising the sale of goods or
merchandise, except within three feet of a building or adjacent to an existing
tree, light post, or planter unless authorized by the Council.
136.20   SALES STANDS.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand for
the sale of fruit, vegetables, or other substances or commodities on any
sidewalk except when authorized by the Council.
136.21   REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE AND ACCUMULATIONS.
   1.   It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to remove
snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from sidewalks. The abutting property
owner may be liable for damages caused by failure to remove snow, ice, and
accumulations promptly from the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b])
   2.   If a property owner does not remove snow, ice, or accumulations within
12 daylight hours after the cessation of the storm or other cause of
accumulation, the City may do so and assess the costs against the property
owner for collection in the same manner as a property tax. The City
Administrator may, without notice to the property owner, cause the same to be
removed. The City may use its own forces to remove the snow and ice or the City
may hire an independent contractor to remove the snow and ice. The actual cost
of the removal and an administrative fee of no less than $35.00 shall be
assessed against the property The City Administrator shall submit to the
Director of Finance an itemized and verified statement showing expenditures of
material, labor, and equipment or the contracted cost used in making the
removal, the name of the owner or owners of the property, and the description
of the lot, part of lot or parcel of ground abutting upon the sidewalk from
which snow, ice, or accumulations have been removed. The Director of Finance
will be directed to bill the property owner. If not paid within 30 days, the
Clerk is to certify the cost and assessments to the County Treasurer and it
shall then be collected with and in the same manner as general taxes.
CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
 
137.01 Power to Vacate                137.04 Findings Required
137.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 137.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or
                                      Alleys
137.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing     137.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
137.01   POWER TO VACATE.
When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of the
City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds, the
Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])
137.02   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
Any proposal to vacate a street or alley shall be referred by the Council to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for its study and recommendation prior to
further consideration by the Council. The Commission shall submit a written
report including recommendations to the Council within 30 days after the date
the proposed vacation is referred to the Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
137.03   NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.
The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the time
at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.
137.04   FINDINGS REQUIRED.
No street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds shall be vacated
unless the Council finds that:
   1.   Public Use. The street, alley, portion thereof, or any public ground
proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore,
its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified.
   2.   Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of
property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
137.05   DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.
When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the
City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public ground,
the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7, Code
of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
137.06   DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.
The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a governmental body
for a public purpose or to a fair.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.15[2] and 364.7[3])
EDITOR’S NOTE
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public
grounds and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED            ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
31            May 25, 1931       94-10         March 21, 1994
32            May 25, 1931       94-9          July 5, 1994
33            May 25, 1931       94-16         July 18, 1994
67            July 14, 1936      95-06         April 3, 1995
70            March 24, 1937     95-07         April 10, 1995
76            June 21, 1938      95-28         October 23, 1995
78            November 15, 1938  98-08         August 17, 1998
86            April 8, 1941      98-15         December 21, 1998
90            April 13, 1942     2004-12       January 4, 2005
91            September 9, 1942  2019-02       January 21, 2019
114           May 10, 1949       2023-03       June 5, 2023
129           September 11, 1951
130           September 11, 1951
131           September 12, 1951
132           November 13, 1951
133           November 13, 1951
134           December 11, 1951
157           February 15, 1954
159           August 1, 1955
160           August 1, 1955
161           August 1, 1955
167           June 11, 1956
168           June 11, 1956
58A1          August 5, 1957
58A2          April 7, 1958
58A3          April 7, 1958
58A4          August 4, 1958
58A5          May 4, 1958
58A7          December 4, 1961
58A8          August 19, 1963
58A9          October 14, 1963
58A10         July 22, 1964
58A12         April 1, 1968
58A13         June 23, 1969
58A14         September 2, 1969
58A15         September 2, 1969
58A11         November 2, 1973
58A13         August 5, 1974
Unnumbered    April 6, 1981
Unnumbered    July 19, 1982
Unnumbered    August 1, 1983
Unnumbered    November 7, 1983
89-1          February 6, 1989
CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES
 
138.01 Purpose and Definition 138.03 Record Maintained
138.02 Established Grades
138.01   PURPOSE AND DEFINITION. 
This chapter is designed to meet the requirements of the Code of Iowa for the
establishment of street grades. As used herein, “grade” means the longitudinal
reference lines, as established by ordinance of the Council, which designate
the elevation at which a street or sidewalk is to be built.
138.02   ESTABLISHED GRADES.
The grades of all streets, alleys, and sidewalks, which have been heretofore
established by ordinance, are hereby confirmed, ratified, and established as
official grades.
138.03   RECORD MAINTAINED.
The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning such grades upon request.
 
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
 
CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS
 
139.01 Naming New Streets      139.04 Official Street Name Map
139.02 Changing Name of Street 139.05 Revision of Street Name Map
139.03 Recording Street Names  139.06 Revision of Street Names
139.01   NAMING NEW STREETS.
New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:
   1.   Streets Running in North-South and East-West Directions. Streets
running in a north-south direction shall be designated as numbered avenues.
Names of avenues south of First Street (as if extended and continuous) shall be
prefixed with the word “South,” e.g., South Sixth Avenue. Streets running in an
east-west direction shall be designated as numbered streets. Names of streets
east of First Avenue (as if extended and continuous) shall be prefixed with the
work “East,” e.g., East Eighth Street. Streets designated as numbered avenues
(running north-south) that are located east of First Avenue shall be suffixed
with the word “East” e.g. Fourth Avenue East. Streets designated as numbered
streets (running east-west) and located south of First Street shall be prefixed
with the word “South” e.g., South Fifth Street. Streets designated as numbered
streets (running east-west) and located south of First Street and East of 1st
Avenue shall be prefixed with the word “South” and suffixed with the word
“East” e.g., South Fifth Street East.
139.02   CHANGING NAME OF STREET.
The Council may, by ordinance, change the name of a street.
139.03   RECORDING STREET NAMES.
Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk
shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor, and County
Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.04   OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP.
Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map,
which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify
that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section
139.04 of the Code of Ordinances of DeWitt, Iowa.”
139.05   REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP.
If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in
street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map
promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Council with an entry on
the Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the
City Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map:
(brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by
the Clerk. No amendment to this chapter which involves naming or changing the
name of a street shall become effective until after such change and entry have
been made on said map.
139.06   REVISION OF STREET NAMES.
New street names shall be assigned as follows. The new street names shall be
entered on the Official Street Name Map and signed accordingly.
   1.   250th Street from its western terminus at the property listed with the
Clinton County Parcel ID # of 2016290000, owned by Guardian Industries, to
eastern terminus of 250th Street with 300th Avenue shall be renamed East Lake
Street.
   2.   300th Avenue from where it intersects with 245th Street of the City to
the point where 300th Avenue intersects with 250th Street (East Lake Street)
shall retain the County Designation of 300th Avenue, but shall have added a
City designation which shall be 15th Avenue East.
   3.   300th Avenue from where it intersects with 250th Street (East Lake
Street) to the point where 300th Avenue intersects with US Highway 30 shall
retain the County Designation of 300th Avenue, but shall have added a City
designation which shall be South 16th Avenue East.
 
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing or changing street names and remain
in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED          ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
94-14         July 17, 1995
2017-05       December 4, 2017
 
CHAPTER 140
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
 
140.01 Purpose    140.03 Establishment
140.02 Definition
140.01   PURPOSE.
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City under
Chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace, health,
and safety and for the promotion of the general welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1)
140.02   DEFINITION.
The term “controlled access facility” means a highway or street especially
designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or occupants of
abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only a controlled
right or easement of access, light, air, or view by reason of the fact that
their property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for any other
reason.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2)
140.03   ESTABLISHMENT.
There are fixed and established controlled access facilities which shall be and
remain on file in the office of the Building Official.
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
 
145.01 Enforcement Officer          145.05 Conduct of Hearing
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe 145.06 Posting of Signs
145.03 Unsafe Building              145.07 Right to Demolish; Municipal
                                    Infraction
145.04 Notice to Owner              145.08 Costs
145.01   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
The Building Official is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
145.02   GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE.
All buildings or structures that are structurally unsafe or not provided with
adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous
to human life, or that in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to
safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose of this
chapter, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or
removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 and 364.12[3a])
145.03   UNSAFE BUILDING.
“Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home meeting any or all of the
following criteria:
   1.   Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any
portion thereof, because of:
      A.   Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay;
      B.   Faulty construction;
      C.   The removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground
necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;
      D.   The deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or
      E.   Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
   2.   Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure,
or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is
being used.
   3.   Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer
to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is
likely to cause sickness or disease.
   4.   Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
   5.   Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
145.04   NOTICE TO OWNER.
The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building or
structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such is
found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement
officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice
stating the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in
charge of the building or premises, within 48 hours or such reasonable time as
the circumstances require, to commence either the required repairs or
improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions
thereof, and all such work shall be completed within 90 days from date of
notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement officer. If necessary,
such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to
be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and
improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the enforcement officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   1.   Notice Served. Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail
to the owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa, if
the owner is found within the City limits. If the owner is not found within the
City limits, such service may be made upon the owner by registered mail or
certified mail. The designated period within which said owner or person in
charge is required to comply with the order of the enforcement officer shall
begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.
   2.   Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she may
request a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written request
for hearing within the time provided in the notice.
145.05   CONDUCT OF HEARING.
If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the
date, time and place of hearing.
   2.   Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why
the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
   3.   Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and
may issue such order as it deems appropriate.† 9
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order of the
  Council for the administration of this chapter are provided in the APPENDIX to
9 this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this procedure. We
  recommend you review the situation with your attorney before initiating
  procedures and follow his or her recommendation carefully.
145.06   POSTING OF SIGNS.
The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. CITY OF DEWITT,
IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required demolition, removal
or repairs are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written
permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the building
except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the
building.
145.07   RIGHT TO DEMOLISH; MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to
repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or
portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as
a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement
officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the
cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council. As an alternative to
this action, the City may utilize the municipal infraction process to abate the
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
145.08   COSTS.
Costs incurred under Section 145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury.
Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and levied as
a special assessment against the land on which the building or structure is
located, and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for collection in the
manner provided for other taxes. In addition, the City may take any other
action deemed appropriate to recover costs incurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
CHAPTER 146
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
 
146.01 Definitions                 146.03 Foundation Requirements
146.02 Conversion to Real Property
146.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1)
   1.   “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure built under the
authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403 which was constructed on or after June 15,
1976, and is required by federal law to display a seal from the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   2.   “Manufactured home community” means any site, lot, field, or tract of
land under common ownership upon which 10 or more occupied manufactured homes
are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any
building, structure, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the
equipment of the manufactured home community.
   3.   “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed, or reconstructed
as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or
more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with motive power not
registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home means any such vehicle
built before June 15, 1976, which was not built to a mandatory building code
and which contains no State or Federal seals.
   4.   “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon
which three or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of any
of these homes, are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit
enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and electrical services available.
The term “manufactured home community” or “mobile home park” is not to be
construed to include manufactured or mobile homes, buildings, tents, or other
structures temporarily maintained by any individual, educational institution,
or company on its own premises and used exclusively to house said entity’s own
labor or students. The manufactured home community or mobile home park shall
meet the requirements of any zoning regulations that are in effect.
146.02   CONVERSION TO REAL PROPERTY.
A mobile home or manufactured home that is located outside a manufactured home
community or mobile home park shall be converted to real estate by being placed
on a permanent foundation and shall be assessed for real estate taxes except in
the following cases:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26)
   1.   Retailer’s Stock. Mobile homes or manufactured homes on private
property as part of a retailer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not used as a place
for human habitation.
   2.   Existing Homes. A taxable mobile home or manufactured home that is
located outside of a manufactured home community or mobile home park as of
January 1, 1995, shall be assessed and taxed as real estate, but is exempt from
the permanent foundation requirement of this chapter until the home is
relocated.
146.03   FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS.
A mobile home or manufactured home located outside of a manufactured home
community or mobile home park shall be placed on a permanent frost-free
foundation system that meets the support and anchorage requirements as
recommended by the manufacturer or required by the State Building Code. The
foundation system must be visually compatible with permanent foundation systems
of surrounding residential structures. Any such home shall be installed in
accordance with the requirements of the State Building Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.10 and 414.28)
CHAPTER 147
FIRE ZONE
 
147.01 Fire Zone Established  147.05 Reconstruction Prohibited
147.02 Plans Submitted        147.06 Special Permit
147.03 Buildings Prohibited   147.07 Removal of Buildings
147.04 Construction Standards 147.08 Storage of Materials Restricted
147.01   FIRE ZONE ESTABLISHED.
A Fire Zone is established to include all of the following territory:
   All that part of the City which is bounded on the west by the east line of
Seventh Avenue, on the north by the south line of Eleventh Street, on the east
by the west line of Fifth Avenue and on the south by the north line of Sixth
Street.
147.02   PLANS SUBMITTED.
It is unlawful to build, enlarge, or alter any structure, building, or part
thereof, within the Fire Zone until a plan of the proposed work, together with
a statement of materials to be used has been submitted to the Council, who
shall, if in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, issue a permit for
the proposed work.
147.03   BUILDINGS PROHIBITED.
The erection of any building or structure of any kind, or additions thereto, or
substantial alterations thereof, involving partial rebuilding, are prohibited
in the Fire Zone, unless constructed in strict compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
147.04   CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
The construction standards for all buildings, structures, or parts thereof
within the Fire Zone shall be of Type I, Type II, or, at a minimum, Type III
fire resistant construction, as specified in the International Building Code.
147.05   RECONSTRUCTION PROHIBITED.
Any building within the Fire Zone not constructed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter which is hereafter damaged by fire, decay, or
otherwise shall not be rebuilt, altered, or reconstructed except in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
147.06   SPECIAL PERMIT.
The Council may, by four-fifths vote, issue a special permit to improve any
property within the Fire Zone contrary to the provisions of this chapter, on
condition that such improvement shall not increase the rates for fire insurance
or the fire hazard potential of the area, or to allow any person to erect or
move in any building or structure for temporary purposes for a period of time
not exceeding six months from the date of such permission.
147.07   REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS.
Any person who erects any building in the Fire Zone, contrary to the provisions
of this chapter, shall be given written notice by the Mayor to remove or tear
down the same, and if such removal or taking down is not completed within 30
days from the time of the service of such notice, the Mayor shall cause the
same to be removed or taken down. The Mayor shall report an itemized bill of
the expense to the Clerk, and the same shall be charged to the person owning
such building. The Clerk shall present the bill to the owner of the property
and if the bill is not paid within 10 days from the date it is presented, the
amount of the bill shall be certified, by the Clerk, to the County Treasurer,
as a lien against the property and collected the same as other taxes.
147.08   STORAGE OF MATERIALS RESTRICTED.
No person shall have or deposit any grain stack, pile of rubbish, explosives,
hazardous chemicals or other flammable substance within the Fire Zone, nor
shall any person have or deposit any cord wood or fire wood, within the Fire
Zone without written permission from the Mayor, specifying the maximum amount
of such cord wood or fire wood, that may be kept, stored, or deposited on any
lot or part of a lot within the Fire Zone, unless the same be within one of the
buildings allowed by this chapter. No person shall build or allow any fires,
whether trash fires or otherwise, within the Fire Zone as described in this
chapter.
CHAPTER 148
BUILDING NUMBERING
 
148.01 Definitions             148.04 Base Lines for Numbering
148.02 Owner Requirements      148.05 Odd and Even Numbers
148.03 Building Numbering Plan
148.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
   2.   “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision
thereof.
148.02   OWNER REQUIREMENTS.
Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:
   1.   Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to
the principal building from the Building Official.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
   2.   Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed
and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous
place to the street in figures not less than two and one-half inches high and
one and one-half inches wide and of a contrasting color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
   3.   Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein
provided, or fails to do so for a period of 30 days after being notified in
writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the assigned number
on the principal building and assess the costs against the property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
148.03   BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN.
The Building Official is responsible for preparing and maintaining a building
numbering map.
148.04   BASE LINES FOR NUMBERING.
First Street of the City (as if extended and continuous) is the base line for
all avenues running in a northerly or southerly direction therefrom and First
Avenue of the City (as if extended and continuous) is the base line for all
streets running in an easterly and westerly direction therefrom.
148.05   ODD AND EVEN NUMBERS.
A full number shall be assigned to each 22 feet of street frontage, even
numbers on east and north and odd numbers on the west and south sides of the
street or avenue from the above named base lines. Even numbers shall begin with
00 and odd numbers with 01 prefixed by the correct figure to designate its
relation in blocks to the base lines commencing with 100 and 101 in blocks
adjoining the base lines.
CHAPTER 150
TREES
150.01 Definitions                      150.10 Dead or Diseased Tree Removal on
                                        Private Property
150.02 Street Tree Species              150.11 Procedure Upon Order to Preserve
                                        or Remove
150.03 Spacing                          150.12 Removal of Stumps
150.04 Distance from Curb and Sidewalk  150.13 Abuse or Mutilation of Trees
150.05 Location Within Public Right-of- 150.14 Arborist Bond
Way
150.06 Utilities                        150.15 Emergencies
150.07 Public Tree Care                 150.16 Ash Tree Treatment and Permit
150.08 Tree Topping
150.09 Pruning, Corner Clearance
150.01   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Boulevard” means that part of the street, avenue, or highway in the
City not covered by sidewalk (typically a seeded lawn) and lying between the
lot line and curb line; or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street,
avenue, or highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street
usually traveled by vehicular traffic.
   2.   “Property owner” means a personal and private property owner in the
City as shown by the County Auditor’s plats of the City.
   3.   “Public property” means any and all property located within the
confines of the City and owned by the City or held in the name of the City by
any of the departments, commissions, or agencies within the government.
   4.   “Street tree” or “tree” means a tree in the public place, except where
otherwise indicated. Trees located within parkings are street trees.
150.02   STREET TREE SPECIES.
   1.   The following list constitutes the recommended tree species for the
City. This does not mean it is complete or will remain unchanged; however, it
provides a broad selection of trees that show promise as tough, attractive
additions to the City landscape. No trees, including those recommended, may be
planted as street trees without permission of the Director of Public Works.
Table 2.1 Selection of Trees
Common Name Genus Species Minimum Spacing Mature Height (ft) Mature Spread (ft)
Table 2.1 Selection of Trees
Common Name   Genus Species               Minimum Mature Height  Mature Spread
                                          Spacing (ft)           (ft)
Freeman Maple Acer X freemanii            30      50             45
Norway Maple  Acer platanoides            30      75             30
Black Maple   Acer nigrum                 40      65             60
Sugar Maple   Acer saccharum              45      80             50
Greencolumn   Acer nigrum                 25      50             20
Maple
**European    Capinus betulus             40      40             30
Hornbeam
Hackberry     Celtis occidentalis         40      75             50
Ginkgo (male  Ginkgo biloba               50      60             35
only)
Honeylocust, Thornless
Skyline       Gleditsia triacanthos i.    30      60             30
Honeylocust   cv.
Moraine       Gleditsia triacanthos i.            60             40
Honeylocust   cv.
Imperial      Gleditsia triacanthos var.  30      25             30
Honeylocust   inermis ‘Imperial’
Shademaster   Gleditsia triacanthos var.  40      45             40
Honeylocust   inermis ‘Shademaster’
**American    Ostrya virginiana           25      40             20
Hophornbeam   (Ironwood)
Sycamore      Platanus occidentalis       40      100            50
(huge)
Calley Pear   Pyrus calleryana            35      60             60
**Swamp White (High Quercus bicolor PH    50      75             60
Oak           sensitive)
Northern Red  Quercus rubra               50      75             70
Oak
Burr Oak      Quercus macrocappa          40      75             50
English Oak   Quercus robur               55      75             50
**Scarlet Oak (High PH Quercus coccinea   50      60             50
              sensitive)
Linden:
**American    Tilia americana             35      70             45
**Littleleaf  Tilia cordata               30      50             35
Silver        Tilia tomentosa             50      50             40
American      Tilia Americana             30      50             30
              ‘Fastigiata’
Greenspire    Tilia cordata ‘Greenspire�30      45             30
Crimean       Tilia x euchlora            35      30             60
Crabapple:
Adams*        Malus ‘Adams’           25      20             20
              Malus Adirondack            20      18             10
Pink Spires*  Malus ‘Pink Spires’     15      12             10
Snowdrift*    Malus ‘Snow Drift’      20      20             15
Spring Snow*  Malus ‘Spring Snow’     20      20             15
White Candle* Malus ‘White Candle’    12      18             8
*Dwarf
Species
**Salt
Sensitive
Small = mature height less than 25 feet (as a rule, must be trained to tree
form)
Medium = mature height 25 – 40 feet
Large = mature height greater than 40 feet
 
All tree plantings in the boulevard or in the City right-of-way shall be
approved in writing by the Director of Public Works. Requests for tree
plantings in the boulevard or in the City right-of-way shall be in writing and
include a plot plan indicating the proposed location of trees and all other
public and private infrastructure, such as driveways, streets, fire hydrants,
streets, and streetlights. All trees planted within City boulevards shall be a
minimum of one and one-quarter inch in caliper or larger at the base and shall
be a minimum of eight feet tall or larger in height. Trees must meet the
American Standard for Nursery Stock.
   2.   The following list contains trees that are not allowed to be planted on
City boulevards:
 
Ash (any variety) Box Elder                 White Poplar
Mulberry          European Mountain Ash     Willows
Black Locust      Catalpa                   Austrian Pine
Russian Olive     Tree of Heaven            Lombardy Poplar
Bolleana Poplar   Weeping Birch             White Birch
Paper Birch       Silver Maple
Walnut            Cotton-Bearing Cottonwood
For safety consideration, no conifers or evergreens should be planted between
the sidewalk and the curb of any City street.
150.03   SPACING.
The spacing of street trees shall be in accordance with three species size
classes listed in Section
150.02, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: Small
Trees, 30 feet; Medium Trees, 40 feet; Large Trees, 50 feet, except in special
plantings approved by the Tree Board.
150.04   DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK.
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks shall
be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in Section
150.02, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the
following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large trees,
four feet. No trees shall be planted where the width of the boulevard is less
than four feet.
150.05   LOCATION WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
The following criteria is for the location of street trees that are located in
the street right-of-way. Jurisdictions may require additional street right-of-
way to provide clearances to underground or overhead utilities. This criteria
does not include street trees located within medians. Special designs that meet
the required clear zone must be used when locating trees within medians.
   1.   Minimum distance of five linear feet from water service stop boxes.
   2.   Minimum distance of four linear feet from curb or alley right-of-way
line.
   3.   Minimum distance of 10 linear feet from hydrants, poles, transformers,
telephone junction boxes, manholes, and driveway approaches.
   4.   Minimum distance of 25 linear feet from streetlights.
   5.   In Central Business Districts where traffic speeds are low, a minimum
distance of three feet from the back of curb should be used for street trees if
a minimum distance of eight feet exists for right-of-way from back of curb.
   6.   No trees should be in the horizontal clear zone or triangular sight
distance area.
   7.   No tree shall be planted in any public right-of-way less than 12 feet
in width.
   8.   All underground utilities or any other improvements, either private or
public, shall be located before planting is done. One Call Services shall be
utilized to locate underground utilities. The One Call service phone number is
1-800-292-8989.
150.06   UTILITIES.
No street trees other than those species meeting the small trees criteria in
Section
150.02 of this chapter may be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any
overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground
water line, sewer, transmission line, or other utility.
150.07   PUBLIC TREE CARE.
The City and any electric utility company with a City franchised agreement
shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants, and
shrubs within the lines of all street, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and
public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or
enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. Not less than two weeks
before the proposed removal of City trees, adjacent property owners will be
notified in writing by ordinary mail of the proposed action and their right to
request a public hearing before the Tree Board. In those cases referred to it,
the Tree Board, following the public hearing, shall rule within five days if
the City tree(s) shall be removed or pruned. The City Forester may remove or
cause or order to be removed any tree or shrub or part thereof which is in an
unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, gas
lines, water lines, or other public improvements or is infected with any
injurious fungus, insect, or other pest or which obstructs view of traffic.
This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent
property owners providing that the selection and location of said trees are in
accordance with this chapter.
150.08   TREE TOPPING.
It is unlawful as a normal practice for any person or City department to top
any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. Topping is defined
as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in
diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes
or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning
practices are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the
determination of the Tree Board. The tree trimming and tree topping conducted
by the employees of Iowa Electric Light and Power Company shall be exempt from
this section.
150.09   PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE.
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the City
shall prune the branches so that such branches do not obstruct the light from
any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that
there is a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk and at
least 14 feet above the surface of the street. Said owners shall remove all
dead, diseased, or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs which constitute
a menace to the safety of the public. The City shall have the right to prune
any trees or shrubs on private property when the same interfere with the proper
spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interfere with
visibility of any traffic control device or sign. The abutting property owner
shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly
owned property or right-of-way.
150.10   DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
The City shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the City when such trees constitute a hazard
to life and property or harbor insects or disease which constitutes a potential
threat to other trees within the City. The Tree Board shall notify in writing
the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their expense
within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of
owners to comply with such provisions, the City shall have the authority to
remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner’s property tax
notice.
150.11   PROCEDURE UPON ORDER TO PRESERVE OR REMOVE.
When the City shall find it necessary to order the trimming, preservation, or
removal of trees or plants upon private property, as authorized in Section
150.10, it shall serve a written order to correct the dangerous condition upon
the owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for its existence.
   1.   Method of Service. The order shall be served in one of the following
ways:
      A.   By making personal delivery of the order to the person responsible.
      B.   By leaving the order with some person of suitable age and discretion
upon the premises.
      C.   By affixing a copy of the order to the door or the entrance of the
premises in violation.
      D.   By mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the
owner of the premises, by registered mail.
      E.   By publishing a copy of the order in a local paper once a week for
three consecutive weeks.
   2.   Time for Compliance. The order required herein shall set forth a time
limit for compliance, dependent upon the hazard and danger created by the
violation. In cases of extreme danger to persons or public property, the City
shall have the authority to require compliance immediately upon service of the
order or remove the hazard at City cost without right of appeal.
   3.   Appeal from Order. A person to whom an order hereunder is directed
shall have the right, within 24 hours after the service of such order, to
appeal to the Council, who shall review the order within 30 days and file its
decision thereon. Unless the order is revoked or modified, it shall remain in
full force and be obeyed by the person to whom directed. No person to whom an
order is directed shall fail to comply with such order within three days after
an appeal have been determined.
   4.   Failure to Comply. When a person to whom an order is directed fails to
comply with the specified time, the City shall remedy the condition or contract
with others for such purpose and charge the cost thereof to the person to whom
the order is directed. The person remedying a condition under a contract made
hereunder shall be authorized to enter premises for that purpose.
   5.   Special Assessment. If the cost of remedying a condition is not paid
within 30 days after receipt of a statement therefor from the City, such cost
shall be levied against the property upon which said hazard exists as a special
assessment. The levying of such assessment shall not affect the liability of
the person to whom the order is directed to fine or imprisonment as herein
provided. Such special assessment shall be certified by the City to the County
Treasurer and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon such a property, shall
be included in the next tax bill rendered to the owner or owners thereof unless
paid before, and shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes against
such property.
150.12   REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
All stumps of street trees and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump does not project above the surface of
the ground.
150.13   ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF TREES.
No person shall:
   1.   Damage, cut, carve, transplant, or injure the bark of street or park
trees.
   2.   Remove any healthy street or park tree or plant without approval of the
Tree Board.
   3.   Attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any street or park tree
or plant.
   4.   Dig in or otherwise disturb, injure, or impair the root systems of
street or park trees.
   5.   Cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come in contact
with street or park trees or plants or allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid
substance which is harmful to such trees or plants to come in contact with
them.
150.14   ARBORIST BOND.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of trimming, pruning,
spraying, or otherwise treating trees or shrubs within the City without first
filing evidence of possession of liability insurance with the limits and form
as set out below:
   1.   The applicant shall purchase and maintain such insurance as will
protect the applicant from claims set forth below which may arise out of, or
result from the applicant’s operations under the permit, whether such operation
be by the applicant or by any subcontractor or by anyone directly or indirectly
employed by any of them, or by anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable.
The insurance to be maintained by the applicant shall be written as follows:
      A.   Workers’ Compensation and Employers Liability Insurance as
prescribed by State law, or the minimum limits shown below:
         (1)   State Benefits         Statutory
         (2)   Employers Liability:
            Bodily Injury by Accident    $500,000.00 each accident
            Bodily Injury by Disease    $500,000.00 each accident
            Bodily Injury by Disease    $500,000.00 each employee
         The Workers Compensation policy shall include a waiver of subrogation
clause in favor of the owner.
      B.   Commercial General Liability Insurance combined single limits shown
below covering Bodily Injury, Property Damage, and Personal Injury:
         General Aggregate Limit             $2,000,000.00
         Products-Completed Operations Aggregate Limit    $2,000,000.00
         Personal and Advertising Injury Limit       $1,000,000.00
         Each Occurrence Limit             $1,000,000.00
         Fire Damage Limit (for any one fire)         $100,000.00
         Medical Damage Limit (any one person)      $5,000.00
      This insurance must include the following features:
         (1)   Coverage for all premises and operations. The policy shall be
endorsed to provide the aggregate per project endorsement.
         (2)   Personal and Advertising Injury.
         (3)   Operations by independent contractors.
         (4)   Contractual liability coverage.
         (5)   Coverage for property damage underground or damage by explosion
or collapse (XCU).
      C.   Automobile Liability Insurance covering all owned, non-owned, hired,
and leased vehicles with a minimum combined single limit for Bodily Injury and
Property Damage of $1,000,000.00 per accident. Insurance must include
Contractual Liability.
      D.   Umbrella or Excess Liability Insurance at contractor’s option, the
limits specified may be satisfied with a combination of Primary and Umbrella/
Excess Insurance.
      E.   Additional Insured. The contractor will include the City as
additional insured on all policies except Workers’ Compensation as respects all
work performed.
      F.   Insurance Certificates. Each policy noted above shall be issued by
an insurance company authorized to write such insurance in the State of Iowa
and shall be reasonably acceptable to the City. These insurance policies shall
not be cancelled without at least 30 days’ prior written notice to the City. A
properly executed Certificate of Insurance showing evidence of these insurance
requirements shall be delivered to the City prior to the permit being issued.
      G.   Government Immunity. The following clauses will be added to all
liability coverages:
         (1)   The company and the insured expressly agree and state that the
purchase of this policy of insurance by the insured does not waive any of the
defenses of governmental immunity available to the insured under Section 670.4
of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists and as it may be amended from time to
time.
         (2)   The company and the insured further agree that this policy of
insurance shall cover only those claims not subject to the defense of
governmental immunity under Section 670.4 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists
and as it may be amended from time to time.
      H.   Subrogation. To the extent that such insurance is in force and
collectible and to the extent permitted by law, the City and contractor each
hereby release and waive all right of recovery against the other or anyone
claiming through or under each of them by way of subrogation or otherwise. The
forgoing release and waiver shall apply to damage to contractor’s equipment,
tools, and other personal property as well as automobiles.
150.15   EMERGENCIES.
The City shall, by resolution, declare a state of emergency in the event of
storm, disaster, tree disease, or other cause and order the removal of trees,
fallen limbs, or debris at City cost and expense.
150.16   ASH TREE TREATMENT AND PERMIT.
   1.   Fraxinus (ash) trees on private property or in the public rights-of-way
(ROW) may be chemically treated at the expense of the property owner. The use
of a soil drench or basal spray shall be prohibited. Direct trunk injection
will be allowed with a permit. Permits will be available at City Hall. The
permit shall only be taken out by a licensed commercial pesticide applicator.
The commercial pesticide applicator shall have a current license with
Endorsements 3O or 3OT issued by the Iowa Department of Agriculture. The
licensed applicator must be on site for the duration of the application
treatment.
   2.   The chemical application permit fee shall be set by resolution. A site
map of trees and structures on the property shall be submitted with the permit
application. Diameter at breast height and distances from two approximate
property corners shall be required on the site map.
   3.   Permits to chemically treat Ash trees shall only be available from
April 15th to August 1st unless special authorization from the City Forester is
given in writing.
CHAPTER 151
TAP-ON FEE AUTHORIZATION
 
151.01 Purpose   151.03 Procedures
151.02 Authority 151.04 Contents
151.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish substantive and procedural rules
for the adoption and implementation of project specific tap-on fee ordinances
which shall provide for the equitable apportionment of the cost associated with
the extension of public utility service to development in areas beyond the
current service area of public utilities which have not been previously
assessed for public utility services, by charging a proportionate share of the
total, actual construction costs of the public utility to each owner of
benefited property at the time of such owner’s connection to the public
utility.
151.02   AUTHORITY.
It is the finding of the Council that authority for the establishment of
project specific tap-on fee ordinances is found in Article III, Section 38A,
Constitution of the State, and Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa.
151.03   PROCEDURES.
The Council shall substantially comply with the following procedures in the
adoption of project specific tap-on fee ordinances.
   1.   State Code and local rules regarding the adoption of ordinances shall
apply, except as augmented by these procedures.
   2.   A public hearing shall be held before the Council prior to the passage
of the ordinance. Notice of public hearing in addition to that required at
Section 362.4 of the Code of Iowa, shall:
      A.   Include the publication in a newspaper of general circulation of an
additional notice in the form of a display advertisement of at least two
columns wide by six inches long, containing a brief summary of the proposed
ordinance and the benefited area; and
      B.   Be sent by ordinary mail to the owners of record of real property
within the benefited area.
   3.   Upon adoption of a project specific tap-on fee ordinance, a certified
copy of the ordinance shall be filed in the office of the County Recorder
151.04   CONTENTS.
A project-specific tap-on fee ordinance shall contain the following:
   1.   A general description of the project, including a narrative of the
reasons for its construction, a recital of actions taken in approving its
construction, a description of any interim financing used and disclosure of any
agreements between the City and owners of any benefited properties including,
but not limited to, tap-on fee prepayment and developments sequencing.
   2.   A map showing the general location of the project area in relation to
the Comprehensive Plan, land use component of the City.
   3.   A plat and legal description of the utility constructed.
   4.   A plat and legal description of the properties benefited by the
construction of the public utility.
   5.   Calculation of the total area benefited by the construction of the
public utility on a basis which reasonably identifies the area to be benefited
by construction of the public utility.
   6.   The City Engineer’s certification of the actual, total cost of the
construction project, including, when applicable, interest cost.
   7.   A schedule of fees, predicated upon a formula specified within the
project specific tap-on fee ordinance, to be paid by an owner or building
permit applicant upon connection to the public utility constructed. The method
employed in determining the connection fee to be paid by the benefited property
owner shall be specified within the ordinance. The method shall be equitable
and consistent with the benefits conferred.
   8.   A finding of properties within the benefited area which are exempt from
the project specific tap-on fee ordinance by virtue of their having been
previously assessed for the service provided by the public utility constructed.
CHAPTER 152
WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
 
152.01 Definitions 152.03 Rules Regarding Use
152.02 Permits
152.01   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Commercial WES” means a facility which is intended to produce
electricity specifically for sale to a utility or for use off-site. Any WES
which has a rated capacity of 100 Kilowatts (kW) or more will be considered
commercial.
   2.   “Fall zone” means the area that is the furthest distance from the tower
base in which a tower will collapse in the event of a structural failure.
   3.   “Guyed tower” means a tower that is supported by guy wires and ground
anchors.
   4.   “Kilowatt” (kW) is equal to 1,000 Watts.
   5.   “Lattice tower” means a self-supporting tower with three or four sides,
an open steel framed structure used to support equipment.
   6.   “Monopole tower” means a tower consisting of a single pole, constructed
without guy wires and ground anchors.
   7.   “Non-commercial WES” means a facility which has a rated capacity of
less than 100 kW or less which is intended to produce electricity primarily for
use on site, e.g., power for a business. Excess power generated and not
presently needed for on-site use may be used by the utility company.
   8.   “Residential WES” means a facility which usually consists of a single
wind turbine, tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which
has a rated capacity of not more than 10kW. It is intended to reduce on-site
consumption of electricity. Such a WES may also receive power from the local
utility company. Excess power generated may be used by the utility company.
   9.   “Roof-mounted Residential WES” means a facility which usually consists
of a single wind turbine, mounted on a roof of a permitted structure, and
associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not
more than 10kW. It is intended to reduce on-site consumption of electricity.
Such a WES may also receive power from the local utility company. Excess power
generated may be used by the utility company.
   10.   “Total system height” means the height above grade of the system,
including the base, tower, generating unit, and attached blades or rotors.
   11.   “Watt” means, in the international system of units standard of power,
the equivalent of one joule per second.
   12.   “Wind energy system” (WES) means an electrical generating facility
comprised of one or more wind turbines and accessory facilities, including (but
not limited to) power lines, transformers, substations, and meteorological
towers that operate by converting the kinetic energy of wind into electrical
energy.
152.02   PERMITS.
A wind energy system shall only be allowed as an accessory use to a permitted
principal use and shall require a Special Use Permit. Approval of the Board of
Adjustment shall be made prior to construction, installation, alteration, or
location of such structure. The owner or operator of the wind energy system
shall obtain all other permits required by federal, State, and local agencies
prior to construction of the system. No permit shall be issued for a WES unless
it meets all the criteria in this chapter. Application for a permit must
include the following:
   1.   A site plan, showing the following:
      A.   Property dimensions. Location and full dimensions of all buildings
existing on property including exterior dimensions, height of buildings, and
all uses on property. Location and full dimensions of all buildings within 200
feet of the property including exterior dimensions, height, and uses on
property.
      B.   Location and dimensions of any other natural or manmade features
within 200 feet of the property such as trees, ridges, highways, streets,
bridges, and underpasses.
      C.   Location of tower including height and setbacks.
   2.   Drawings, to scale, of the structure, including the tower, base,
footings, and guywires, if any. The drawings and any necessary calculations
shall be certified by a licensed engineer as meeting the requirements of the
City Building Code.
   3.   Line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow
for a determination that the manner of installation will meet the City
Electrical Code.
   4.   Certification from a licensed engineer or qualified person that the
rotor and overspeed control have been designed for the proposed use on the
proposed site.
   5.   Evidence that the proposed wind energy conversion system model has an
operational history of at least one year.
   6.   Evidence that the applicant has notified the utility that the customer
intends to install an interconnected customer-owned generator, and that the
generator meets the minimum requirements established by the utility and the
Iowa Utilities Board. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
   7.   Evidence that the wind energy conversion system does not violate any
covenants of record.
   8.   Evidence from a qualified individual that the site is feasible for a
wind energy conversion system, or that covenants, easements, and other
assurances to document sufficient wind to operate the wind energy conversion
system have been obtained.
   9.   Evidence that the proposed wind energy conversion system will comply
with applicable federal aviation regulations, including any necessary approvals
from the federal aviation administration.
   10.   Evidence that the applicant can obtain and maintain adequate liability
insurance for the facility.
   11.   A shadow flicker model, if applicable.
   12.   For roof-mounted residential WESs, certification from a licensed
engineer that the WES installation is structurally sound and meets the
standards of the City’s Building Code.
   13.   Any other evidence or information as required by the Zoning
Administrator or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
152.03   RULES REGARDING USE.
    1.   Districts in Which WESs Are Authorized.
      A.   Residential Zoning Districts. Residential WESs and roof-mounted
Residential WESs are authorized, provided that the owner-operator complies with
the construction and use rules shown below. Commercial WESs are not permitted,
unless authorized by a specific ordinance.
      B.   Business Zoning Districts. Residential WESs and non-commercial WESs
are authorized, provided that the owner-operator complies with the construction
and use rules shown below. Commercial WESs are not permitted.
      C.   Industrial Zoning District. Residential WESs and non-commercial WESs
are authorized, provided that the owner-operator complies with the construction
and use rules shown below. Commercial WESs are not permitted, unless authorized
by a specific ordinance.
   2.   Construction and Use.
      A.   Accessory Use. All WESs are considered as accessory structures.
      B.   Lot Size. No residential WESs shall be constructed on a parcel of
real property that measures less than 10,000 square feet in size. No roof-
mounted residential WESs shall be constructed on a parcel of real property that
measures less than 8,000 square feet in size. No non-commercial WES shall be
constructed on a parcel of real property measuring less than 10 acres in size.
      C.   Setback Rules. The area regulations contained in the Zoning
Regulations, regarding lot area, front yard, side yard, and rear yard, shall
apply to the location of WESs. In addition, no part of the WES structures,
including any guy wire anchors, may extend closer than 25 feet to the real
property boundaries of the installation site. The WES towers may be no closer
to the real property line than 1.1 times the total height of the WES. Non-
commercial WESs shall meet a minimum setback of 300 feet from the nearest
residential zoning district boundary.
      D.   Other than a roof-mounted residential WES, a wind energy system
shall be located entirely in the rear yard.
      E.   No part of a wind energy system shall be located within or over
drainage, utility, or other established easements.
      F.   Clearance of Blades. No portion of any WES rotor blades shall extend
within 30 feet of the ground. No blades may extend over streets, alleys,
parking areas, driveways, or sidewalks.
      G.   Fall-Zone Clearance. No dwelling structure shall be located within
the fall zone of any WES. Other accessory structures may be located within 75
percent of the designated fall zone of the WES.
      H.   Sound. No WES shall be operated if it can be heard by human beings
at a distance of more than 100 feet.
      I.   Approved WESs. All WESs that are constructed and used must be of a
type approved by the American Wind Energy Association or the U.S. Department of
Energy.
      J.   Electrical Components. Construction and maintenance of the
electrical components of the WES shall conform to the requirements of the
National Electric Code. All wind energy conversion systems shall be equipped
with manual and automatic overspeed controls to limit the blade rotation speed
to within the design limits of the wind energy conversion system.
      K.   Tower Configuration. Any WES tower under 50 feet in total system
height may have a monopole, guyed wire, or lattice design for support. All WES
towers with a total system height of 50 feet shall use a monopole design.
      L.   Total System Height. Residential WESs shall have a total system
height of no greater than 50 feet. Non-commercial WESs shall have a maximum
total system height of 100 feet. Roof-mounted Residential WESs shall not
protrude more than 10 feet above the peak roof height to which it is attached
and shall not have a maximum total system height of 45 feet.
      M.   Color and Finish. All WES surface finishes shall be matte or non-
reflective.
      N.   Lighting. Lighting intensity and frequency of strobe shall adhere
to, but not exceed, requirements established by the FAA permits and
regulations. Red strobe lights are preferred for nighttime illumination to
reduce impacts on migrating birds. Red pulsating incandescent lights should be
avoided.
      O.   Signs. One sign, no larger than four square feet, shall be posted at
the base of each tower. The sign shall include a notice of no trespassing, a
warning of high voltage, and the phone number of the owner-operator to call in
case of emergency.
      P.   Climbing Apparatus. All climbing apparatus shall begin at least 12
feet above ground level, and the tower must be designed to prevent climbing
within the first 12 feet.
      Q.   Fencing. To limit access to the tower, a fence six feet in height
shall be placed around non-commercial WESs. Residential WESs are not required
to be fenced.
      R.   Maintenance. All WESs shall be maintained in good, safe-working
order.
      S.   The property owner of any wind energy system shall maintain such
system in a safe and attractive manner, including replacement of defective
parts, painting, cleaning, and other acts that may be required for the
maintenance and upkeep of the function and appearance of such a system. The
owner shall also maintain the ground upon which the system is located in an
orderly manner, such that is free from debris, tall grass, and weeds, and any
structures remain in good appearance.
      T.   Insurance. The owner-operator of a WES shall maintain casualty and
liability insurance in amounts of not less than $1,000,000.00 for any one
accident with limits of $1,000,000.00 for property damage.
      U.   Removal. When a WES ceases to be used at least for 120 days in a
calendar year, for any reason other than maintenance, it shall constitute a
public nuisance. In such event the WES and its base shall be dismantled and
removed from the real property site within six months of the last day that the
WES was used.
CHAPTER 153
COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
153.01 Purpose and General Policy       153.09 Application Process
153.02 Definitions                      153.10 Noise and Emission Standards
153.03 Local Regulation and Compliance  153.11 Engineering and Inspection Fees
with the Telecommunications Act of 1996
153.04 Lease Required                   153.12 Placement of Facilities and
                                        Related Lease Fees
153.05 Fee Required                     153.13 Abandonment
153.06 Limit on Term                    153.14 Termination
153.07 Priorities                       153.15 Home Rule
153.08 Placement Requirements           153.16 New Technologies
153.01   PURPOSE AND GENERAL POLICY.
The Council finds that in order to ensure public safety and provide efficient
delivery of services by the City and others wishing to utilize wireless
communication technologies, in order to protect public and private investments,
ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the population, to provide for the
regulation and administration of the orderly location of antenna arrays and
towers and to secure the rights of the City to a return on its investment on
public property, it is necessary for the City to establish uniform rules and
policies.
153.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Antenna” means a device, dish, or array used to transmit or receive
telecommunications signals.
   2.   “Communications tower” means a tower, pole, or similar structure which
supports a telecommunications antenna operated for commercial purposes above
ground in a fixed location, free standing, guyed, or on a building.
   3.   “Height” means the distance from the base of the tower to the top of
the structure.
   4.   “Telecommunications” means the transmission, between or among points
specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in
the form or content of the information as sent and received.
153.03   LOCAL REGULATION AND COMPLIANCE WITH THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACT OF
1996.
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 prohibits the City from establishing
policies that discriminate against one or a group of providers in favor of
another or another group of providers of potential providers. The following
objectives shall be applied consistently to all telecommunications providers
that request a location on City property for their communications towers and
antennas.
   1.   To minimize the overall number of towers located in the City, providers
may be required to participate in collocation agreements.
   2.   To ensure that new towers will be safe and blend into their
environment, providers will propose designs consistent with site
characteristics.
   3.   To minimize placement of wireless equipment in highly populated areas,
residential locations will be considered as a last resort.
   4.   To assure revenues from site leases of City owned and controlled land
and structures reflects fair compensation for use of City property and
administration of this chapter.
153.04   LEASE REQUIRED.
No person or other entity shall use any public property without first obtaining
a lease from the City.
153.05   FEE REQUIRED.
No lease for the use of public property shall be granted without requiring the
lessee thereof to pay a reasonable and competitively neutral fee for the use of
that public property.
153.06   LIMIT ON TERM.
No lease for the use of public property shall be granted for a term of more
than 25 years.
153.07   PRIORITIES.
Priority of the use of City-owned land for communications antennas and towers
will be given to the following entities in descending order of priority:
   1.   All functions of the City.
   2.   Public safety agencies that are not a part of the City, including law
enforcement, fire, and ambulance services, and private entities with a public
safety agreement with the City.
   3.   Other governmental agencies for uses which are not related to public
safety.
   4.   Entities providing licensed commercial communications services,
including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized
mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and
similar services that are marketed to the general public for business or
personal use.
153.08   PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
The placement of communications antennas or towers on City owned property must
comply with the following requirements:
   1.   The antenna or tower will not interfere with the purpose for which the
City-owned property is intended.
   2.   The antenna or tower will have no adverse impact on surrounding private
property.
   3.   The applicant will produce proof of adequate liability insurance for
potential damage antennas or towers could reasonably cause to City property and
facilities and commit to a lease agreement which includes equitable
compensation for the use of public land and other necessary provisions and
safeguards. The fee shall be established by the Council and shall reflect
potential expenses and risks to the City and other appropriate factors. (See
Section
153.12)
   4.   The applicant will submit a letter of credit, performance bond, or
other security acceptable to the City to cover the cost of antenna or tower
removal.
   5.   The antennas or towers will not interfere with other uses which have a
higher priority as discussed in the paragraphs above.
   6.   Upon reasonable notice, the antennas or towers may be required to be
removed at the user’s expense.
   7.   The applicant must reimburse the City for any costs which it incurs
because of the presence of the applicant’s antenna or tower.
   8.   The user must obtain all necessary land use approval.
   9.   The applicant will cooperate with the City’s objective to promote
collocations and thus limit the number of separate antenna sites requested.
153.09   APPLICATION PROCESS.
All applicants who wish to locate a communications antenna or tower on City-
owned or private property must submit to the Building Official a completed
application accompanied by a fee of $100.00 and the following documents, if
applicable:
   1.   One copy of typical specifications for proposed structures and
antennas, including description of design characteristics and material.
   2.   A site plan drawn to scale showing property lines, tower location,
tower height, guy wires and anchors, existing structures, photographs, or
elevation drawings depicting typical design of proposed structures, parking,
fences, landscape plan, and existing land uses on adjacent property. A site
plan is not required if the antenna is to be mounted on an approved existing
structure.
   3.   A current map or update for an existing map on file showing locations
of applicant’s antennas, facilities, existing towers, and proposed towers which
are reflected in public records, serving any property within the City.
   4.   A report from a structural engineer showing the tower antenna capacity
by type and number, and a certification that the tower is designed to withstand
winds in accordance with ANS/EIA/TIA 222, latest revision, standards.
   5.   Identification of the owners of all antennas and equipment to be
located on the site.
   6.   Written authorization from the site owner for the application.
   7.   Evidence that a valid Federal Communications Commission (FCC) license
for the proposed activity has been issued.
   8.   A line of sight analysis showing the potential visual and aesthetic
impacts on adjacent residential districts.
   9.   A written agreement to remove the tower and/or antenna within 180 days
after cessation of use.
   10.   Additional information, as required, to determine that all applicable
zoning regulations are met.
   11.   Any communications facilities located on the roof of an antenna
support structure must be set back at least one foot from the edge of the roof
of the structure. This setback requirement shall not apply to:
      A.   Communications facilities located above the roof of the structure if
the facilities are appropriately screened from view through the use of panels,
walls, fences, or other screening techniques approved by the City.
      B.   Camouflage antennas that are mounted to the exterior of the antenna
support structures below the roof, but do not protrude more than 24 inches from
the side of such an antenna support structure.
   12.   Applicant must also show evidence that all of the following conditions
which are applicable are met:
      A.   Applicant must show that the proposed communications tower, antenna,
or accessory structure will be placed in a reasonably available location that
will minimize the visual impact on the surrounding area and allow the facility
to function in accordance with minimum standards imposed by applicable
communications regulations and applicant’s technical design requirements.
      B.   Applicant must show that a proposed antenna and equipment cannot be
accommodated and function as required by applicable regulations and applicant’s
technical design requirement without unreasonable modifications on any existing
structure or tower under the control of the applicant.
      C.   Permits shall not be allowed in residential districts.
      D.   Prior to consideration of a permit for location on private property
which must be acquired, applicant must show that available publicly-owned
sites, and available privately-owned sites occupied by a compatible use, are
unsuitable for operation of the facility under applicable communications
regulations and applicant’s technical design requirements.
      E.   Applicant must provide the names, addresses, and telephone numbers
of all owners of other towers or useable antenna support structures within a
one-half mile radius of the proposed new tower site, including City-owned
property, and written documentation that the applicant:
         (1)   Made diligent but unsuccessful efforts for a minimum of 40 days
prior to the submission of the application to install or collocate the
applicant’s telecommunications facilities on towers or useable antenna support
structures owned by the City and other persons located within a one-half mile
radius of the proposed tower site, or
         (2)   Written technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed
tower or facilities cannot be installed or collocated on another person’s tower
or support structure within a one-half mile radius of the proposed tower and
must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage requirements
of the applicant’s wireless communications system.
      F.   Applicants must show that a new tower is designed to accommodate
additional antenna equal in number to applicant’s present and future
requirements.
      G.   Applicant must show that all applicable health, nuisance, noise,
fire, building, and safety code requirements are met.
      H.   All towers shall be built to local building code requirements. All
towers and communications facilities shall be of camouflage design standards.
Examples of camouflage facilities include, but are not limited to,
architecturally screened roof, roof mounted antennas, antennas integrated into
architectural elements, telecommunications towers designed to blend into the
surrounding environment or to look other than a tower, such as light poles,
power poles and trees. At a minimum, all towers not requiring FAA painting and
markings shall have an exterior finish which is galvanized or painted dull
blue, gray, or black.
      I.   Applicant must show by certificate from a registered engineer that
the proposed facility will contain only equipment meeting FCC rules, and must
file with the Building Official a written indemnification of the municipality
and proof of liability insurance or financial ability to respond to claims up
to $1,000,000.00 in the aggregate which may arise from operation of the
facility during its life, at no cost to the municipality, in form approved by
the City Attorney.
      J.   Land use regulations, visibility, fencing, screening, landscaping,
parking, access, lot size, exterior illumination, sign, storage, and all other
general zoning district regulations except setback and height, shall apply to
the use. Setbacks on all sides shall be a distance equal to the height of the
tower. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) must be notified by the
applicant of any construction or alteration of structures over 200 feet in
height. The following height conditions apply:
         (1)   Agricultural Holding District: Commercial use prohibited.
Noncommercial use limited to three-foot diameter dishes and/or towers not
exceeding 50 feet in height.
         (2)   Residential Districts: Communications towers and antennas shall
not be permitted in Residential Districts. Communication dishes of 36 inches or
less are permitted to be mounted to conforming building in compliance with
Building Code.
         (3)   Commercial Districts: Commercial use prohibited. Noncommercial
use limited to three foot diameter dishes and/or towers not exceeding 50 feet
in height.
         (4)   M-1 Light Industrial District and M-2 Heavy Industrial District:
Freestanding or guyed tower with height not exceeding 360 feet is a permitted
conditional use; height exceeding 360 feet requires special exception.
      K.   A tower must be a minimum distance equal to one and one-half the
height of the tower from all lot lines and from property designated historic or
architecturally significant, unless if collapsible fold-in construction, in
which case the setback from lot lines and property designated historic or
architecturally significant must be one and one quarter the height of the
tower.
All responses to applications for siting of telecommunications towers and
facilities shall be in writing and shall be made within 60 days after all
application materials are received.
153.10   NOISE AND EMISSION STANDARDS.
No equipment shall be operated at towers and telecommunications facilities so
as to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under WAC 173-60,
except during emergencies or periodic routine maintenance which requires the
use of a back-up generator, where the noise standards may be exceeded
temporarily. The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 gives the FCC sole
jurisdiction to regulate radio frequency emissions. Facilities that meet the
FCC standards shall not be conditioned or denied on the basis of emissions
impacts. Applicants for tower sites shall be required to provide information on
the projected power density of the facility and how this meets the FCC
standards.
153.11   ENGINEERING AND INSPECTION FEES.
Engineering fees incurred by the City for review of documents and drawings, and
for inspections of physical improvements, shall be paid by the applicant and
shall be the actual costs of the reviews and inspections to the City.
153.12   PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES AND RELATED LEASE FEES.
The placement and maintenance of communications antennas or towers on City-
owned sites, such as water towers and parks, will be allowed when the following
additional requirements are met.
   1.   The placement of communications towers or antennas on water towers will
be allowed only when the following requirements are met.
      A.   The applicant must have written approval from the Director of Public
Works each time access to the facility is desired. This will minimize the risk
of contamination to the water supply.
      B.   There is sufficient room on the structure and/or the grounds to
accommodate the applicant’s facility.
      C.   The presence of the facility will not increase the water tower
maintenance cost to the City.
      D.   The presence of the facility will not be harmful to the health or
safety of the workers maintaining the water tower.
      E.   The annual fee for placing facilities on a City water tower shall be
negotiated and approved by the Council.
   2.   Parks. The presence of certain communications antennas or tower
represents a potential conflict with the purpose of certain City-owned parks
and recreational facilities. Towers shall be prohibited in City public parks.
153.13   ABANDONMENT.
In the event the use of any communications tower has been discontinued for a
period of 180 consecutive days, the tower shall be deemed to be abandoned.
Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the City
Administrator who shall have the right to request documentation or affidavits
from the communications tower owner or operator regarding the issue of tower
usage. Upon such abandonment, the owner or operator of the tower shall have an
additional 180 days within which to:
   1.   Reactivate the use of the tower or transfer the tower to another owner
or operator who makes actual use of the tower.
   2.   Dismantle and remove the tower. At the earliest, 181 days from the date
of abandonment, without reactivating or upon completion of dismantling and
removal, any special exception or variance approval for the tower shall
automatically expire.
   3.   A user violates any of the standards in this chapter or the conditions
attached to the City’s lease agreement.
153.14   TERMINATION.
Before taking action, the City will provide notice to the user of the intended
termination and the reasons for it, and provide an opportunity for a hearing
before the Council regarding the proposed action. This procedure need not be
followed in emergency situations.
153.15   HOME RULE.
This chapter is intended to be and shall be construed as consistent with the
reservation of local authority contained in the 25th Amendment to the State
Constitution granting cities Home Rule powers. To such end, any limitation on
the power of the City contained herein is to be strictly construed and the City
reserves to itself the right to exercise all power and authority to regulate
and control its local affairs and all ordinances and regulations of the City
shall be enforced against the holders of any lease.
153.16   NEW TECHNOLOGIES.
Should, within the term of any lease, developments within the field for which
the grant was made to the holder of the lease present the opportunity to the
holder of the lease to be more effective, efficient, and economical through the
use of a substance or material other than those for which the lease was
originally made, the holder of the lease may petition the Council which, with
such requirements or limitations as it deems necessary to protect public
health, safety and welfare, may allow the use of such substances under the
terms and conditions of the lease.
CHAPTER 154
RIGHTS-OF-WAY
154.01 Purpose and Rule of Interpretation   154.09 City Construction and Paving
154.02 Franchise, License, or Lease         154.10 Design Notice to City
Required
154.03 Fees Required                        154.11 Above-Ground Cables, Wires,
                                            Conduits, and Poles
154.04 Limit on Term                        154.12 Assignment
154.05 Placement of Facilities              154.13 Forfeiture
154.06 Indemnification and Bond             154.14 Application
154.07 Regulation by the City               154.15 Home Rule
154.08 Construction and Excavation by       154.16 New Technologies
Holders of Franchises or Licenses or Leases
154.01   PURPOSE AND RULE OF INTERPRETATION.
The Council finds it is necessary for the City to establish uniform rules and
controls to ensure public safety and provide efficient delivery of services by
the City and others wishing to utilize streets and other public property for
the delivery of utility or other services, in order to protect public and
private investment, ensure orderly use of public property and ensure the
health, safety, and welfare of the population, to provide for the regulation
and administration of the public streets and other public property and secure
the rights of the City to a return on its investment in public property. This
chapter is to be interpreted in light of these findings for the benefit of the
public and users of the streets and other public property.
154.02   FRANCHISE, LICENSE, OR LEASE REQUIRED.
No person or other entity shall use the public right-of-way or other public
property without first obtaining a franchise, license, or lease from the City.
The City shall not enter into or issue any franchise, license, or lease that
grants exclusive rights. An application for a license or lease shall be filed
with the Clerk, copy to Director of Public Works, and shall include as a
minimum the following information: the name, address, and telephone number of
the applicant; the name, address, and telephone number of a person whom the
City may notify or contact at any time concerning the license or lease; an
engineering site plan showing the proposed location of the facilities including
any manholes, the size, type, and proposed depth of any conduit or other
enclosures; and any additional information the City may require. All licenses
or leases required by this section shall be granted by the Council.
154.03   FEES REQUIRED.
No franchise, license, or lease for the use of public right-of-way or other
public property shall be granted without requiring the grantee thereof to pay a
reasonable and competitively neutral fee for the use of public right-of-way or
other public property. The fees will be as follows:
   1.   All new franchises shall be assessed a franchise fee of up to five
percent of the gross receipts of customers within the City limits.
   2.   Additionally, any person or other entity shall pay a fee and obtain a
permit in accordance with the provisions of Section
135.09 every time their facility requires excavation in the right-of-way. This
fee will cover costs for street degradation and replacement, inspection, and
obstruction and routing of pedestrian and vehicle traffic. All or part of this
fee may be waived if work is done in conjunction with City construction.
154.04   LIMIT ON TERM.
No franchise, license, or lease for use of the public right-of-way or other
public property shall be granted for a term to exceed 25 years.
154.05   PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES.
The facilities, fixtures, and equipment of the distribution, transmission, or
sale of any utility services, or services provided under license or lease or
easement, shall be placed and maintained so as not to unnecessarily or
unreasonably interfere with the travel on the streets, avenues, alleys,
bridges, and public places in the City, nor shall such facilities, fixtures,
and equipment interfere with the proper use of the same including, but not
limited to ordinary drainage, or the functioning of the sewers, underground
pipe, or other property of the City. In the event that facilities, fixtures,
and equipment of any person or other entity located within a public right-of-
way must be relocated because of paving, road construction, or road
reconstruction, sewer construction, or sewer reconstruction, or the
construction or reconstruction of public drainage systems or similar public
works or the construction or reconstruction of the facilities of any City owned
utility, such relocation, at the written request of the City, shall be
completed by the owner of such facilities at the owner’s cost. The City shall,
upon request of any person or other entity holding a franchise, license, or
lease, review any plans for the construction of facilities, fixtures, and
equipment within the public right-of-way and advise the person or other entity
of any conflict such construction may have with planned or anticipated public
improvements, but failure of the City to so advise such person or other entity
will not relieve the owner of such facilities of its obligations under this
chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may require placement of
equipment or facilities belonging to any holder of a franchise, license, or
lease be limited to locations designated by the Public Works Director if such
limitation is deemed by the Public Works Director to be necessary to protect
the integrity of use of present and future users of the public right-of-way or
other public property.
154.06   INDEMNIFICATION AND BOND.
   1.   The holder of any franchise, license, or lease shall indemnify and hold
the City harmless at all times during the term of the franchise, license, or
lease from and against all claims for injury or damage to any person or
property, including payments under workers’ compensation laws, caused by the
construction, erection, operation, or maintenance of its facilities, fixtures,
or equipment, or the negligence of its contractors or its employees. In case of
any suit or action at law being commenced against the City, upon any claim for
damage arising out of any loss, injury, or damage claimed to have been caused
by any installation, improvement, obstruction, or excavation made or left in,
under, or upon such a street, sidewalk, alley, or public place by the holder of
a franchise, license, or lease, its agents, contractors, or employees, upon
being notified in writing by the City of such action or proceeding, the holder
of said franchise, license, or lease shall appear and make proper defense
thereto at the expense of the holder of the franchise, license, or lease; and
if any judgement or decree shall in any such case be rendered against the City
therein, the holder of said franchise, license, or lease shall assume, pay, and
satisfy such judgement or decree, with the cost thereof.
   2.   Immediately upon issuance of the franchise, license, or lease, the
holder of the franchise, license, or lease shall purchase general liability
insurance. The amount of insurance shall be a minimum of $1,000,000.00 with a
maximum deductible of $5,000.00. The holder of the franchise, license, or lease
shall file with the Clerk a certificate of insurance which clearly discloses on
its face coverage in conformity with these requirements. Upon request of the
City, the holder of the franchise, license, or lease shall submit certified
copy of the policy.
154.07   REGULATION BY THE CITY.
The City reserves the right to make reasonable general regulations for the use
of streets and other public property which, unless otherwise specifically
provided, shall apply to any holder of a franchise, license, or lease.
154.08   CONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION BY HOLDERS OF FRANCHISES OR LICENSES OR
LEASES.
    1.   A written permit will be obtained from the Clerk whenever it becomes
necessary for the holder of any franchise, license, or lease to excavate in
streets or public grounds of the City. Such permits shall state a particular
part or point of the street where the excavation is to be made and the length
of time in which such permit shall authorize the work to be done. An exception
to a requirement for a permit shall be made in cases of emergency involving
public safety, in which case a permit will be obtained at the earliest
opportunity after the work has started.
   2.   In making excavations in the streets, the holder of any franchise,
license, or lease shall proceed with such work as to cause the least possible
inconvenience to the public. The holder of any franchise, license, or lease
shall properly protect, according to safety standards generally accepted at the
time of placement, as may be determined from time to time by the Public Works
Director, all excavations, and obstructions by proper placement of shoring,
surface plates, barricades, warning lights, and such other or additional
devices as circumstances may warrant. If, in the opinion of the Public Works
Director, such excavation or obstruction is not properly and safely protected,
the Public Works Director shall notify such holder of a franchise, license, or
lease who shall immediately comply with such reasonable instructions. All
contractor work and operations shall be in compliance with Occupational Health
and Safety Administration (OSHA) standards.
   3.   Immediately after use, any trenches for excavations which the holder of
a franchise, license, or lease has opened shall be filled. However, no trench
or excavation in the streets shall be filled or covered without giving the City
the right to inspect the same. All backfilling in streets will be according to
City specifications. Temporary street surfacing will be placed in such
excavation as soon as the same has been backfilled. Pavements, sidewalks,
curbs, and gutter or other portions of streets and public places opened,
disturbed, or damaged shall be promptly restored and replaced with like
materials at the expense of the holder of a franchise, license, or lease and
left in as good a condition as before the opening, disturbance, or damage
occurred. In the event like replacement materials are not available, the holder
of the franchise, license, or lease shall notify the Public Works Director who
must approve the use of any alternate materials. In the event that the holder
of a franchise, license, or lease fails to comply with the provision of this
section, after having been given reasonable notice, the City may do such works
as may be needed to properly repair such pavements, sidewalks, curbs, and
gutters or other portions of streets and public places and the cost thereof
shall be repaid to the City by the holder of the franchise, license, or lease.
In cases where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of street paving or
sidewalks but causes greater disturbance than to just the area cut, rather than
replace only the area cut, the holder of a franchise, license, or lease shall
replace that area as may be ordered by the Public Works Director, which in no
event shall exceed the panel or panels disturbed.
154.09   CITY CONSTRUCTION AND PAVING.
    1.   Whenever the City shall pave or repave any street or shall change the
grade line of any street or public place or shall construct or reconstruct any
conduit, water main service or water connection, sewer, or other City-owned
public works or City owned utility, it shall be the duty of the holder of any
franchise, license, or lease, when so ordered by the City, to relocate its
service lines and other property in the streets or other public places at its
own expense so as to conform to the established grade or line of such street or
public place and so as not to interfere with the public improvements so
constructed or reconstructed. In the case of other public improvements
including, but not limited to, urban renewal projects, the City may require the
holder of a franchise, license, or lease to relocate its poles, service lines
and appurtenances in the streets at the owner's expense.
   2.   The City may at its discretion assign personnel for inspection of
excavation and related work being performed by the holder of a franchise,
license, or lease. Should the holder of the franchise, license, or lease fail
or refuse to do and perform the things provided in this section, the City may,
after reasonable notice, perform the work and charge the expense thereof to the
holder of the franchise, license, or lease and the holder of the franchise,
license, or lease shall promptly pay such charges.
154.10   DESIGN NOTICE TO CITY.
The holder of a franchise, license, or lease shall promptly, upon request,
furnish the Public Works Director, a detailed map, or maps of its distribution
system both within the City limits and the area within two miles surrounding
the City. The holder of a franchise, license, or lease shall thereafter update
the map or maps at least annually or upon request, showing all subsequent
additions or deletions to the distribution system. Prior to any excavation by
the City or its agents, a representative must contact the holder of any
franchise, license, or lease regarding current information on the location of
underground lines or facilities in the area concerned. The obligation to
contact the holder of franchise, license, or lease under this section shall be
satisfied if contact is made with a corporation pursuant to Chapter 480 of the
Code of Iowa, or an entity with a similar function utilized by both the City
and the company, currently the Iowa One Call System.
154.11   ABOVE-GROUND CABLES, WIRES, CONDUITS, AND POLES.
All cables, wires, and conduits shall be placed underground except where above-
ground connection to buildings or other locations above-ground is reasonably
necessary. Such above-ground connection shall be by means of poles located, as
far as reasonably practical, within alleys. No such poles shall be installed or
erected until the Public Works Director has approved the proposed location,
construction, and pole heights.
154.12   ASSIGNMENT.
No sale or assignment of any franchise, license, or lease of the use of the
public right-of-way or other public property shall be effective until it is
approved by the Council and until the holder thereof has filed in the office of
the Clerk written notice of the proposed sale, transfer, disposition
assignment, such notice to clearly summarize the proposed procedure and the
terms and conditions thereof. Such approval by the City shall not be
unreasonably withheld. The proposed vendee, assignee, or lessee shall similarly
file an instrument, duly executed, reciting such proposal, accepting the terms
of the franchise, license, or lease and agreeing to perform all of the
conditions thereof.
154.13   FORFEITURE.
The violation of any material portion of a franchise, license, or lease by the
holder thereof or its successors or assigns, or its failure promptly to perform
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be cause for forfeiture of said
franchise, license, or lease and the termination of all rights thereunder. Such
forfeiture shall be accomplished by ordinance of the City after written notice
to the holder thereof and a continuation of the violation, failure, or default
specified on the notice for at least 30 days from the date the notice was
served.
154.14   APPLICATION.
This chapter shall apply to all franchises, licenses, or leases and. easements
granted by the City including all existing franchises, licenses, or leases and
easements.
154.15   HOME RULE.
This chapter is intended to be and shall be construed as consistent with the
reservation of local authority contained in the 25th Amendment to the State
Constitution granting cities Home Rule powers. To such end any limitation on
the power of the City contained herein is to be strictly construed and the City
reserves to itself the right to exercise all power and authority to regulate
and control its local affairs and all ordinances and regulations of the City
shall be enforceable against the holder of any franchise, license, or lease.
154.16   NEW TECHNOLOGIES.
Should, within the term of any franchise, license, or lease, developments
within the field for which the grant was made offer to the holder thereof the
opportunity to effectively, efficiently and economically serve its customers
through use of a substance or material other than those for which the grant was
originally made, then the holder of the franchise, license, or lease may
petition the Council which, with such requirements or limitation as it deems
necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare, may allow the use of
such substances under the terms and conditions of the franchise, license, or
lease.
CHAPTER 155
BUILDING CODE
 
155.01 Purpose                      155.04 Permits and Fees
155.02 Adoption                     155.05 Site Drainage
155.03 Amendments and Modifications 155.06 Penalties
155.01   PURPOSE.
An ordinance of the City adopting the 2015 edition of the International
Building Code, including the referenced 2015 International Fire Code, 2015
International Existing Building Code, and the 2015 International Residential
Building Code, 2012 International Energy Conservation Code as adopted by the
State, and 2015 International Fuel Gas Code, regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such
structures in the City providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefore.
155.02   ADOPTION.
That a certain document is on file in the office of the Building Official of
the City being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2015
edition, including the referenced 2015 International Fire Code, 2015
International Existing Building Code, and the 2015 International Residential
Building Code, 2012 International Energy Conservation Code as adopted by the
State, 2015 International Fuel Gas Code, and Appendix Chapter J Grading (see
International Residential Code), as published by the International Code
Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City, in the
State, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings, and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; and
the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use,
and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said Building Code
on file in the office of the City are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions,
insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 155.03 of
this chapter.
155.03   AMENDMENTS AND MODIFICATIONS.
The following sections are hereby revised:
   1.   Section 101.1. Insert: City of DeWitt
   2.   Delete R105.2(1) in its entirety and replace with the following: R105.2
(1) One-story detached accessory structures, provided the floor area does not
exceed 120 square feet.
   3.   Delete R105.2(5) and replace with the following: R105.2(5) Concrete
flatwork on private property.
   4.   Delete R105.2(7) in its entirety and replace with the following: R105.2
(7) Prefabricated or constructed swimming pools that are less than 18 inches of
water depth.
   5.   Delete R105.2(10) in its entirety.
   6.   Section 301.2-1 insert the following:
 
Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria
       Wind Design                               Subject to Damage From
Ground                   Special Wind-  Seismic             Frost           Winter              Flood   Air      Mean Annual
Snow   Speed Topographic Wind    borne  Design   Weathering Line  Termite   Design Ice Barrier  Hazards Freezing Temp
Load   (mph) Effects     Region  Debris Category            Depth           Temp   Underlayment         Index
                                 Zone                                              Required
Same   115   Yes         No      No     A        Severe     42” Moderate/ -4                  Yes     FIRM     2000 50.5°F
                                                                  Heavy
7.   Delete Table R403.1 and all references to and replace with the following
Table R403.1:
 
                                                                  Minimum Depth
                                                                  of Foundation
                                                                  Below Natural
Number of      Thickness of Foundation                            Surface of
Floors         Walls (inches)          Minimum Width Thickness of Ground or
Supported by                           Footings      Footing      Finish Grade
the Foundation                         (inches)      (inches)     (Whichever is
                                                                  Lower)
                                                                  (inches)
               Unit
               Concrete Masonry
1              8        8              16            8            42
2              8        8              16            8            42
3              10       10             18            12           42
      A.   Foundations may support a roof in addition to the stipulated number
of floors. Foundations supporting roofs only shall be as required for
supporting one floor. Footings shall be continuous and contain a minimum of two
one-half inch reinforcement bars, and have a minimum compressive strength of
2,500 pounds per square inch at 28 days.
      B.   A one-story wood frame building used for private garage, detached
accessory to a single-family dwelling and not over 600 square feet in floor
area may be constructed on a floating slab-on-grade provided the following
conditions are met: A concrete perimeter grade-beam, 12 inches deep and 12
inches wide and reinforced with two one-half inch reinforcement bars shall be
installed to support the exterior walls. A minimum four-inch thick concrete
floor slab reinforced with wire mesh or fiber mesh shall be installed within
the perimeter beam and shall be formed to allow a continuous pour consisting of
the required grade beam and floor. (See exhibit A).
Exhibit A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a3969280cde48ae71605d8fb9fd4bcb31dc2a2ee/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3224.png]
      C.   Buildings or portions of buildings containing mechanical
installations and connected to underground utilities shall be supported on a
continuous, frost-free foundation capable of resisting the movement of the
slab-on-grade.
      D.   Cast-in-place concrete foundation walls shall be concrete having a
minimum compressive strength of 28 days of not less than 3,000 pounds per
square inch. In addition, the following shall apply:
         (1)   The minimum thickness of a wall shall be seven and one-half
inches.
         (2)   Walls shall be reinforced with no less than three half-inch
diameter deformed ASTM A615 grade 40 steel bars placed horizontally at the
center of the wall, with one bar located near the top, one bar located near the
bottom, and one bar located near mid-height of the wall.
      E.   Footings Requirements for Decks Without Roof Support. All decks
shall have a minimum footing size of 12 inches in diameter and 42 inches in
depth.
      F.   Footing Requirements for Covered Deck and Room Additions. All
covered decks, screened porches, three-season rooms, four-season rooms, shall
have one of the following:
         (1)   Pier footings designed by a professional.
         (2)   12-inch wide trench footings 42 inches in depth.
         (3)   Spread footings 42 inches in depth with a minimum eight inch
masonry wall or concrete foundation wall.
   8.   Amend 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code to define swimming
pool as any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that
contains water over 18 inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground, and
on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas.
   9.   Delete: 313.1.1 in its entirety and replace with: An automatic
residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses and other
multi-unit residential complexes with 5 or more units.
   10.   Delete: 313.2 in its entirety.
155.04   PERMITS AND FEES.
All permits and fees pertaining to the Building Code shall be set by the
Council by separate resolutions or Council approved policies.
155.05   SITE DRAINAGE.
Land development projects larger than one single-family house shall require the
developer to provide engineered site plans in sufficient detail to ensure that
surface water drainage onto downstream properties will be no greater than prior
to development. For land development projects of a single-family home or
smaller, the developer must provide site plan drawings in sufficient detail to
ensure that surface water drainage onto downstream properties will be no
greater than prior to development.
155.06   PENALTIES.
A violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as
misdemeanors are prosecuted and, upon conviction, the violator shall be
punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal
prosecution, the City shall have the power to issue a civil infraction for any
violation of this chapter and shall be entitled to any fines, injunctive
relief, and other remedies allowed the City under the civil infraction
provisions of the Code of Iowa. It is specifically declared that the failure of
a developer, individual, or entity to comply with the provisions of this
chapter or the Code of Iowa shall be a nuisance subject to all fines and
remedies provided in this Code.
CHAPTER 156
MECHANICAL CODE
 
156.01 Purpose                               156.07 Issuance of Permits
156.02 Adoption of the 2021 Edition of the   156.08 Homeowner
International Mechanical Code
156.03 Amendments, Modifications, Additions, 156.09 Covering or Concealing Work
and Deletions
156.04 Validity                              156.10 Removal of Covering
156.05 Permits and Fees                      156.11 Correcting Defective Work
156.06 Permits Required                      156.12 Penalties
156.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the chapter is to provide for protection of the safety and
welfare of the general public and owners and occupants of industrial,
commercial, and residential buildings within the City.
156.02   ADOPTION OF THE 2021 EDITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
That certain documents which are on file and are open for inspection of the
public in the office of the Building Official of the City, being marked and
designated as International Mechanical Code as published by the International
Code Council, Inc. and adopted by the State be and is hereby adopted as the
Code of the City, for regulating the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems in the City;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of such
International Mechanical Code, 2021 Edition, published by the International
Code Council, Inc. on file in the office of the City, are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter.
156.03   AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS.
The following sections are hereby revised:
   1.   Section 108.5. Stop work orders. Change last sentence to read: Any
person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been
served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a simple
misdemeanor.
156.04   VALIDITY.
That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter,
is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Council hereby
declares that it would have passed this ordinance, and each section,
subsection, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, and phrases be declared
unconstitutional.
156.05   PERMITS AND FEES.
All permits and fees pertaining to the Building Code shall be set by the
Council by separate resolutions or Council approved policies.
156.06   PERMITS REQUIRED.
No person shall perform any mechanical work or install mechanical equipment in
or upon any building or property without first securing a permit.
156.07   ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
After proper application on forms provided by the Building Official, permits
shall be issued in the name of the person holding a State contractor’s license.
All applications for mechanical permits shall be signed by a licensed
mechanical contractor or homeowner. A contractor must be licensed by the State
to be issued a permit.
156.08   HOMEOWNER.
Repairs and installations of a minor nature are permitted to be completed by
the homeowner in a single-family dwelling who resides in that dwelling. Such
person(s) shall apply for a permit prior to installation, describe the work to
be done, and satisfy the Building Official as to their ability to competently
perform the work described. The Building Official shall have full authority to
determine the applicant’s capability based upon the above information which
shall become a permanent part of the permit files. The permit holder shall call
for inspection when rough-in work is finished. If, upon inspection, violations
of this code are found, such work must be completed by a mechanical contractor,
bonded, and licensed by the State. If the work passes inspection, the permit
holder may continue. When the work is completed, the permit holder must call
for a final inspection. All applicable inspection fees must be paid.
156.09   COVERING OR CONCEALING WORK.
No mechanical work for which a permit is required shall be concealed in any
manner from access or sight until the work has been inspected and approved by
the Building Official.
156.10   REMOVAL OF COVERING.
The Building Official has the authority to remove or cause the removal of
lathe, plaster, boarding, or other obstruction which may prevent the proper
inspection of mechanical installations or equipment.
156.11   CORRECTING DEFECTIVE WORK.
When a mechanical contractor is notified that defects exist in their work, said
contractor shall make corrections within 30 days after notification. If not so
made, the contractor shall not be issued any other permits until defects are
corrected, and approval given by Building Official.
156.12   PENALTIES.
A violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as
misdemeanors are prosecuted and, upon conviction, the violator shall be
punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal
prosecution, the City shall have the power to issue a civil infraction for any
violation of this chapter and shall be entitled to any fines, injunctive
relief, and other remedies allowed the City under the civil infraction
provisions of the Code of Iowa. It is specifically declared that the failure of
a developer, individual, or entity to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, or the Code of Iowa, shall be a nuisance subject to all fines and
remedies provided in this Code.
CHAPTER 157
ELECTRICAL CODE
 
157.01 Purpose                               157.07 Issuance of Permits
157.02 Adoption of the 2020 Edition of the   157.08 Homeowner
National Electrical Code
157.03 Amendments, Modifications, Additions, 157.09 Covering or Concealing Work
and Deletions
157.04 Validity                              157.10 Removal of Covering
157.05 Permits and Fees                      157.11 Correcting Defective Work
157.06 Permits Required                      157.12 Penalties
 
157.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the chapter is to provide for protection of the safety and
welfare of the general public, and owners and occupants of industrial,
commercial, and residential buildings within the City.
157.02   ADOPTION OF THE 2020 EDITION OF THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.
That certain documents which are on file and are open for inspection of the
public in the office of the Building Official of the City, being marked and
designated as National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire
Protection Association, Inc. and as amended and adopted by the State, be and is
hereby adopted as the Code of the City, for regulating the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance of
electrical systems in the City; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions, and terms of such National Electrical Code, 2020
Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, Inc. on file in
the office of the City, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof
as if fully set out in this chapter.
157.03   AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS.
The following sections are hereby revised:
   1.   Section 108.5. Stop work orders. Change last sentence to read: Any
person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been
served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a simple
misdemeanor.
157.04   VALIDITY.
That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter,
is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Council hereby
declares that it would have passed this ordinance, and each section,
subsection, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, and phrases be declared
unconstitutional.
157.05   PERMITS AND FEES.
All permits and fees pertaining to the Building Code shall be set by the
Council by separate resolutions or Council approved policies.
157.06   PERMITS REQUIRED.
No person shall perform any electrical work or install electrical equipment in
or upon any building or property without first securing a permit. An electrical
permit is not required for the following installations or alterations:
   1.   Portable motors or other portable appliances energized by means of a
cord or cable having an attachment plug end to be connected to an approved
receptacle when that cord or cable is permitted by the electrical code.
   2.   Repair or replacement of current carrying parts of any switch,
contactor, or control device.
   3.   Temporary decorative lighting.
   4.   Repair or replacement of fixed motors, transformers, or fixed approved
appliances of the same type and rating in the same location.
   5.   Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not the outlets
thereof.
   6.   Repair or replacement of any overcurrent device of the required
capacity in the same location. (breakers)
   7.   Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same size
and capacity for signs or gas tube systems.
   8.   Removal of electrical wiring.
   9.   Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable experimental
laboratories.
   10.   Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus, or equipment
operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supply.
   11.   Low energy power, control, and signal circuits of classes II and III
as defined in the Electrical Code.
157.07   ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
After proper application on forms provided by the Building Official, permits
shall be issued in the name of the person holding a State contractor’s license.
All applications for electrical permits shall be signed by a licensed
electrical contractor or homeowner. A contractor must be licensed by the State
to be issued a permit.
157.08   HOMEOWNER.
Wiring repairs and installation of a minor nature are permitted by the
homeowner in a single-family dwelling who resides in that dwelling. Such person
(s) shall apply for a permit prior to installation, describe the work to be
done, and satisfy the Electrical Inspector as to their ability to competently
perform the work described. The Electrical Inspector shall have full authority
to determine the applicant’s capability based upon the above information which
shall become a permanent part of the inspector’s files. The permit holder shall
call for inspection when rough-in work is finished. If, upon inspection,
violations of this Code are found, such work must be completed by an electrical
contractor, bonded, and licensed by the State. If the work passes inspection,
the permit holder may continue. When the work is completed, the permit holder
must call for a final inspection. All applicable inspection fees must be paid.
157.09   COVERING OR CONCEALING WORK.
No electrical work for which a permit is required shall be concealed in any
manner from access or sight until the work has been inspected and approved by
the Electrical Inspector.
157.10   REMOVAL OF COVERING.
The Electrical Inspector has the authority to remove or cause the removal of
lathe, plaster, boarding, or other obstruction which may prevent the proper
inspection of wires or electrical equipment.
157.11   CORRECTING DEFECTIVE WORK.
When an electrical contractor is notified that defects exist in their
electrical work, said contractor shall make corrections within 30 days after
notification. If not so made, the electrical contractor shall not be issued any
other permits until defects are corrected, and approval given by Electrical
Inspector.
157.12   PENALTIES.
A violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as
misdemeanors are prosecuted and, upon conviction, the violator shall be
punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal
prosecution, the City shall have the power to issue a civil infraction for any
violation of this chapter and shall be entitled to any fines, injunctive
relief, and other remedies allowed the City under the civil infraction
provisions of the Code of Iowa. It is specifically declared that the failure of
a developer, individual, or entity to comply with the provisions of this
chapter or the Code of Iowa, shall be a nuisance subject to all fines and
remedies provided in this Code.
CHAPTER 158
PLUMBING CODE
 
158.01 Purpose                               158.07 Issuance of Permits
158.02 Adoption of the State Plumbing Code   158.08 Homeowner
158.03 Amendments, Modifications, Additions, 158.09 Covering or Concealing Work
and Deletions
158.04 Validity                              158.10 Removal of Covering
158.05 Permits and Fees                      158.11 Correcting Defective Work
158.06 Permits Required                      158.12 Penalties
158.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the chapter is to provide for protection of the safety and
welfare of the general public and owners and occupants of industrial,
commercial, and residential buildings within the City.
158.02   ADOPTION OF THE STATE PLUMBING CODE.
That certain documents which are on file and are open for inspection of the
public in the office of the Building Official of the City, being marked and
designated as the State Plumbing Code (Uniform Plumbing Code 2021 edition, as
adopted and amended by the State) be and is hereby adopted as the Code of the
City, for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use, or maintenance of plumbing systems in the City; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of such State Plumbing Code,
on file in the office of the City, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter.
158.03   AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS.
The following sections are hereby revised:
   1.   Section 108.5. Stop work orders. Change last sentence to read: Any
person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been
served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a simple
misdemeanor.
158.04   VALIDITY.
That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter,
is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Council hereby
declares that it would have passed this ordinance, and each section,
subsection, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, and phrases be declared
unconstitutional.
158.05   PERMITS AND FEES.
All permits and fees pertaining to the Building Code shall be set by the
Council by separate resolutions or Council approved policies.
158.06   PERMITS REQUIRED.
No person shall perform any plumbing work or install plumbing equipment in or
upon any building or property without first securing a permit. A permit is not
required for the following installations, alterations, or repairs:
   1.   Water lines within a single- or two-family residence.
   2.   Repair or replacement of faucets or valves.
   3.   Cleaning clogged drains or lines.
   4.   Installation of shower water lines.
   5.   Repair of toilets.
   6.   Water softeners.
158.07   ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
After proper application on forms provided by the Building Official, permits
shall be issued in the name of the person holding a State contractor’s license.
All applications for plumbing permits shall be signed by a licensed plumbing
contractor or homeowner. A contractor must be licensed by the State to be
issued a permit.
158.08   HOMEOWNER.
In cases in which an owner-occupant of a single-family dwelling desires to
install plumbing or plumbing equipment, or perform any plumbing work in their
single-family dwelling, said person may make application and perform plumbing
work to the standards adopted within this chapter. A homeowner may obtain a
plumbing permit by paying the proper fee.
158.09   COVERING OR CONCEALING WORK.
No plumbing work for which a permit is required shall be concealed in any
manner from access or sight until the work has been inspected and approved by
the plumbing inspector.
158.10   REMOVAL OF COVERING.
The plumbing inspector has the authority to remove or cause the removal of
lathe, plaster, boarding, or other obstruction which may prevent the proper
inspection of plumbing work.
158.11   CORRECTING DEFECTIVE WORK.
When a plumbing contractor is notified that defects exist in their plumbing
work, said contractor shall make corrections within 30 days after notification.
If not so made, the plumbing contractor shall not be issued any other permits
until defects are corrected, and approval given by the plumbing inspector.
158.12   PENALTIES.
A violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as
misdemeanors are prosecuted and, upon conviction, the violator shall be
punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal
prosecution, the City shall have the power to issue a civil infraction for any
violation of this chapter and shall be entitled to any fines, injunctive
relief, and other remedies allowed the City under the civil infraction
provisions of the Code of Iowa. It is specifically declared that the failure of
a developer, individual, or entity to comply with the provisions of this
chapter or the Code of Iowa, shall be a nuisance subject to all fines and
remedies provided in this Code.
CHAPTER 159
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
 
159.01 Purpose                        159.03 Amendments, Modifications,
                                      Additions, and Deletions
159.02 Adoption of 2015 International
Property Maintenance Code
159.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the chapter is to establish minimum regulations governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings, and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such
structures.
159.02   ADOPTION OF 2015 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
That certain documents which are on file and are open for inspection to the
public in the office of the Building Official of the City, being marked and
designated the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as
the Property Maintenance Code for the City; for the control of buildings and
structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions, and terms of said Property Maintenance Code are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter.
159.03   AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS.
Section 101.1 Insert: City of DeWitt
Section 103.5 Insert: Rental Dwelling Licensing Fee Schedule
Section 112.4 Insert: $50.00 and $200.00
Section 302.4 Insert: Nine inches
Section 304.14 Delete: “during the period from [date] to [date]”
Insert: When occupied.
Section 602.3 Delete: “during the period from [date] to [date]”
Insert: When occupied.
Section 602.4 Delete: “during the period from [date] to [date]”
Insert: When occupied.
   1.   Rental Dwelling Licensing Fee. The Rental Dwelling Licensing Fee shall
be $30.00 per unit paid annually on or before the 1st day of September each
year.
   2.   Delinquent Rental Dwelling Licensing Fee. If the rental dwelling
licensing fee is not paid within 30 days of due date, the licensing fee becomes
delinquent and an additional $25.00 delinquent fee shall be added to the
licensing fee.
   3.   Dwelling Unit Re-inspection Fees. If upon regular rental inspection
violations are noted and a notice of violation is served, there shall be no
charge for the re-inspection if all violations are corrected within the time
allowed. If the violations remain uncorrected at the time of re-inspection,
there shall be a $25.00 fee charged per unit for said re-inspection and for
every re-inspection thereafter.
   4.   Any Additional Regular Rental Unit Inspections. Any additional regular
rental unit inspections (more than one inspection in any two-years) will have
an additional charge of $25.00 per inspection.
   5.   Revocation of Rental License for Delinquent Fees. Any rental license
may be declared invalid and may be revoked by the Building Official if fees
become delinquent and/or are unpaid. Dwelling units and rooming units being let
for occupancy without a valid permit may be ordered to be vacated upon
revocation of the rental license.
   6.   Penalty for Failure to Pay Fees. Any person who, without good cause,
fails to pay any fee required by this section within 30 days of inspection or
re-inspection shall be charged with a municipal infraction and be fined
accordingly. Each day payment is delinquent shall be deemed a separate offense
and punishable by the appropriate fine.
   7.   Penalty for Failure to Schedule and Complete Inspection. Every unit is
to be inspected once every 24 months. The City contacts owners to schedule
inspections every January. Inspections are to be scheduled and completed by
April 30. If owners or their designees do not schedule inspections and have
inspections completed by April 30, they will be considered delinquent for each
unit not inspected. As of the first day of May each year the owner of any units
that were not inspected as required shall be considered delinquent and shall be
charged a delinquent penalty of $25.00 per unit per month for each month that
the units are not inspected. The penalty for failure to schedule and complete
inspections shall be invoiced every month. Enforcement of this provision does
not preclude the City from revoking an owner’s Rental License as aforementioned
in Subsection 5 of this section.
CHAPTER 160
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
 
160.01 Definitions                       160.06 Standards for Floodplain
                                         (Overlay) District
160.02 Statutory Authority, Findings of  160.07 Appointment and Duties of Board
Fact, and Purpose                        of Appeals
160.03 General Provisions                160.08 Nonconforming Uses
160.04 Administration                    160.09 Penalties for Violation
160.05 Establishment of Zoning (Overlay) 160.10 Amendments
Districts
160.01   DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   1.   “Appurtenant structure” means a structure which is on the same parcel
of the property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which
is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
   2.   “Base flood” means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. (Also commonly referred to as the “100-year
flood.”)
   3.   “Base flood elevation” (BFE) means the elevation floodwaters would
reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
   4.   “Basement” means any enclosed area of a structure which has its floor
or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see “lowest
floor.”
   5.   “Board of Appeals” means the City Council of the City.
   6.   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including (but not limited to) buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or storage
of equipment or materials. Development does not include minor projects or
routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities, as defined in this
section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling or grading.
   7.   “Enclosed area below lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest
enclosed area in a building when all the following criteria are met:
      A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions
of Section
160.06(5)(A) of this chapter; and
      B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking, or
storage; and
      C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot above the base flood elevation; and
      D.   The enclosed area is not a basement as defined in this section.
   8.   “Existing construction” means any structure for which the start of
construction commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
   9.   “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
   10.   “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means
the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   11.   “Factory-built home” means any structure, designed for residential use
which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled
in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a
building site. For the purpose of this chapter, factory-built homes include
mobile homes, manufactured homes, and modular homes; and also include
recreational vehicles which are placed on a site for greater than 180
consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
   12.   “Factory-built home park or subdivision” means a parcel or contiguous
parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or
lease.
   13.   “Five hundred (500)-year flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which
has a two-tenths percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
or which, on average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every 500
years.
   14.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or
rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
   15.   “Flood Insurance Rate Map” (FIRM) means the official map prepared as
part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which
delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
   16.   “Flood Insurance Study” (FIS) means a report published by FEMA for a
community issued along with the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map(s). The
study contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water
surface elevations that were used to prepare the FIRM.
   17.   “Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water as a result of a flood.
   18.   “Floodplain management” means an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including (but not limited to) emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing, and floodplain management regulations.
   19.   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such
structures.
   20.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions
of the floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to
carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood
flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot.
   21.   “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the Special Flood Hazard
Area outside the floodway.
   22.   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   23.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
      A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the National Register; or
      B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; or
      C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by
either:
         (1)   An approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
         (2)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   24.   “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building, including a basement, except when the criteria listed in the
definition of enclosed area below lowest floor are met.
   25.   “Maximum damage potential development” means hospitals and like
institutions; buildings or building complexes containing documents, data, or
instruments of great public value; buildings or building complexes containing
materials dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; power
installations needed in emergency or other buildings or building complexes
similar in nature or use.
   26.   “Minor projects” means small development activities (except for
filling, grading, and excavating) valued at less than $500.00.
   27.   “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home parks) means
those structures or development for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations
adopted by the community.
   28.   “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after
the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by
the community.
   29.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
      A.   Built on a single chassis; and
      B.   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection; and
      C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
      D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   30.   “Routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities” means
repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do
not trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general
improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs
include:   
      A.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing
roofing tiles, and replacing siding.
      B.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting,
cabinets, counter tops, and similar finish work.
      C.   Basement sealing.
      D.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes.
      E.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or air
conditioning systems, and repairing wells or septic systems.
   31.   “Special Flood Hazard Area” (SFHA) means the land within a community
subject to the base flood. This land is identified on the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, or A99.
   32.   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the structure.
   33.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories,
sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities, or
other similar uses.
   34.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be
included in the estimated cost of repair.
   35.   “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
      A.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure
either:
         (1)   Before the start of construction of the improvement; or
         (2)   If the structure has been substantially damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure
to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
The term also does not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided
the alteration will not preclude the structure’s designation as a historic
structure.
      B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a structure
by 25 percent or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of
the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community shall be
added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in
original floor space would exceed 25 percent.
   36.   “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of
the floodplain management regulations.
   37.   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
160.02   STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT, AND PURPOSE.
   1.   Statutory Authority. The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in
Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact
zoning regulations to secure safety from flood and to promote health and the
general welfare.
   2.   Findings of Fact.
      A.   The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic
inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community.
      B.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused
by:
         (1)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood
damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately
elevated or otherwise protected from flooding; and
         (2)   The cumulative effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing
increases in flood heights and velocities.
      C.   This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood
hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Department of
Natural Resources.
   3.   Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the City and its residents and
to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and
convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses described in
Section
160.02(2)(A) with provisions designed to:
      A.   Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows
so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
      B.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
      C.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
      D.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
      E.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
160.03   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   1.   Lands to Which Chapter Applies. The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City which are located within
the boundaries of the Floodplain (Overlay) District as established in Section
160.05.
   2.   Establishment of Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) for Clinton County and Incorporated Areas, City of DeWitt,
Panel(s) 19045C0450E, dated July 22, 2020, which were prepared as part of the
Flood Insurance Study for Clinton County are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The Clinton County Flood
Insurance Study is hereby adopted by reference and is made a part of this
chapter for the purpose of administering floodplain management regulations.
   3.   Rules for Interpretation of Floodplain (Overlay) District. The
boundaries of the Floodplain (Overlay) District areas shall be determined by
scaling distances on the official Flood Insurance Rate Map. When an
interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the
Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The Board of Appeals
shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   4.   Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be used, and no
structure shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered,
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
   5.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   6.   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.
   7.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The standards required by this
chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside the designated Floodplain (Overlay) District areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the City, or any officer or employee thereof, for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
   8.   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
160.04   ADMINISTRATION.
   1.   Appointment, Duties, and Responsibilities of Administrator.
      A.   The City Administrator is hereby appointed to implement and
administer the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the
Administrator.
      B.   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include (but
not necessarily be limited to) the following:
         (1)   Review all Floodplain Development Permit Applications to assure
that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
         (2)   Review Floodplain Development Applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from federal, State, and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of
Natural Resources for floodplain construction.
         (3)   Record and maintain a record of:
            a.   The elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum
1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures; or
            b.   The elevation to which new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed.
         (4)   Notify adjacent communities, counties, and the Department of
Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
         (5)   Keep a record of all permits, appeals, and such other
transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this
chapter.
         (6)   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report
concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administrator.
         (7)   Notify the Federal Insurance Administrator of any annexations or
modifications to the community’s boundaries.
         (8)   Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Board of Appeals of
potential conflict.
         (9)   Maintain the accuracy of the community’s Flood Insurance Rate
Maps when:
            a.   Development placed within the floodway results in any of the
following:
               i.   An increase in the base flood elevations; or
               ii.   Alteration to the floodway boundary.
            b.   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not
include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base elevation; or
            c.   Development relocates or alters the channel.
Within six months of the completion of the development, the applicant shall
submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for a Letter of Map
Revision.
         (10)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the
standards of this chapter.
         (11)   Forward all requests for variances to the Board of Appeals for
consideration. Ensure all requests include the information ordinarily submitted
with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary to the
Board of Appeals.
      C.   Floodplain Development Permit.
         (1)   Permit Required. A Floodplain Development Permit issued by the
Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any manmade
change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, storage of
materials and equipment, excavation, or drilling operations), including the
placement of factory-built homes.
         (2)   Application for Permit. Application shall be made on forms
furnished by the Administrator and shall include the following:
            a.   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
            b.   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be
done (i.e., lot, block, track, street address, or similar description) that
will readily identify and locate the work to be done.
            c.   Location and dimensions of all structures and additions.
            d.   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work
is intended.
            e.   Elevation of the base flood.
            f.   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988)
of the lowest floor (including basement) of structures or of the level to which
a structure is to be floodproofed.
            g.   For structures being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost
of improvements and market value of the structure prior to the improvements.
            h.   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
         (3)   Action on Permit Application. The Administrator shall, within a
reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or
disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed,
in writing, of the specific reasons therefore. The Administrator shall not
issue permits for variances except as directed by the Board of Appeals.
         (4)   Construction and Use to Be as Provided in Application and Plans.
Floodplain Development Permits based on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement, or
construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be
required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor,
as appropriate, registered in the State, that the finished fill, structure
floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the
use or occupancy of any structure.
160.05   ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS.
The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided
into the following districts:
   1.   Floodplain (Overlay) District – those areas identified as Zone A on the
Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The boundaries shall be as shown on the
Official Floodplain Zoning Map. Within these districts, all uses not allowed as
permitted uses are prohibited unless a variance to the terms of this chapter is
granted after due consideration by the Board of Appeals.
160.06   STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT.
   1.   Permitted Uses.
      A.   All development within the Floodplain District shall be permitted to
the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying
zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance standards of the
Floodplain District.
      B.   Any development which involves placement of structures, factory-
built homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment,
excavation, or alteration of a watercourse shall be reviewed by the Department
of Natural Resources to determine:
         (1)   Whether the land involved is either wholly or partly within the
floodway or floodway fringe; and
         (2)   The base flood elevation.
The applicant shall be responsible for providing the Department of Natural
Resources with sufficient technical information to make the determination.
      C.   Review by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources is not required
for the proposed construction of new or replacement bridges or culverts where:
         (1)   The bridge or culvert is located on a stream that drains less
than two square miles, and
         (2)   The bridge or culvert is not associated with a channel
modification that constitutes a channel change as specified in 567-71.2(2),
Iowa Administrative Code.
   2.   Performance Standards. All development must be consistent with the need
to minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable performance
standards. Where base flood elevations and floodway data have not been provided
in the Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be
contacted to compute such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing
the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to
make such determination. All development shall:
      A.   Be designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
      B.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
      C.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage.
   3.   Residential Structures. All new or substantially improved residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum
of one foot above the base flood elevation. Construction shall be upon
compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the
base flood elevation and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the
limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such
as piers or extended foundations) may be allowed subject to favorable
consideration by the Board of Appeals   where existing topography, street
grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods
used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various
forces and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential structures
located in areas that would become isolated due to flooding of surrounding
ground shall be provided with a means of access that will be passable by
wheeled vehicles during the base flood. However, this criterion shall not apply
where the Administrator determines there is sufficient flood warning time for
the protection of life and property. When estimating flood warning time,
consideration shall be given to the criteria listed in 567-75.2(3), Iowa
Administrative Code.
   4.   Nonresidential Structures. All new or substantially improved
nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with
attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When
floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State
shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the
flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact, uplift forces, and other factors
associated with the base flood; and that the structure, below the base flood
elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water. A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in
relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
   5.   All New and Substantially Improved Structures.
      A.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
         (1)   A minimum of two openings, with positioning on at least two
walls, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
         (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot
above grade.
         (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and
low damage potential storage.
      B.   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
      C.   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with
electric meter, electrical service panel box, hot water heater, heating, air
conditioning, ventilation equipment (including ductwork), and other similar
machinery and equipment elevated (or, in the case of nonresidential structures,
optionally floodproofed to) a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation.
      D.   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with
plumbing, gas lines, water meters, gas meters, and other similar service
utilities either elevated (or in the case of nonresidential structures,
optionally floodproofed to) a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation or designed to be watertight and withstand inundation to such a
level.
   6.   Factory-Built Homes.
      A.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure
is a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation.
      B.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Anchorage systems
may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors as required by the State Building Code.
   7.   Utility and Sanitary Systems.
      A.   On-site wastewater disposal and water supply systems shall be
located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the
system during flooding.
      B.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood elevation.
      C.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water
supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with
a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood
elevation.
      D.   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
   8.   Storage of Equipment and Materials. Storage of materials and equipment
that are flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal, or plant life is
prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or:
      A.   Not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent
movement due to flood waters; or
      B.   Be readily removable from the area within the time available after
flood warning.
   9.   Flood Control Structures. Flood control structural works such as
levees, flood walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from the base
flood with a minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall provide for
adequate interior drainage. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources
shall approve structural flood control works.
   10.   Watercourse Alterations. Watercourse alterations or relocations must
be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources must
approve such alterations or relocations.
   11.   Subdivisions. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation
of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this
chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all
lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during
the base flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots
(whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those areas
located within the Floodplain (Overlay) District.
   12.   Accessory Structures to Residential Uses.
      A.   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are incidental
to a residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation requirements
where the following criteria are satisfied:
         (1)   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential. Its size shall not exceed 600 square feet in size. Those portions of
the structure located less than one foot above the base flood elevation must be
constructed of flood-resistant materials.
         (2)   The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage
potential purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure
shall not be used for human habitation.
         (3)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
         (4)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement which may result in damage to other structures.
         (5)   The structure’s service facilities such as electrical and
heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation.
         (6)   The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of Section
160.06(5)(A).
      B.   Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a
structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of
the structure and its contents.
   13.   Recreational Vehicles.
      A.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of Section
160.06(6) regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when the
following criteria are satisfied.
         (1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less
than 180 consecutive days, and
         (2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
      B.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180
consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements of
Section
160.06(6) regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes.
   14.   Pipeline Crossings. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be
buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to
prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
   15.   Maximum Damage Potential Development. All new or substantially
improved maximum damage potential development shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated a minimum of one foot above the elevation of the
500-year flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be
floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional
engineer registered in the State shall certify that the floodproofing methods
used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact,
uplift forces, and other factors associated with the two-tenths percent annual
chance flood; and that the structure, below the two-tenths percent annual
chance flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator. Where a
two-tenths percent chance flood elevation data has not been provided in the
Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be
contacted to compute such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing
the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to
make such determinations.
160.07   APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF APPEALS.
   1.   Appointment and Duties of Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals is
hereby established which shall hear and decide:
      A.   Appeals; and
      B.   Requests for variances to the provisions of this chapter, and shall
take any other action which is required of the Board.
   2.   Appeals. Where it is alleged that there is any error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved party may appeal such action.
The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board of Appeals and with the
official from whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason
for the appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to
the Board of Appeals all the documents constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.
   3.   Variance. The Board of Appeals may authorize upon request in specific
cases such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary
to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary
hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards.
      A.   Variances shall only be granted upon:
         (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (3)   A determination that the granting of the variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances.
      B.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      C.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for structures than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the
applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator
that:
         (1)   The issuance of a variance will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of
insurance coverage; and
         (2)   Such construction increases risks to life and property.
      D.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
   4.   Hearings and Decisions of the Board of Appeals.
      A.   Hearings. Upon the filing with the Board of an appeal or a request
for a variance, the Board shall hold a public hearing. The Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as well as due
notice to parties in interest. At the hearing, any party may appear in person
or by agent or attorney and present written or oral evidence. The Board may
require the appellant or applicant to provide such information as is reasonably
deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance or evaluation of a
professional engineer or other expert person or agency, including the
Department of Natural Resources.
      B.   Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal or
variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon an appeal, the Board may, so
long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in
writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decision.
In granting a variance, the Board shall consider such factors as contained in
this section and all other relevant sections of this chapter and may prescribe
such conditions as contained in Section
160.09(4)(B)(2).
         (1)   Factors Upon Which the Decision of the Board Shall Be Based. In
passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall consider all relevant
factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
            a.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments.
            b.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
            c.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary
conditions.
            d.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
            e.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the City.
            f.   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
            g.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use.
            h.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
            i.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for the area.
            j.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
            k.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site.
            l.   The cost of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.
            m.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
         (2)   Conditions Attached to Variances. Upon consideration of the
factors listed above, the Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such
conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
            a.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
            b.   Limitation of periods of use and operation.
            c.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.
            d.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
            e.   Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the
flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated
with the regulatory flood. The Board shall require that the applicant submit a
plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
   5.   Appeals to the Court. Any person or persons, jointly or severally,
aggrieved by any decision of the Board may present to a court of record a
petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole
or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be
presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the
office of the Board.
160.08   NONCONFORMING USES.
   1.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but
which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be
continued subject to the following conditions:
      A.   If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future
use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
      B.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
      C.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless
it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This
limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing
State or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations, or
the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued
designation.
   2.   Except as provided in Section
160.08(1)(B), any use which has been permitted as a variance shall be
considered a conforming use.
160.09   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any
person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Each day such violation continues shall
be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
violation.
160.10   AMENDMENTS.
The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to time
be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
CHAPTER 161
DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
 
161.01 Definitions                       161.07 Inspection
161.02 Demolition Permit                 161.08 Completion by the City
161.03 Minimum Demolition Standards      161.09 Responsibility for Costs
161.04 Barricades, Fencing, and Lighting 161.10 Permit Fees
161.05 Insurance Required                161.11 Separate Violations
161.06 Restoration of Public Property
161.01   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Building” means any structure designed or built for the support,
enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property of
any kind.
   2.   “Demolish” or “demolition” means the intentional razing, tearing down,
leveling, destruction, wrecking, or demolishing of any building by any person.
   3.   “Excavation” means any basement, opening, hole, or other similar
opening in the ground remaining after the demolition of any building.
161.02   DEMOLITION PERMIT.
No person shall demolish any building within the City without first completing
a permit application for the same from the Building Official. Each such permit
application shall:
   1.   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit;
   2.   Provide a description of the location at which the proposed demolition
will occur;
   3.   Include the name and address of the property owner;
   4.   Include the name and business address of the person that is to do the
work;
   5.   List the date of commencement of the work and estimated completion
date;
   6.   Give any other information as reasonably may be required by the
Building Official.
The issuance of a permit by the City shall not render the City responsible or
liable for any damages which may ensue by the permittee’s demolition of a
building, and said permittee will indemnify and defend the City should action
be brought for the same. Any judgment of action rendered in a case involving
damages for demolition of a building shall be the sole responsibility of the
permittee.
161.03   MINIMUM DEMOLITION STANDARDS.
At a minimum, demolition projects must comply with the following:
   1.   Water and sewer mains serving the property must be disconnected and
capped in accordance with City specifications; i.e., water lines shall be
capped and sewer lines must be closed with cement to prevent water getting into
lateral;
   2.   Drainage must be provided by breaking up basement floor;
   3.   Demolition material must be removed to a depth of at least two feet
from the surface prior to backfill;
   4.   Backfill shall consist of a granular fill material installed to within
one foot below the level of the property elevation, topped with one foot of top
soil to a level even with the property elevation. Request for variations shall
be made to the Building Official.
161.04   BARRICADES, FENCING, AND LIGHTING.
Adequate barricades, fencing, and warning lights meeting standards specified by
the City shall be so placed as to protect the public from hazard. No demolition
work may commence until pedestrian protection structures, if necessary, are in
place and they shall be maintained in place and kept in good order for the
entire length of time pedestrians may be endangered.
161.05   INSURANCE REQUIRED.
The applicant shall purchase and maintain such insurance as will protect the
applicant from claims set forth below which may arise out of, or result from
the applicant’s operations under the permit, whether such operation be by the
applicant or by any subcontractor or by anyone directly or indirectly employed
by any of them, or by anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable. The
insurance to be maintained by the applicant shall be written as follows:
   1.   Workers’ Compensation and Employers Liability Insurance as prescribed
by Iowa law or the minimum limits shown below:
      A.   State Benefits   Statutory
      B.   Employers Liability:
         Bodily Injury by Accident    $500,000.00 each accident
         Bodily Injury by Disease    $500,000.00 each accident
         Bodily Injury by Disease    $500,000.00 each employee
The Workers Compensation policy shall include a waiver of subrogation clause in
favor of the owner.
   2.   Commercial General Liability Insurance combined single limits shown
below covering Bodily Injury, Property Damage and Personal Injury:
      General Aggregate Limit    $2,000,000.00
      Products-Completed Operations Aggregate Limit   $2,000,000.00
      Personal & Advertising Injury Limit   $1,000,000.00
      Each Occurrence Limit   $1,000,000.00
      Fire Damage Limit (for any one fire)   $100,000.00
      Medical Damage Limit (any one person)   $5,000.00
This insurance must include the following features:
      A.   Coverage for all premises and operations. The policy shall be
endorsed to provide the aggregate per project endorsement.
      B.   Personal and Advertising Injury.
      C.   Operations by independent contractors.
      D.   Contractual liability coverage.
      E.   Coverage for property damage underground or damage by explosion or
collapse (XCU).
   3.   Automobile Liability Insurance covering all owned, non-owned, hired,
and leased vehicles with a minimum combined single limit for Bodily Injury and
Property Damage of $1,000,000.00 per accident. Insurance must include
Contractual Liability.
   4.   Umbrella or Excess Liability Insurance at contractor’s option, the
limits specified may be satisfied with a combination of Primary and Umbrella or
Excess Insurance.
   5.   Additional Insured. The contractor will include the City as additional
insured on all policies except Workers’ Compensation as respects all work
performed.
   6.   Insurance Certificates. Each policy noted above shall be issued by an
insurance company authorized to write such insurance in the State of Iowa and
shall be reasonably acceptable to the City. These insurance policies shall not
be cancelled without at least 30 days’ prior written notice to the City. A
properly executed Certificate of Insurance showing evidence of these insurance
requirements shall be delivered to the City prior to the permit being issued.
   7.   Government Immunity. The following clauses will be added to all
liability coverages:
      A.   The company and the insured expressly agree and state that the
purchase of this policy of insurance by the insured does not waive any of the
defenses of governmental immunity available to the insured under Section 670.4
of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists and as it may be amended from time to
time.
      B.   The company and the insured further agree that this policy of
insurance shall cover only those claims not subject to the defense of
governmental immunity under Section 670.4 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists
and as it may be amended from time to time.
   8.   Subrogation. To the extent that such insurance is in force and
collectible and to the extent permitted by law, the City and contractor each
hereby release and waive all right of recovery against the other or anyone
claiming through or under each of them by way of subrogation or otherwise. The
forgoing release and waiver shall apply to damage to contractor’s equipment,
tools, and other personal property as well as automobiles.
161.06   RESTORATION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
Streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored to the condition of the property prior to the
commencement of the work, or in a manner satisfactory to the City, at the
expense of the permit holder or property owner.
161.07   INSPECTION.
All work shall be subject to inspection by the City. The permit holder or
property owner shall provide the City with notice at least 24 hours prior to
the time when backfill is desired to be placed.
161.08   COMPLETION BY THE CITY.
Should any demolition project be discontinued or left unfinished for a period
of two weeks after the approved completion date, or in the event the work is
improperly done, the City has the right to finish or correct the demolition
work and charge any expenses therefor to the permit holder or property owner.
161.09   RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS.
All costs and expenses incident to the demolition shall be borne by the permit
holder and/or property owner. The permit holder or property owner shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by such demolition.
161.10   PERMIT FEES.
A separate permit for each demolition shall be payable at the time of filing
the permit application with the City. The permit fee is set at $50.00.
161.11   SEPARATE VIOLATIONS.
Each day that demolition continues, or the filling of any excavation continues
without having obtained an appropriate permit therefor shall constitute a
separate violation of this chapter.
CHAPTER 162
VACANT BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION
 
162.01 Definitions                     162.06 Vacant Building Permit Conditions
162.02 Applicability                   162.07 Enforcement
162.03 Vacant Building Permit Required 162.08 Process and Timeline
162.04 Vacant Building Permit          162.09 Fees and Penalties
Requirements
162.05 Issuance of Vacant Building
Permit
162.01   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Accessory building/structure” means a detached building or structure
on the same lot, with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal building or structure or use of the land; i.e., a garden house,
greenhouse, garage, shed, fence, or retaining wall.
   2.   “Building” means any structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy.
   3.   “Exterior premises” means the open space on the premises or the portion
of the premises upon which there is not a structure.
   4.   “Good repair” means free from blighting and hazardous conditions, clean
and sanitary, and in safe condition.
   5.   “Imminent hazard” means a condition which could cause serious or life-
threatening injury or death at any time.
   6.   “Mixed occupancy” means occupancy of a structure in part for
residential use and in part for some other use not accessory thereto.
   7.   “Occupant” means an occupant is any person who leases or lawfully
resides in a building or premises, or a portion of a building or premises.
   8.   “Owner” means any person having a title to the premises, as recorded in
the Office of the Recorder for the County, or as recorded on the County
assessment rolls.
   9.   “Partially vacant” means a multi-storied building or structure that has
one or more stories vacant, including the ground level store front. For the
purpose of this chapter the ground floor store front must be vacant to be
deemed partially vacant.
   10.   “Responsible person” means a person who is the owner, operator, or
manager of any building, structure, or premises and is responsible for the
property’s maintenance and management.
   11.   “Rubbish” means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage. The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke, and other combustible materials, papers, rags, cartons, boxes, wood
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust and other similar materials.
   12.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected, which requires
location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground.
   13.   “Vacant” means a residential, commercial, or industrial building or
structure shall be deemed to be vacant if it is unoccupied and/ or no person or
persons currently operate a lawful business open regularly for business with
the exception of holidays and seasonal businesses, and meets one or more of the
following:
      A.   Unsecured or secured by means other than those used in the design of
the building;
      B.   Declared unfit for occupancy as determined by the Building
Inspector;
      C.   Non-compliant with International Property Maintenance Code or other
City and State Building Codes as adopted by the City;
      D.   Existence of housing, building, fire, health, and safety, or zoning
code violations; or
      E.   Not receiving services from City utilities (water, sanitary sewer,
and garbage).
   14.   “Waste” means garbage, ashes, rubbish, or trash.
   15.   “Weeds” or “noxious weeds” means Canada thistle, leafy spurge, field
bindweed (Creeping Jenny), Ambrosia trifida (Giant Ragweed), Arubuosia trifida
(Common Ragweed), and such other weeds as are defined in “Weeds of the North
Central States, North Central Regional Research Publication No. 281, Bulletin
772,” published by the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, College of
Agriculture, Agriculture Experiment Station, and in all applicable sections of
current codes at the time as adopted by the Council (e.g. Code of Iowa,
International Property Maintenance Code, etc.).
162.02   APPLICABILITY.
   1.   General. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all residential,
manufacturing, commercial, industrial, and mixed occupancy buildings vacant (as
defined above in Section
162.01[13]) for 180 consecutive days, and all residential manufacturing,
commercial, industrial, and mixed occupancy buildings, which have been
partially vacant for 180 days, in any commercial or industrial zoned district.
This shall include any building that has been vacant for 180 days or more prior
to March 1, 2022, and remains vacant at the time of approval of this chapter.
The provisions of this chapter shall exclude residential garages, sheds, and
auxiliary buildings.
   2.   Conflict. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be
in conflict with a provision of the Zoning Code or any other provisions of the
Code of Ordinances, the provision which established the higher standard for the
protection of the public health, safety, and welfare shall prevail.
   3.   Application of Other Ordinances. Nothing contained herein shall be
deemed to authorize the use of a structure or premises contrary to any other
provision of the Code of Ordinances or the Zoning Code. Repairs, additions, or
alterations to a structure shall be done in accordance with the procedures and
provisions of State law, and applicable chapters of this Code of Ordinances.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to cancel, modify, or set aside any
provision of the City Zoning Code or Building Code.
   4.   Existing Remedies. The provisions in this chapter shall not be
construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the City, or its officers
or agencies, under State laws or this Code of Ordinances, including the Zoning
Code, relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is
dangerous, unsafe, and unsanitary, or the abatement of public nuisances.
   5.   Historic Buildings. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to
structures designated by the federal government, State, or City as historic
buildings. Any work to said structures shall also comply with current
International Building Code as adopted by the City.
162.03   VACANT BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   1.   Vacant Building Permit. The owner of any vacant building or structure
to which this chapter applies shall obtain a Vacant Building Permit within 30
days of becoming vacant (is unoccupied or no person or persons currently
operate a lawful business open regularly for business with the exception of
holidays and seasonal businesses). Upon enactment of this chapter, any vacant
building as defined in Section
162.02(1) must apply for a Vacant Building Permit no later than March 31, 2022.
   2.   Application for a Vacant Building Permit shall be made by completing a
Vacant Building Registration Form, which shall be submitted to the City. The
owner must maintain a valid Vacant Building Permit for any building or
structure to which this chapter applies and must continue to renew the permit
as long as the building or structure remains vacant, subject to this chapter.
   3.   Vacant Building Permit Process. When completing the Vacant Building
Registration Form, which is available to be downloaded from the City website,
or obtained from the Building Official or City Hall, applicants shall disclose
all measures to be taken to ensure that the building will be kept weathertight,
secure from trespassers, and safe for entry by peace officers and firefighters
in times of exigent circumstances or emergency. The application shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
      A.   Contact Information for Each Owner. If the owner does not reside
within a mile radius of the City, the owner shall provide the name, physical
address, email address, and telephone number of an agent who is available for
service of process within a 50-mile radius of the City. If the owner is other
than a natural person or persons, the following shall apply, as appropriate:
         (1)   If the owner is a corporation, limited liability company,
limited or general partnership, the registration statement shall provide the
names and residence addresses of all responsible persons and the name and
business address of the registered agent for service of process appointed
pursuant to the Code of Iowa.
         (2)   If an estate, the name, and business address of the personal
representative of the estate.
         (3)   If a trust, the names and addresses of the trustee or trustees.
         (4)   If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the
partner or partners.
      B.   Contact information for a responsible person, as defined by this
chapter, who is a natural person who may be contacted at all times for
inspections, emergency repairs, or maintenance, and who can respond to the
vacant building or structure when requested.
      C.   Any rehabilitation or demolition plans for the building or
structure.
      D.   An acknowledgement by the owner that grass and weeds shall not
exceed a height of eight inches and a plan for how the owner will comply with
this requirement.
      E.   An acknowledgement by the owner that snow and ice shall be removed
from the public right-of-way per Section
136.21 (within 12-daylight hours after the end of the snowfall). A plan for how
the owner will comply with this requirement shall be stated.
      F.   An acknowledgement by the applicant that the owner is aware of and
understands the Vacant Building Maintenance Standards in this chapter.
   4.   Vacant Building Permit Renewal. Any applicant seeking to renew a permit
must submit an updated vacant building registration form and shall pay the
required fee as established by the Council.
162.04   VACANT BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
A permit may only be issued or renewed if the building or structure, which is
subject to the application satisfies the following requirements:
   1.   Code Compliant. All buildings or structures subject to the application
shall comply with all building, fire, property maintenance, zoning, and other
applicable sections of the Code of Ordinances, and shall apply for all
necessary building, fire prevention, and zoning permits, if any are required to
bring the building into compliance, upon application for a Vacant Building
Permit.
   2.   Vacant Building Maintenance Standards. All buildings or structures
subject to the application shall adequately protect the building from intrusion
by trespassers and pests, and from deterioration by the weather. The buildings
must also comply with the following vacant building maintenance standards:
      A.   Building Openings. Doors, windows, areaways, and other openings
shall be weathertight and secured against entry by birds, vermin, and
trespassers. Missing or broken glass in doors, windows, and other such openings
shall be repaired or replaced with glass. No building opening shall be boarded.
All first floor or ground level windows, doors, and openings shall be free of
any posters, paper, or fabric coverings.
      B.   Waste Removal. All waste, debris, rubbish, and garbage shall be
removed from the interior of the building or structure and surrounding
premises.
      C.   Roofs. The roof and flashings shall be sound and tight, not admit
moisture, or have defects which might admit moisture, rain, or roof draining,
and shall allow for sufficient drainage to prevent dampness or deterioration in
the interior of the building.
      D.   Drainage. The building storm drainage system shall be functional and
installed in an approved manner, and allow discharge in an approved manner. All
exterior ditches must be maintained and mowed regularly so that flows can be
maintained.
      E.   Building Structure. The building shall be maintained in good repair
and structurally sound. The building shall be maintained in a sanitary manner
and in a manner that does not pose a threat to the public health, safety, and
welfare.
      F.   Structural Members. The structural members shall be free of
deterioration and capable of safely bearing imposed dead and live loads.
      G.   Foundation Walls. The foundation walls shall be maintained
structurally sound and in a sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to
the public health, safety, and welfare, shall be capable of supporting the load
which normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be free from open
cracks and breaks, free from leaks, and be animal and rat-proof.
      H.   Exterior Walls. The exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks,
and loose or rotting materials. Exposed metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic applications
of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
      I.   Decorative Features. The cornices, belt courses, corbels, terracotta
trim, wall facings, and similar decorative features shall be safe, anchored,
and in good repair. Exposed metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be protected
from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic applications of
weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
      J.   Overhanging Extensions. All balconies, canopies, marquees, signs,
metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar
features shall be in good repair, anchored, safe, and sound. Exposed metal,
wood, or other surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay
or rust by periodic applications of weather-coating materials, such as paint or
similar surface treatment.
      K.   Appurtenance. Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance
ornamentation on the exterior thereof shall be of sufficient strength or
stability, and anchored so as to be capable of resisting wind pressure of one-
half of that specified in the Building Code for new buildings of similar
structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted
in the building code for such buildings.
      L.   Chimneys and Towers. Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and
similar appurtenances shall be structurally safe and in good repair. Exposed
metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against
decay or rust by periodic applications of weather coating materials, such as
paint or similar surface treatment.
      M.   Walkways. Public walkways shall be in good repair, shall be safe for
pedestrian travel, and shall be free of snow and ice. Snow and ice removal
shall be completed within 12 daylight hours after a snowfall has ended.
      N.   Accessory Building and Structures. Accessory buildings and
structures such as garages, sheds and fences shall be free from safety, health,
and fire hazards; and shall comply with these Vacant Building Maintenance
Standards.
      O.   Exterior Premises. The surrounding premises upon which the structure
or building is located shall be clean, safe, sanitary, free from waste,
rubbish, garbage, excessive vegetation, shall not be used for exterior storage,
and shall not pose a threat to public health, welfare, or safety.
162.05   ISSUANCE OF VACANT BUILDING PERMIT.
The Building Official shall issue or renew a Vacant Building Permit upon being
satisfied that the building has been inspected and is in compliance with all
applicable provisions of this Code and the Vacant Building Maintenance
Standards set forth in this chapter, and is adequately protected from intrusion
by trespassers and from deterioration by the weather. This permit shall be
effective for a period of 365 days from the date of issuance or renewal.
162.06   VACANT BUILDING PERMIT CONDITIONS.
All permits issued are subject to all other applicable conditions of the Code
of Ordinances and the following additional conditions:
   1.   Consent to Entry. All applicants and owners holding a permit consent to
the entry of duly authorized officials of the City at all reasonable hours and
upon reasonable notice for the purpose of inspection. A key box, or Knox Box
shall be required for all commercial buildings. Refusal to consent to entry
shall be a violation of this chapter. In addition to issuing a municipal
infraction citation in the event of refusal, the City may file a complaint
under oath to any Court of competent jurisdiction and said Court shall
thereupon issue its order authorizing the appropriate person to enter such
establishment to inspect.
   2.   Consent to Emergency Inspections and Emergency Repairs. All applicants
and owners holding a permit consent to the entry of duly authorized officials
of the City if such official has reason to believe that an emergency situation
exists with respect to the building or structure that tends to create an
imminent hazard to health, welfare, or safety of the general public. Such
official may enter the building to inspect the premises, without notifying the
responsible party or obtaining a warrant. If such official finds an emergency
situation exists in fact, which presents an imminent hazard to the health,
welfare, or safety of the general public, then such official may cause any
reasonable action, including the employment of necessary labor and materials,
to perform emergency repairs to alleviate the hazard. City employees will
confer with legal counsel prior to entering or causing entry to be made to
premises and/ or performing any emergency repairs without prior owner
notification and consent. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency
repairs may be paid by the City and if so paid, the City may levy a special
assessment against the property to recover the costs.
   3.   Cooperation by Owner or Responsible Person. All owners holding a permit
or responsible persons identified in a permit application shall cooperate with
and facilitate inspections of the premises at reasonable times pursuant to
reasonable notice to determine compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. Obstructing a duly authorized inspection, including refusing entry or
access to portions of the building subject to the permit, shall be a violation
of this chapter. The owner shall notify the Building Inspector within 30
business days of any changes to the contact information of the owner or
responsible person.
   4.   Continued Compliance. For the Vacant Building Permit to remain valid,
the building or structure subject to the permit shall continue to comply with
all the requirements of the Vacant Building Maintenance Standards.
162.07   ENFORCEMENT.
   1.   Authorized Officials. The Building Official, Fire Chief, Police Chief,
and City Administrator shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to exercise the powers and duties specified in this chapter
and may delegate their authority to appropriate City personnel as their
designee.
   2.   Right of Entry. An authorized official has the right to enter
buildings, structures, or premises subject to this chapter at reasonable times,
with the express or implied consent of the owner, responsible person, or
occupant, to inspect in accordance with the City’s policy and procedure for
entering onto private property to conduct administrative interior and exterior
inspections for Code administration and enforcement. If entry is refused, it
shall be a violation of this chapter for which a municipal infraction citation
may be issued.
   3.   Inspections. An authorized official may inspect the premises and
structures to determine compliance with this chapter at their discretion. All
reports of such inspections shall be in writing, signed, or initialed and
dated. An authorized official may engage any expert opinion as deemed necessary
to report upon unusual technical issues that arise in the course of their
duties, in accordance with City policy. An authorized official, or their
designee(s), may conduct inspections made pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter in conjunction with other inspectors of the department, peace officers,
firefighters, or inspectors from other governmental bodies.
   4.   Issuance of Orders to Repair. Upon inspection, an authorized official
or their designee, shall issue orders to repair for work needed:
      A.   To adequately protect the building from intrusion by trespassers and
from deterioration by the weather;
      B.   To comply with the vacant building maintenance standards set forth
in this chapter;
      C.   To ensure that allowing the building to remain will not be
detrimental to public health, safety, and welfare, will not unreasonably
interfere with the reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment of other premises
within the neighborhood; or
      D.   To eliminate any hazards to police officers or firefighters that may
enter the premises in times of emergency. When issuing orders to repair, the
authorized official shall specify the deadline for completion of the repair
required and shall mail the notice to the owner or responsible person
identified in the permit. All work done pursuant to this chapter shall be done
in compliance with any applicable Building, Fire, Property Maintenance, and
Zoning Codes and ordinances.
   5.   Reinspections. Reinspections may be conducted after the deadline for
repair as stated in the order. Reinspections are subject to applicable
reinspection fees.
   6.   Notices and Orders. An authorized official may issue notices and orders
to owners, responsible persons, operators, or occupants to obtain compliance
with this chapter.
   7.   Revocation, Reinstatement Measures. If a vacant building permit is
revoked by the Building Inspector for noncompliance with any provisions of this
chapter, the owner of the building shall be given 30 days to comply with the
provisions of this chapter. Extensions of such 30-day period may be granted at
the discretion of the Building Inspector. Upon expiration of the 30-,day
period, or any extension thereof, if the building continues to be noncompliant,
a municipal infraction will be issued.
162.08   PROCESS AND TIMELINE.
No later than March 1, 2022, following passage of this chapter, and
subsequently within 30 days of a residential, manufacturing, commercial,
industrial, or mixed occupancy building becoming vacant as defined herein
Section
162.02(1), a building owner must complete a Vacant Building Registration Form,
which serves as an application for a Vacant Building Permit.
   1.   There is no charge for the initial inspection as long as the building
is in compliance with all applicable building codes.
   2.   If the building upon the initial inspection is noncompliant with
Chapter 162 necessitating an additional inspection, the building owner or
representative shall pay an inspection fee.
   3.   Upon completion of the inspection, the building owner or representative
shall remedy as ordered. If no repairs are necessary, the permit is valid for
one year from the inspection, at which time the inspection process begins again
with the Vacant Building Permit Application being due annually thereafter.
   4.   If the inspection results in necessary repairs being ordered, a
reinspection will be conducted in accord with the provisions of this chapter.
   5.   In the case of a necessary reinspection, the annual permit shall begin
on that date that the ordered repairs are verified by the Building Official or
designee, and the building is in compliance with all applicable building codes.
162.09   FEES AND PENALTIES.
    1.   Vacant Building Permit Fee. The Council shall establish a fee for the
180-day issuance and renewal of a Vacant Building Permit fee.
   2.   Permit Fee Due. The Vacant Building Permit fee is due upon the 180-day
inspection (per Section
162.02(1) a building is vacant once unoccupied for 180 days).
   3.   Reinspection Fees.
      A.   To compensate the City for its inspection and administrative costs
reasonably related to the enforcement, an escalating fee established by the
Council through resolution, may be charged for any reinspection following the
initial inspection which resulted in an order for corrective action, and the
first reinspection to determine compliance with an order for corrective action
issued hereunder. There shall be no reinspection fee if the inspection
indicates full compliance, or for a reinspection occurring during the period of
an approved time extension granted for good cause and involving a good faith
effort on the part of the property owner to comply with the order.
      B.   Failure to pay reinspection fees within 30 days of mailing an
invoice to the property owner of record shall constitute a violation of this
chapter for which a municipal infraction citation may be issued.
   4.   Violations.
      A.   Any violation of a provision of this chapter is a municipal
infraction for which a municipal infraction citation may be issued. Each day
that the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation for which a
municipal infraction citation may be issued.
      B.   Abatement of Violations. The issuance of a municipal infraction
citation shall not preclude the City Attorney from instituting appropriate
action to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal
occupancy of a structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct
business, or utilization of the structure or premises.
CHAPTER 163
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
 
163.01 Purpose     163.03 Permitted Accessory Use
163.02 Definitions 163.04 Principal Uses
163.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to allow safe, effective, and efficient use of
solar energy conversion systems, and to identify the locations within the City
where they may not be installed.
163.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Solar energy system” means a device, array of devices, or structural
design feature, the purpose of which is to provide for generation of
electricity, the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
space heating or cooling, daylight for interior lighting, or water heating.
Installation types are:
      A.   “Building-integrated” means an integral part of a principal or
accessory building. Building-integrated systems include, but are not limited
to, photovoltaic or hot water systems that are contained within roofing
materials, windows, skylights, and awnings.
      B.   “Ground-mount” means a solar energy system mounted on a rack or pole
that rests on or is attached to the ground. Ground-mount systems can be either
accessory or principal uses.
      C.   “Roof-mount” means a solar energy system mounted on a rack that is
fastened to or ballasted on a building roof. Roof-mount systems can be either
accessory or principal uses.
      D.   “Parallel roof-mount” means a roof-mount solar energy system in
which the solar panels are installed parallel to the roof underneath and no
more than 12” from the surface of the roof. A parallel roof-mount system must
not extend beyond the roof surface underneath it.
      E.   “Wall-mount” means a solar energy system mounted on the side of a
principal or accessory building usually, but not always, for the purpose of
providing direct supplemental space heating by heating and recirculating
conditioned building air.
   2.   “Solar farm” means a commercial facility that converts sunlight into
electricity by means of photovoltaics (PV) for the primary purpose of wholesale
sales of generated electricity. A solar farm is the principal land use for the
parcel on which it is located.
   3.   “Solar garden” means a commercial solar-electric (photovoltaic) array
that provides retail electric power (or a financial proxy for retail power) to
multiple households or businesses residing or located off-site from the
location of the solar energy system. A community solar system/solar garden is a
principal use.
   4.   “Solar resource” means a view of the sun from a specific point on a lot
or building that is not obscured by any vegetation, building, or object for a
minimum of four hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. Standard
Time on all days of the year.
   5.   “Solar access” means unobstructed access to direct sunlight on a lot or
building through the entire year, including access across adjacent parcel air
rights, for the purpose of capturing direct sunlight to operate a solar energy
system.
163.03   PERMITTED ACCESSORY USE.
Solar energy systems shall be allowed as an accessory use in all zoning
classifications where structures of any sort are allowed, subject to certain
requirements as set forth below.
   1.   Height. Solar energy systems must meet the following height
requirements:
      A.   Building- or roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed the
maximum allowed height of a structure in any zoning district.
      B.   Ground- or pole-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed 12
feet in height when oriented at maximum tilt.
   2.   Set-back. Solar energy systems must meet the accessory structure
setback requirements for the zoning district and primary land use associated
with the lot on which the system is located and shall only be located in rear
yards.
      A.   Roof or Building-Mount Solar Energy Systems. In addition to the
building setback, the collector surface and mounting devices for roof-mounted
solar energy systems shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of the
building on which the system is mounted or built, unless the collector and
mounting system has been explicitly engineered to safely extend beyond the
edge, and setback standards are not violated. Exterior piping for solar hot
water systems shall be allowed to extend beyond the perimeter of the building
on a back yard exposure. Solar collectors mounted on the sides of buildings and
serving as awnings are considered to be building-integrated systems and are
regulated as awnings.
      B.   Ground-Mount Solar Energy Systems. Ground-mounted solar energy
systems may not extend into the side yard or rear setback when oriented at
minimum design tilt, except as otherwise allowed for building mechanical
systems.
   3.   Location and Visibility.
      A.   Building-Integrated and Wall-Mount Solar Energy Systems. Building-
integrated and wall-mount solar energy systems shall be allowed regardless of
whether the system is visible from the public right-of-way, provided the
building component in which the system is integrated or mounted meets all
required setback, land use, and performance standards for the district in which
the building is located. The color of the solar collectors is not required to
be consistent with other building materials.
      B.   Roof-Mount Solar Energy Systems. Roof-mount solar energy systems
shall not be restricted for aesthetic reasons if the system is not visible from
the closest edge of any public right-of-way other than an alley. Roof-mounted
systems that are visible from the nearest edge of the street frontage right-of-
way shall not have the highest finished pitch steeper than the roof pitch on
which the system is mounted, and shall be no higher than 12 inches above the
roof. The color of the solar collectors is not required to be consistent with
other roofing materials.
      C.   Ground-Mount Solar Energy Systems. Except as indicated in other
parts of this chapter, ground-mount solar energy systems shall be treated as an
accessory structure and shall be subject to the requirements of an accessory
structure. In particular, a ground-mount solar energy system shall not be
located in the required front yard or side yard of a lot.
      D.   Reflectors. No solar energy system using an external reflector to
enhance solar production shall be installed within the City limits.
   4.   Coverage. Roof- or building-mount solar energy systems, excluding
building-integrated systems, shall allow for adequate roof access for fire-
fighting purposes to the south-facing or flat roof upon which the panels are
mounted. Ground-mount systems shall be exempt from impervious surface
calculations if the soil under the collector is maintained in vegetation and is
not compacted. Foundations, gravel, and compacted soils are considered
impervious.
   5.   Historic Buildings. Solar energy systems on historically designated
buildings shall be installed only as allowed by the U.S. Department of
Interior.
   6.   Plan Approvals.
      A.   Building-Integrated Systems: No approvals by the City shall be
required for building-integrated systems beyond the normal building permit
process.
      B.   Wall-Mount, Parallel Roof-Mount and Roof-Mount Systems on Flat
Roofs. All roof-mounted systems shall require a licensed engineer’s
certification of adequate roof load capacity for the proposed system. All wall-
mount solar energy systems, parallel roof-mount solar energy systems, or roof-
mount solar energy systems on flat roofs shall require a City building permit.
      C.   Non-Parallel Roof-Mount and Ground-Mount Systems. Non-parallel roof-
mount and ground-mount systems shall require a building permit, as described in
Chapter 155.
         (1)   Plan applications for non-parallel roof-mounted systems shall
indicate the height of the highest point on the solar collector relative to the
roof directly under that point, along with drawings showing the location of the
system on the building.
         (2)   Plan applications for ground-mount systems shall indicate the
location of solar energy system on the parcel, the lot lines, and the set-backs
required. In addition, they shall indicate the height of the installation at
maximum tilt and the ground footprint at minimum tilt, along with a description
of the ground cover to be used under the system.
   7.   Approved Solar Components. Electric solar energy system components must
have a UL or equivalent listing and solar hot water systems must have an SRCC
rating.
   8.   Compliance with Building Code. All solar energy systems shall be
consistent with the State Building Code, and solar thermal systems shall comply
with HVAC-related requirements of the Energy Code.
   9.   Compliance with State Electric Code. All photovoltaic systems shall
comply with the State Electric Code.
   10.   Compliance with State Plumbing Code. Solar hot water systems shall
comply with applicable State Plumbing Code requirements.
   11.   Utility Notification. All solar energy systems that connect with an
electric circuit serviced by the local electric utility (grid-tied systems)
shall comply with the interconnection requirements of the electric utility.
Systems not so connected (off-grid systems) are exempt from this requirement.
163.04   PRINCIPAL USES.
    1.   Solar Garden. The City permits the development of community solar
gardens, subject to the following standards and requirements:
      A.   Rooftop Solar Gardens. Subject to the requirements of Section
163.02(4), rooftop solar gardens are a special use in all districts, and will
require approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
      B.   Ground-Mount Solar Gardens. Ground-mount community solar energy
systems must be less than two acres in total size, and are a special use in all
districts, and will require approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
      C.   Interconnection. An interconnection agreement must be in place with
the local electric utility before work commences on installation of a solar
garden.
      D.   Dimensional Standards. All structures must comply with set-back,
height, and coverage limitations for the district in which the system is
located.
      E.   Site Security. A solar garden located wholly or partly within the
City limits must be completely surrounded by a chain link fence at least six
feet high. All gates must be locked at all times unless personnel are on site.
All components must be located at least four feet from the fence.
      F.   Other Standards. Ground-mount systems must comply with all required
standards for structures in the district in which the system is located.
      G.   Ground Cover. The City encourages (but does not require) owners of
ground-mount solar gardens to plant the land underneath the solar collectors in
pollinator friendly wildflowers. Such plantings must be maintained in such a
way that they do not go to weeds or become predominately grass, but afford
passers-by a predominantly flower view during blooming season. Such plantings
shall be considered flower beds and shall be exempt from the mowing
requirements of
Chapter 58. If wildflowers are not planted, the land underneath the collectors
must be neatly maintained in compliance with
Chapter 58 of the Code of Ordinances.
      H.   Building Permit. Development of a solar garden inside the City
limits requires the issuance of a building permit, according to the process
detailed in
Chapter 155.
      I.   Decommissioning. The City requires that, as part of the construction
permit application, a decommissioning plan shall be submitted to ensure that
the facilities are properly removed after their useful life. Decommissioning of
the solar garden must occur in the event it (or a majority part of it) is not
in use for 12 consecutive months. The plan shall include provisions for removal
of all structures and foundations, restoration of the soil and vegetation, and
a plan ensuring financial resources will be available to fully decommission the
site. Disposal of the solar panels, racks, and foundations must meet state
requirements applicable at the time of decommissioning. The City may require
the posting of a bond, letter of credit, or the establishment of an escrow
account to ensure proper decommissioning.
   2.   Solar Farm: The City permits the development of solar farms, subject to
the following standards and requirements:
      A.   Development. A solar farm may be developed only on land zoned A-1
(Agricultural) at the time of the development. Solar Farms are a special use,
and will require approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
      B.   Stormwater and NPDES. If the City has stormwater management, erosion
or sediment control provisions, or NPDES permit requirements at the time of the
development, solar farms shall be subject to those requirements.
      C.   Ground Cover and Buffer Areas. Ground around and under solar arrays
and in project buffer areas shall be planted and maintained in perennial
vegetated ground cover, and meet the following standards:
         (1)   Topsoils shall not be removed during development, unless part of
a remediation effort.
      D.   Soils shall be planted and maintained in perennial vegetation to
prevent erosion, manage run off, and build soil. Seeds may include a mix of
grasses and wildflowers, but shall be predominantly wildflowers, ideally native
to the region that will result in a short stature prairie with a diversity of
forbs or flowering plants that bloom throughout the growing season. Blooming
shrubs may be used in buffer areas as appropriate for visual screening. Seed
mixes and maintenance practices should be consistent with recommendations made
by qualified natural resource professionals such as those from the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources, Clinton County Soil and Water Conservation
Service, or the Natural Resource Conservation Service. Plant material must not
have been treated with systemic insecticides, particularly neonicontinoids.
Such plantings must be maintained in such a way that they do not go to weeds or
become predominantly grass, but afford passers-by a predominantly flower view
during blooming season. Such plantings shall be considered flower beds and
shall be exempt from the mowing requirements of
Chapter 58. If wildflowers are not planted, the land underneath the collectors
must be neatly maintained in compliance with
Chapter 58.
      E.   Foundations. A qualified engineer shall certify that the foundation
and design of the solar panels’ racking and support is within accepted
professional standards, given local soil and climate conditions.
      F.   Other Standards and Codes. All solar farms shall be in compliance
with all applicable local, State, and federal regulatory codes, including the
State Uniform Building Code, as amended; and the National Electric Code, as
amended.
      G.   Power and Communication Lines. Power and communication lines running
between banks of solar panels and to nearby electric substations or
interconnections with buildings shall be buried underground. Exemptions may be
granted by the City in instances where shallow bedrock, water courses, or other
elements of the natural landscape interfere with the ability to bury lines, or
distance makes undergrounding infeasible, at the discretion of the City’s
consulting engineer.
      H.   Site Security. A solar farm located wholly or partly within the City
limits must be completely surrounded by a chain link fence at least six feet
high. All gates must be locked at all times unless personnel are on site. All
components must be located at least four feet from the fence.
      I.   Site Plan Required. A detailed site plan for both existing and
proposed conditions must be submitted, showing location of all solar arrays,
other structures, property lines, rights-of-way, service roads, floodplains,
wetlands and other protected natural resources, topography, electric equipment,
and all other characteristics requested by the City. The site plan shall also
show all zoning districts.
      J.   Aviation Protection. For solar farms located within 500 feet of an
airport or within approach zones of an airport, the applicant must complete and
provide the results of the Solar Glare Hazard Analysis Tool (SGHAT) for the
Airport Traffic Control Tower cab and final approach paths, consistent with the
Interim Policy, FAA Review of Solar Energy Projects on Federally Obligated
Airports, or most recent version adopted by the FAA.
      K.   Agricultural Protection. Solar farms must comply with site
assessment or soil identification standards that are intended to protect
agricultural soils.
      L.   Decommissioning. A decommissioning plan shall be required to ensure
that facilities are properly removed after their useful life. Decommissioning
of the installation must occur in the event that a majority of the solar panels
are not in use for 12 consecutive months. The plan shall include provisions for
removal of all structures and foundations, restoration of soil and vegetation,
and a plan ensuring financial resources will be available to fully decommission
the site. Disposal of the solar panels, racks, and foundations must meet State
requirements applicable at the time of decommissioning. The City shall require
the posting of a bond, letter of credit, or the establishment of an escrow
account to ensure proper decommissioning.
CHAPTER 165
ZONING REGULATIONS
EDITOR’S NOTE
The Zoning Regulations, adopted June 19, 1995, and amendments thereto,
contained in a separate volume, are a part of this Code of Ordinances and
are in full force and effect. The following ordinances have been adopted
amending the Official Zoning Map of the City and have not been codified
herein, but are specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and
effect.
ORDINANCE ADOPTED ORDINANCE ADOPTED
EDITOR’S NOTE
The Zoning Regulations, adopted June 19, 1995, and amendments thereto,
contained in a separate volume, are a part of this Code of Ordinances and
are in full force and effect. The following ordinances have been adopted
amending the Official Zoning Map of the City and have not been codified
herein, but are specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and
effect.
ORDINANCE ADOPTED           ORDINANCE ADOPTED
95-18     October 16, 1995
96-02     June 3, 1996
96-08     June 17, 1996
96-14     November 4, 1996
97-12     July 21, 1997
97-13     August 18, 1997
98-05     May 4, 1998
98-06     May 4, 1998
98-14     December 21, 1998
2001-01   March 5, 2001
2001-04   May 7, 2001
2002-07   June 17, 2002
2002-14   November 18, 2002
2002-15   November 18, 2002
2003-01   March 3, 2003
2003-13   June 16, 2003
2004-04   June 7, 2004
2004-07   June 21, 2004
2004-10   October 18, 2004
2004-11   November 15, 2004
2005-07   May 16, 2005
2005-14   December 5, 2005
2006-02   May 15, 2006
2006-06   July 17, 2006
2009-02   May 4, 2009
2014-16   October 6, 2014
2014-17   September 3, 2014
2016-02   March 7, 2016
2016-04   August 15, 2016
2017-03   June 5, 2017
2018-07   December 3, 2018
2020-05   June 15, 2020
2024-05   August 19, 2024
2025-05   October 20, 2025
 
CHAPTER 170
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
170.01 Title 170.12 Alternative Systems for Sanitary Sewer or Water
170.01 Title                            170.12 Alternative Systems for Sanitary
                                        Sewer or Water
170.02 Purpose                          170.13 Minimum Standards for the Design
                                        of Subdivisions Prescribed
170.03 Application/General Jurisdiction 170.14 Preliminary Plat Requirements
170.04 Fees Established                 170.15 Final Plat Requirements
170.05 Definitions                      170.16 Variances
170.06 General Procedures               170.17 Recording of Plats
170.07 Improvements Required            170.18 Penalties
170.08 Inspection                       170.19 Building Permits Denied
170.09 Minimum Improvements             170.20 Changes and Amendments
170.10 Easements Required
170.11 Maintenance Bond Required
170.01   TITLE.
This chapter may be known and cited as the “Subdivision Ordinance” of the City.
170.02   PURPOSE.
To encourage orderly community development and provide for the regulation and
control of the extension of public services and utilities, the improvement of
land, and the design of subdivisions, consistent with the approved
Comprehensive Plan and other specific community plans and the standards set
forward in the Zoning Ordinance by providing minimum standards for the design,
development, and improvement of all new subdivision and re-subdivision of land,
so that adequate provisions are made for said public facilities and services,
and so that growth occurs in an orderly manner consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan, and to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the City.
170.03   APPLICATION/GENERAL JURISDICTION.
It is unlawful for any person being the owner, agent of person having control
of any land within the corporate limits of the City or, pursuant to Section
354.9, Code of Iowa, within two miles outside those limits, to create a
subdivision or replat of a lot in an existing subdivision unless by plat, in
accordance with the regulations contained herein. Such plat shall be submitted
to the Council for approval or disapproval in accordance with the procedures
contained herein. No plat shall be recorded and no lots shall be sold from such
plat unless and until approved and all public lands and rights dedicated to the
City, or other appropriate jurisdiction within the extraterritorial limit, as
required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354)
   1.   The sale or exchange of small parcels of land to or between adjoining
property owners, where such sale or exchange does not create additional
building lots or creates lots that are nonconforming with respect to this and
other City ordinances, shall not be considered a subdivision of land.
   2.   Any landowner within the City or within the unincorporated areas of the
County, within two miles of the limits thereof, who may hereafter establish or
dedicate a road, highway, street, or alley through a tract of land, regardless
of area, shall submit a subdivision plat to the City in accordance with this
chapter. The use of eminent domain to establish or create said road, highway,
street, or alley shall not require the owner to submit a subdivision plat.
170.04   FEES ESTABLISHED.
The application shall be accompanied by a certified check or money order
payable to the City. For a Preliminary Plat the amount is $100.00. For a Final
Plat the amount is $75.00. The purpose of this fee is to cover the cost of
checking and verifying the proposed plat. Additional engineering fees incurred
by the City for review of the plats and the cost of any engineering inspection
for acceptance of physical improvements shall be paid by the subdivider. No
plat for any subdivision or re-subdivision shall be considered filed with the
Clerk, unless and until said plat is accompanied by the fee.
170.05   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.
   2.   “Arterial street” means those streets designated for large volumes of
traffic movement.
   3.   “Block” means a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination
of streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of
waterways, corporate boundary lines or other discernible land attributes that
might create a logical division in the subdivision or identification of land.
   4.   “Building” means a structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls, for the shelter, support, enclosure, or protection of persons, animals,
chattels, or property. When separated by party walls without opening through
such walls, each portion of such a building shall be considered a separate
structure.
   5.   “Building setback line, building line” means a line on a plat between
which line and the street or alley no building or structure may be erected. In
the absence of such a designation the required yards identified in the City’s
Zoning Ordinance shall be the minimum building line.
   6.   “City Engineer” means the professional engineer registered in the State
designated as City Engineer by the Council or other hiring authority.
   7.   “Commission” refers to the City Planning and Zoning Commission.
   8.   “Communications service” or “communications” includes communication
services provided to the public such as telephone, cable television, and other
such services as may require the use of easements for the delivery of services
within their operating permits.
   9.   “Comprehensive Plan” means the complete plan, or any of its parts, for
the development of the City, prepared by the Commission and adopted in
accordance with the State law.
   10.   “Crosswalk, walkways” means a right-of-way located across a block, on
a dedicated easement or land, for the purpose of providing pedestrian access to
adjacent streets, parks, schools, or other similar public areas.
   11.   “Cul-de-sac or court” means a minor street having one end open to
traffic on a public street and being permanently terminated at its other end by
a vehicular turnaround.
   12.   “Easement” means a grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of
land by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or persons for a
specific purpose or purposes. Or;
A right-of-way reserved for specific uses, such as: creeks, drainage, walkways,
public and private utilities and services, or uses serving the general welfare.
No permanent improvements, such as buildings, trees, or fences shall be placed
in easement areas that restrict the use of or access to the designated land for
the purpose for which it was reserved.
   13.   “Excess stormwater passage” means a drainage easement designed to
carry that portion of stormwater runoff from the 100-year frequency storm that
exceeds the transportation capacity of the storm sewers and/or natural drainage
channels serving a specified watershed.
   14.   “Flag lot” means a lot with a long unbuildable approach used to
provide access and meet frontage provisions for subdivision lots.
   15.   “Highway” means a State or Federal numbered route transversing an
urbanized area that may require limitations to access for the sake of safety
and to preserve the flow of traffic at certain target speeds.
   16.   “Lot” means a tract of land represented and identified by number or
letter designation on an official plat.
   17.   “Low water entry level” means the elevation at which surface water
would enter a building or structure during or after and as a result of
designated storm. Such entry levels should be determined by a qualified
engineer.
   18.   “May” is permissive.
   19.   “Metes and Bounds” means a description of land that uses distances and
angles, uses distances and bearings, or describes the boundaries of the parcel
by reference to physical features of the land.
   20.   “Official Plat” means either an auditor’s plat or a subdivision plat
that meets the requirements of Chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa, and has been
filed for record in the offices of the recorder, auditor, and assessor.
   21.   “Parcel” means a part of a tract of land.
   22.   “Parkway” means a route intended for use by both passenger vehicles
and pedestrians in a park-like setting with adequate separation to protect
both.
   23.   “Plat” means a geographical representation of the subdivision of land,
prepared for the purpose of the division of the property for sale or other
uses.
   24.   “Plat, Preliminary” means a plat submitted for the purpose of gaining
approval of the general layout of a subdivision under Section
170.14 of this chapter.
   25.   “Plat, Final” means a plat that is intended to become an official plat
on approval that is filed with the City and meets the requirements set forth in
Section
170.15 of this chapter and Chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa.
   26.   “Poles, overhead lines, and associated overhead structures” means to
include, but not limited to, poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys,
stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts,
switches, communication circuit appliances, attachments, and appurtenances
located above the ground upon, along, across, or over the streets, alleys, and
ways of the City, and used or are useful in supplying electric, communications,
or other similar or associated services.
   27.   “Replat” means a subdivision or plat, the site of which has previously
been platted or subdivided with lots or parcels of land. It may include all or
any part of a previous subdivision or plat.
   28.   “Roadway” means the paved area, including all curb and gutter
facilities, within a street right-of-way intended for vehicular traffic.
   29.   “Shall” indicates a mandatory requirement or action and is not
discretionary.
   30.   “Street” means a right-of-way dedicated to and accepted for the public
use which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
   31.   “Street, private” means a privately-owned thoroughfare which affords a
principal means of access to abutting properties and includes a general
easement for access by the public.
   32.   “Subdivision” is a tract or parcel of land divided or proposed to be
divided, either by repeated or simultaneous divisions, so as to cause there to
be three or more parcels within a single tract. The existence of a subdivision
shall be determined without regard to any of the following:
      A.   Whether the divisions are carried out by the same or successive
owners of the tract or parcel,
      B.   Whether any parcels resulting from the division are described by
metes and bounds, and
      C.   Whether any plats of surveys have been or are proposed to be
recorded for any of the parcels.
The existence of a subdivision shall be determined with reference to the
smallest tract of which the land divided, or to be divided, is a part, taking
into account any parcels previously created from the same tract by prior
divisions.
   33.   “Utility” or “utilities” means and includes any gas, water, sewer,
electrical, communications, or other similar service and all persons providing
the same.
   34.   “’X’ Year Storm” means the average probable recurrence interval within
which a rainfall of given intensity and duration will be equaled or exceeded
only once. A 100 year storm would have an intensity of rainfall which would, on
the average, have a probability of being equaled or exceeded only once in 100
years. This does not imply that it will occur at such intervals, or that once
having occurred, it will not occur again for 100 years.
170.06   GENERAL PROCEDURES.
The general procedures relative to the platting process are described below.
Appendix A contains progress checklists and routing flow charts.
   1.   Pre-submission of Plans. Prior to the submission of a preliminary plat,
each subdivider of land shall confer with the City or City officials in order
to become thoroughly familiar with the City Comprehensive Plan and with any
municipal regulations affecting the area to be subdivided. At this time
subdividers are invited to submit to the City studies or sketches which may be
helpful in discussing the preparation of a preliminary plat.
   2.   Preliminary Plats. A preliminary plat is required for any subdivision
that requires the extension of services by the City or potentially impacts the
implementation of the City Comprehensive Plan. Where an area being platted is
part of a larger parcel all of which is not to be platted at this time, the
preliminary plat should address the general circulation and drainage from the
entire property and provide for service extensions to the edge of the area to
be incorporated in a final plat and provisions for future services. Street
circulation shall be designed to ensure access throughout the subdivision.
   3.   Final Plats. Final plats represent the legal division of land from
which lots are sold. The procedures and checklists for final platting are
included in Appendix A to this chapter.
170.07   IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
The subdivider shall, at the subdivider’s expense, install and construct all
improvements required by this chapter. All required improvements shall be
installed and constructed in accordance with the design standards established
for such improvements by the City, and as shown on the approved preliminary
plat.
170.08   INSPECTION.
All improvements shall be inspected to ensure compliance with the requirements
of this chapter. The cost of such inspection shall be paid by the subdivider
and shall be the actual cost of inspection to the City.
170.09   MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS.
The improvements set forth in this section shall be considered the minimum
improvements necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
   1.   Streets. The subdivider of land being subdivided shall provide the
grading of the entire street right-of-way or alley and provide appropriate
paving, including curb and gutter on all streets. All streets or alleys shall
be of such width and shall be so constructed as to meet the standards of the
City. Subdivisions adjacent to existing unimproved streets shall provide for
curbs, sidewalks, drainage, and other improvements that may be required,
provided that the final street grade can be reasonably determined and said
improvements can be provided in a logical way.
   2.   Sanitary Sewer System.
      A.   The subdivider of the land being platted shall make adequate
provision for the disposal of sanitary sewage from the platted area, and
unserved abutting parcels, with due regard being given to present or reasonably
foreseeable needs. There shall be constructed, at the subdivider’s expense, a
sanitary sewer system including all necessary pumping stations, pumping
equipment, manholes, and all other necessary or desirable appurtenances to
provide for the discharge of sanitary sewage from all lots or parcels of land
within the platted area to a connection with the City’s sanitary sewers. The
sanitary sewer system shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and
specifications of the City and at the sewer grades as approved by the City.
      B.   The City may require, as a condition for approval of the plat,
installation of a sanitary sewer that is larger than the standard eight-inch
main in order to meet the needs of the platted area, but necessary to complete
the City sanitary sewer system as it relates to both the area being platted and
other areas. In such event, the City shall pay the subdivider the pre-approved
difference in cost of the pipe and installation between the larger sewer and
the diameter of sewer reasonable to meet the foreseeable needs of the area. The
sanitary sewer system shall, upon final approval and acceptance by the City,
become the property of the City.
   3.   Stormwater Sewer System
      A.   The subdivider shall install and construct a stormwater sewer system
adequate to serve that area, including anticipated extensions to serve
additional areas upstream. The stormwater sewer system shall be constructed in
accordance with plans and specifications of the City and at sewer grades
approved by the City. In the design phase, consideration shall be given to
alternatives and principles of the City’s stormwater management plan contained
in Chapter 101 of this Code of Ordinances.
      B.   The stormwater sewer system within the street shall be constructed
to carry the 10-year storm within the gutters and underground system and to
provide an overflow stormwater route and easement for the 100-year storm. Catch
basins shall be provided at reasonable distances to ensure the flow of the 10-
year storm within the gutters at a maximum depth of six inches.
      C.   The City may require, as a condition of approval of the plat,
installation of a stormwater sewer system, including surface drainage systems
and detention ponds, that are larger than necessary for serving the area being
platted to complete the City stormwater system as it relates to both the area
being platted and other areas. When required, the City will pay the subdivider
the pre-approved difference in cost of the pipe and installation or land and
easements, between the larger stormwater sewer and the diameter of stormwater
sewer reasonable to meet the foreseeable needs of the drainage area.
      D.   The drainage system shall, upon inspection, approval, and acceptance
by the City, become the property of the City.
   4.   Water Main System
      A.   The subdivider shall install and construct a water main system to
adequately serve all lots or parcels of land within and abutting the platted
area, with due regard to the present and reasonable foreseeable needs of the
entire area, and shall connect the same to the City’s existing water mains.
      B.   The City may require, as a condition for approval of the plat,
installation of a water main that is larger than necessary to meet the needs of
the platted area, but necessary to complete the City water distribution system
as it relates to the area being platted and other areas. The City will pay the
subdivider the pre-approved difference in cost of the pipe and installation
between the larger water main and the diameter of water main reasonable to meet
the foreseeable needs of the area platted.
      C.   The water main shall, upon inspection, approval, and acceptance by
the City, become the property of the City.
   5.   Other Improvements. The owner and subdivider of the land being platted
shall be responsible for the installation of sidewalks within the street area;
the installation of walkways as necessary; grading, seeding, or sodding of the
lots; the planting of any required trees in the parking; the installation of
street signs, and the provision of street lighting. All such improvements shall
be under the direction of the Director of Public Works.
   6.   Compliance with Other Plans. The owner and subdivider shall comply with
the Comprehensive Plan, Recreation and Open Space Plan and other approved plans
which identify the acquisition of land, require improvements, or use
restrictions.
170.10   EASEMENTS REQUIRED.
   1.   Public Utilities. Where alleys are not provided or where otherwise
required by the present or future placement of public utilities, easements of
not less than 10 feet in width shall be granted by the owner along rear, front,
or side lot lines for public utilities.
   2.   Along Streams and Watercourses. Where any stream or surface watercourse
is located in an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall, at the
subdivider’s own expense, make adequate provisions for the proper drainage of
surface water and shall provide and dedicate to the City an easement along said
stream or watercourse as necessary for proper maintenance of the watercourse.
No person shall place or allow to be placed an accumulation of materials,
including, but not limited to, wood, concrete, stone, brush, grass clippings,
or other debris that might block the flow of stormwater in a stormwater
drainage easement or could reasonably be expected to be carried downstream by
such stormwater to the detriment of either upstream or downstream property
owners.
170.11   MAINTENANCE BOND REQUIRED.
The owner and subdivider of the land being platted shall be required to provide
to the City proper maintenance bonds satisfactory to the City, so as to ensure
that, for a period of two years from the date of acceptance of any improvement,
the owner and subdivider shall be responsible to maintain such improvement in
good repair.
170.12   ALTERNATIVE SYSTEMS FOR SANITARY SEWER OR WATER.
Where connection to the City sanitary sewer or water systems cannot reasonably
be made, the City may approve alternate facilities for the distribution of
water or the collection and disposal of sanitary wastes. Such alternative
systems shall be designed to fully protect the public health, safety, and
welfare, and shall meet all requirements of the State, County, or other
applicable health regulations. Prior to granting approval of such alternate
systems, the City shall require that the owner and subdivider provide to the
City a waiver of assessment protest or such other legally binding documents
necessary to protect the City from the expense of the subsequent installation
of sanitary sewer and water facilities.
170.13   MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR THE DESIGN OF SUBDIVISIONS PRESCRIBED.
The standards set forth in this chapter shall be considered the minimum
standards necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   1.   Land Suitability. No land shall be subdivided which is found to be
unsuitable for subdividing by reason of flooding, ponding, poor drainage,
adverse soil conditions, adverse geological formations, unsatisfactory
topography, or other conditions likely to be harmful to the public health,
safety, or general welfare, unless such unsuitable conditions are corrected to
the satisfaction of the City. If land is found to be unsuitable for subdivision
for any of the reasons cited in this subsection, the Council shall state its
reasons in writing and afford the subdivider an opportunity to present data
regarding such unsuitability. Thereafter, the Council may reaffirm, notify, or
withdraw its determination regarding such unsuitability.
   2.   Lands Subject to Flooding. No subdivision containing land located in a
floodway or a flood hazard area shall be approved by the City without the
approval of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources. No lot shall be located
so as to include land located within a floodway or flood hazard area unless the
lot is of such size and shape that it will contain a buildable area not within
the floodway of flood hazard area, suitable for development as allowed by the
zoning ordinance for the zone in which the lot is located. Land located within
a flood hazard area or a floodway may be included within a plat as follows,
subject to approval of the City:
      A.   The land contour of all lots shall contain building sites with an
elevation of sufficient height to permit construction of the habitable floor of
a building one foot above a 100-year flood level.
Chapter 160 of this Code of Ordinances contains the City’s Flood Plain
Regulations.
      B.   Reserved as open space for recreation use by all owners of lots in
the subdivision, with an appropriate legal instrument approved by the City,
providing for its care and maintenance by such owners.
      C.   If acceptable to the City, dedicated to the City as public open
space for recreation and flood control purposes.
   3.   Plat to Conform to Comprehensive Plan. The arrangement, character,
extent, width, grade, and location of all streets and the general nature and
extent of the lots and uses proposed shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan of
the City and other such plans including Transportation Thoroughfare Plan,
Sanitary Sewer System Plan, Recreation and Open Space Plan and other specific
or general plans of the City.
   4.   Construction Standards for Improvements. In addition to the standards
set forth in this chapter, the City Engineer shall, from time to time, prepare
and the Council adopt by resolution, standard specifications for public
improvements. Such standard specifications for public improvements shall
contain the minimal acceptable specifications for the construction of public
improvements, giving due regard to the classification of streets or other
improvements, and the extent and character of the area served by the
improvements. Upon adoption by the Council by resolution, such standard
specifications for public improvements shall have such force and effect as if
they were fully set forth herein. The standard specifications are a separate
document on file at City Hall.
   5.   Street Standards. The following standards shall apply to all streets to
be located within the subdivision:
      A.   Streets shall provide for the continuation of major streets from
adjoining platted areas, and their extension into adjoining unplatted areas.
Where a plat encompasses the location for a major street proposed in the
Comprehensive Plan or Thoroughfare Plan, the plat shall provide for such major
street.
      B.   Street grades shall align to existing streets and all grades for
streets shall be approved by the City. The entire paving, curbing, guttering,
and sidewalks shall be to grade.
      C.   The subdivision shall be so designed as to prohibit direct access to
residential lots from arterial streets and to limit the commercial access
points so they occur at a frequency consistent with street development.
      D.   The standard width for residential streets is 31 feet back of curb
to back of curb.
      E.   Street design shall comply with the following standards:
 
                                                         Minimum Radius of
Street Type    Right-of-Way in Feet Paving Width in Feet Horizontal/
                                                         Vertical Curves
Arterial       80                   49                   500/200 ft.
Arterial with  90                   56                   500/200 ft.
Turning Lane
Collector      60                   36                   400/150 ft.
Collector with 70                   41                   400/150 ft.
Turning Lane
Minor Street
(parking       50                   27                   100/100 ft.
limitations)
               50                   31                   100/100 ft.
For 27-foot, 31-foot, 36-foot and 41-foot paving width, longitudinal joint
spacing for Portland Cement Concrete (PCC) shall be eight feet from back of
curb in addition to centerline. Longitudinal joint spacing requirements for PCC
paving are shown in Appendix B to this chapter.
Exception: The Commission and Council may determine a different minimum street
standard within a planned unit development based upon the applicable land use,
number of lots served, and traffic patterns within the development, or as
determined by the Comprehensive Plan and adopted by resolution as standards
pertaining to this chapter.
      F.   Half-streets are prohibited; except where an existing platted half-
street abuts the subdivision, a half-street to complete the street shall be
required.
      G.   Minor streets should be designed to discourage through traffic while
providing safe access to collector or arterial streets.
      H.   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall be
prohibited, except where topography or other physical conditions make such jogs
unavoidable.
      I.   Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles as possible, and
no street shall intersect any other street at less than 75 degrees.
      J.   At intersections of major streets, and otherwise as necessary, lot
corners abutting the intersection shall be rounded with a radius sufficient to
provide necessary space within the right-of-way for sidewalks, traffic control
devices, and other necessary improvements without encroachment onto the corner
lots.
 
Maximum Gradient Minimum Gradient Clear Sight Distance
5 percent        0.35 percent     500 ft.
6 percent        0.35 percent     300 ft.
6 percent        0.35 percent     200 ft.
      K.   Dead-end streets are prohibited, except where a street is planned to
continue past the subdivider’s property, a temporary dead end may be allowed.
Cul-de-sacs are permitted, but shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length. The
minimum interior radius for a cul-de-sac on a 27-foot to 31-foot wide street is
40 feet. The entry or exit radius is 50 feet. A diagram is provided in Appendix
C to this chapter.
      L.   When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal lots or parcels,
such lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit the logical location and
opening of future streets and appropriate re-subdivision with provision for
adequate utility connections for such re-subdivision. Easement for future
openings and extensions for such streets or utilities may be, at the discretion
of the Council, made a requirement of the plat.
      M.   Streets shall be named in accordance with
Chapter 139 o
      N.   The right-of-way shall be dedicated, at no cost to the City, with
street improvements to the width required provided. Additional width may be
paid by the City.
      O.   Private streets, not dedicated to the City, may be approved by the
City where adequate covenants or other legal documents ensure that the City
will not have or need to assume any maintenance or other responsibility for
such street, unless or until it is brought to full City standards required in
this chapter. In this regard building setback should accommodate the layout of
such public streets in case of future conversion.
   6.   Block and Lot Standards. The following standards shall apply to the
layout of blocks and lots in all subdivisions and, to the extent possible, in
all re-subdivisions:
      A.   No residential block shall be longer than 1,500 feet or shorter than
300 feet measured from street line to street line. The width of blocks should
be arranged so as to allow two tiers of lots with utility easements.
      B.   In blocks over 700 feet in length, the Council may require a public
way or an easement at least 10 feet in width, at or near the center of the
block for use by pedestrians.
      C.   The size and shape of blocks or lots intended for commercial or
industrial use shall be adequate to provide for the use intended and to meet
the parking, loading, and other requirements for such uses contained in the
zoning ordinance.
      D.   Lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will provide
satisfactory building sites, properly related to topography and surrounding
land uses.
      E.   The size and shape of all lots shall comply with all requirements of
the zoning ordinance for the zone in which the lot is located. Corner
residential lots shall be wider than normal in order to permit appropriate
setbacks from both streets.
      F.   All lots shall abut a public street or upon an approved private
street with a minimum frontage of at least 25 feet, measured as a straight line
between the two front corners, or in the case of flag lots, the aggregate sum
of the flags shall be sufficient to produce a minimum street right-of-way but
no less than 10 feet in width with a common access easement (i.e., total width
25 feet for a single flag lot, 40 feet for two flag lots, 50 feet for three to
five lots and 60 feet for six lots).
      G.   All lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or
radial to curved street lines, except where in the judgment of the Council, a
variation to this provision will provide a better street and lot layout.
      H.   Double frontage lots shall only be permitted where these lots abut
arterial streets and such lots shall access only on the minor street. In that
event a planting strip used for a screen, at least 20 feet in width, shall be
provided along the rear of the lot.
      I.   Any lot not to be served by a sanitary sewer system shall have
sufficient area to allow for two satisfactory drain fields. No subdivision to
be served by septic systems shall be approved by the Council until percolation
tests have been performed and the results have been provided to and reported on
by the City Engineer. Septic systems are to be permitted only where sanitary
sewer is unavailable within 500 feet and are not likely to be extended within
seven years.
   7.   Curbs and Gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be constructed by the
subdivider on both sides of all streets.
   8.   Sidewalks. The subdivider shall provide sidewalks on both sides of all
streets including cul-de-sacs, courts, or dead-end streets.
   9.   Parks and Open Space. All residential subdivisions in excess of 20
acres should be so designed as to meet the neighborhood park and open space
needs of its residents. Such needs may be met by dedication and acceptance of
public park and land and/or by reservation by covenant of private open space,
provided there shall exist sufficient covenants, running with the land, to
ensure adequate maintenance by the property owners benefiting from such open
space.
   10.   Parks and School Sites Reserved. When a tract being subdivided
includes lands proposed to be used for parks or school sites in the
Comprehensive Plan or other official plan of the City, the subdivider shall
indicate such areas on the plat and:
      A.   Proposed park sites shall be reserved for three years, giving the
City the option to purchase the land at the appraised raw land value prior to
the subdivision as established by a certified land appraiser. The purchase
price shall also include one-half of the cost for grading and paving, including
curb cuts, of the portion of any streets that are contiguous to the site and
any taxes and interest incurred by the subdivider between the date of the
reservation and date of purchase by the public agency. Should the park site not
be purchased within three years, the subdivider may then amend the final plat
and incorporate the area into the development.
      B.   Proposed school sites shall be reserved for three years, giving the
school district the option to purchase the land at the appraised raw land value
prior to the subdivision as established by a certified land appraiser. The
purchase price shall also include one-half of the cost for grading and paving
including curbs, of the portion of any streets that are contiguous to the site
and any taxes and interest incurred by the subdivider between the date of the
reservation and date of purchase by the school district. Should the school
sites not be purchased within three years, the subdivider may then amend the
final plat.
   11.   Monuments. Steel rods with proper identification of the surveyor in
accordance with the Code of Iowa, a minimum of one-half inch in diameter and 30
inches long shall be in place at all block and lot corners, all points of
curvature, all points of tangency, and all boundary corners within 30 days
after completion of the improvements.
170.14   PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
Plats containing three lots or less which do not involve the extension of City
services may be exempted from the requirement of the preliminary plat as set
forth in this chapter.
   1.   Submission of Preliminary Plat - Contents. The subdivider shall submit
to the Commission 40 copies of the preliminary plat. 20 shall be at a scale of
not less than one inch per 100 feet. 20 shall be reduced to smallest readable
size (preferably 8½” x 11” or 11” x 17”). Said plat should be submitted at
least 10 days, excluding Saturdays and Sundays prior to the regular meeting of
the Commission at which the plat is to be considered. It shall contain or be
supplemented by the following information:
      A.   The location of present property lines, section lines, easements,
corporate limits and other legally established districts, streets, building,
watercourses, marshes, rock outcropping, tree masses, and other existing
features within the area to be subdivided and similar facts regarding existing
conditions on land immediately adjacent thereto (generally within 100 feet);
      B.   The proposed location and width of streets, alleys, lots, building
setback lines, and easements, if any;
      C.   The location of existing sanitary and stormwater sewers, water
mains, culverts, and other underground structures within the tract and
immediately adjacent thereto. The location and size of the nearest water and
sewer mains, stormwater sewer outlets, electric, gas, phone, and other services
to be provided are to be included in a general way upon the plat;
      D.   The proposed name of the subdivision (which shall not duplicate any
previously filed plat), the name of the landowner, the land developer, and the
proposed land surveyor;
      E.   The names and adjoining boundaries of all adjacent subdivisions and
the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land;
      F.   Existing contours with intervals of five feet or less. Where the
general slope of the land is less than a two percent grade, two-foot contours
may be required; and
      G.   North point, graphic and nominal scale, the date submitted, and a
vicinity sketch showing the proposed subdivision in relationship to surrounding
development and street systems and water courses.
   2.   Review Procedures - Conformance with Minimum Standards. The following
are the procedures for submission and review of a preliminary plat by the City.
The standard for development improvements are contained in this chapter and the
City’s Standard Specifications (a separate document on file at City Hall) for
materials with respect to construction of improvements.
      A.   The Clerk, upon receipt of the 20 large scale copies of the
preliminary plat, shall file one copy in the records of the City, shall retain
one copy for public inspection and shall forward the remaining copies to the
Building Official. The 20 smaller scale copies shall be forwarded to the City
Administrator.
      B.   The Building Official shall provide copies of the plat to the City
Technical Development Committee as prescribed in Appendix A of this chapter and
shall schedule the plat for consideration by the Commission.
      C.   The Commission shall examine the plat and the report of the City
Technical Development Committee (the technical committee is identified in
Appendix A) and other information as it deems necessary to ascertain whether
the plat conforms to the ordinances of the City and conforms to the
Comprehensive Plan and other duly adopted plans of the City. The Commission
shall, within 45 days of the filing of the plat with the Clerk, forward a
report and recommendation regarding the plat to the Council. If such
recommendation is to disapprove or modify the plat, the reasons therefor shall
be set forth in writing in the report, and a copy of the report and
recommendation shall be provided to the applicant.
      D.   The Council shall examine the plat, the report of the Technical
Development Committee, the report of the Commission, and such other information
as it deems necessary or desirable. Upon such examination, the Council shall
determine whether the plat conforms to the Comprehensive Plan and other duly
adopted plans of the City, and will be conducive to the orderly growth and
development of the City, in order to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare. Following such examination, the Council may approve, approve subject
to conditions, or disapprove the plat. If the decision of the Council is to
disapprove the plat or to approve subject to conditions, the reasons therefor
shall be set forth in writing in the official Council proceedings and such
decision shall be provided to the applicant. Action on the preliminary plat by
the Council shall be taken within 60 days of the filing of the plat with the
Clerk unless such time period is extended by agreement between the subdivider
and the City.
   3.   Authorization to Install Improvements, Performance Bond, or Assessment
Waiver. The developer, at the City’s discretion, has the option of installing
the improvements and then submitting the final plat or delaying the
construction of the improvements by providing a performance bond, assessment
waiver, or other similar guarantee exercisable by the City to ensure
installation of the required improvements. The approval of the preliminary plat
shall constitute authorization by the Council for the installation of
improvements as required by this chapter and as shown on the preliminary plat;
provided no such improvements shall be constructed or installed until and
unless the plans, profiles, cross-sections, and specifications of the
construction of such improvements have been submitted to and approved in
writing by the City Engineer and other regulatory bodies. If the developer
elects to install improvements after approval of the final plat, said plan
shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to final plat approval.
   4.   Revocability and Duration of Approval. Approval of the preliminary
plat, or any portion thereof not final platted, is revocable by the Commission.
      A.   If neither a part nor all of the preliminary plat is approved by the
Council as a final plat within two years after the approval of the preliminary
plat, the approval for the preliminary plat shall expire and be void unless an
extension for an additional period not to exceed five years is granted by the
Council with the advice of the Commission.
      B.   If only a part of a preliminary plat is approved as a final plat,
the approval of the remaining portion of the preliminary plat shall
automatically be extended for a period of five years from the platting date.
170.15   FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   Conditions for Approval. After approval of the preliminary plat by the
Council, the subdivider may prepare a final plat and submit 20 copies to the
Commission. They shall be supplemented by the information listed in Paragraphs
A through O of Subsection 4 hereto. They shall be filed at least 10 days,
excluding Saturdays and Sundays, prior to the regular meeting of the Commission
at which they are to be considered. If the final plat conforms to the approved
preliminary plat, the Commission will approve the plat subject to the
conditions that the Commission may deem necessary and forward it to the Council
for final acceptance.
   2.   Engineering Plans. Detailed engineering drawing and construction plans,
prepared by and certified to by a professional engineer registered in the
State, in accordance with the provisions of the latest revision of the City’s
Standard Specifications and stormwater sewers, water, and sanitary sewer
systems as contained herein shall be submitted to the City for review at the
subdivider’s expense. Engineering plans shall be approved by the City Engineer
prior to construction of the improvements.
   3.   Scale. The final plat is to be drawn from an accurate survey at a scale
of 50 feet to the inch (1” = 50’) unless a specific variance is granted by the
Commission.
   4.   Submission of the Final Plat - Contents. 20 copies of the final plat,
reduced to the smallest readable size (preferably 8½” x 11” or 11” x 17”),
together with the original tracing and four to scale copies shall be submitted
to the City. They shall be filed at least six working days prior to the regular
meeting of the Council at which they are to be considered. The plat will be
clearly marked “Final Plat” and will show or be supplemented by the following
information:
      A.   The name of the subdivision;
      B.   The name and address of the owner, subdivider, and/or registered
agent;
      C.   Scale, and a graphic bar scale, north arrow, and date on each sheet;
      D.   All monuments to be of record, as required by Chapter 354 of the
Code of Iowa;
      E.   Sufficient survey data to positively describe the bounds of every
lot, block, street, easement, or other areas shown on the plat, as well as the
outer boundaries of the subdivided lands. The boundaries shall be tied to the
nearest section corner.
      F.   All distances, bearings, curve, and other survey data as required,
as required by Chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa;
      G.   All adjoining properties shall be identified and where such
adjoining properties are a part of a recorded subdivision, the name of that
subdivision shall be shown. If the subdivision platted is a re-subdivision or a
part of the whole of a previously recorded subdivision, sufficient ties shall
be shown to controlling lines appearing on the earlier plat to permit an
overlay to be made. Re-subdivision shall be labeled as such in a subtitle
following the name of the plat.
      H.   The lines of all proposed streets with their widths, and any other
area intended to be dedicated for public use along with the proposed use for
the dedicated land;
      I.   The lines of all adjoining lands and the lines of adjacent streets
and alleys with their width and names;
      J.   An identification system for all lots and blocks;
      K.   Building lines and easements for any right-of-way provided for
public use, services. or utilities, or excess stormwater passageways with
dimension shown;
      L.   Radii, arcs and chords, points of tangency, central angles for all
curvilinear streets, and radii and tangents for all rounded corners;
      M.   All survey monuments and benchmarks together with their
descriptions;
      N.   A statement by a registered land surveyor that the plat was prepared
by the surveyor or under the surveyor’s direct personal supervision, signed and
dated by the surveyor and bearing the surveyor’s State registration number or
seal, and a sealed certification of the accuracy of the plat by the registered
land surveyor who drew the plat; and
      O.   Signature blocks for the approval signature of the Mayor, Chair of
the Planning and Zoning Commission, authorized representatives of the public
service or utility companies concerned that easements shown on the plat are
satisfactory for their requirements.
   5.   Material to be Filed Prior to Consideration. The following material
shall be filed with the City at least six working days prior to the regular
meeting of the Council at which they are to be considered. Appendix D to this
chapter contains sample forms.
      A.   One of the following:
         (1)   A certificate bearing the approval of the City Engineer, stating
that all improvements and installations to the subdivision required by this
section have been made or installed in accordance with the standard
specifications and this chapter; or
            a.   A performance bond or bonds with the City, which will ensure
to the City that the subdivision improvements will be completed by the
subdivider within two years after Council acceptance of the plat and a
maintenance bond or bonds, from all the subdivider’s contractors, with the City
which will ensure to the City that said improvements will be maintained in good
and suitable condition for a period of two years after Council acceptance of
the construction.
            b.   The term “maintain” or “maintained” shall be defined as
pertaining to the repairs which shall become necessary because of defective or
faulty workmanship or materials in the improvement completed by the subdivider
and/or the subdivider’s contractors.
            c.   The form and type of a performance bond or bonds shall be
approved by the City Attorney and the Finance Committee of the City, and the
amount of any bond shall not be less than the estimated cost of the
improvements, and the amount of any performance maintenance bond shall be
approved by the City Engineer. If the improvements are not completed or
maintained within the specified times, the Council may use the bond or bonds or
any necessary portion thereof to complete or maintain the improvements.
         (2)   A waiver to the Council to provide the subdivision improvements
required with the final plat and to assess the cost thereof against the
subdivided property in accordance with the law regarding special assessments.
However, the subdivider or property owners shall be responsible for any
difference between the cost of the improvements and the amount that can be
legally assessed by the City against the subdivided property, and they shall
furnish the necessary waivers to permit the assessment of the entire cost of
the improvement. Notwithstanding the assessment waiver, the subdivider or
property owner may elect to construct the subdivision improvements, in which
case all their contractors shall file with the City a maintenance bond as set
forth in Section
170.15(5)(A).
      B.   A petition, signed by the property owner, requesting the Council to
approve the plat and stating that they are doing so of their own free will;
      C.   A letter of certification by the surveyor that all monuments
required are in place;
      D.   State approvals of plans and profiles of all sanitary sewers and
appurtenances;
      E.   If a surety bond is to be filed, a letter from the developer’s
engineer stating the quantities of excavation, pavement, sidewalks, sewers, and
other necessary improvements;
      F.   A hold harmless agreement protecting the City from any damages,
claims, or suits resulting from the construction and development by the owner
and/or subdivider, with said agreement approved as to format by the City
Attorney and recorded with the plat;
      G.   The following signed certificates, current within 30 days prior to
the date of the Council’s approval, shall accompany the final plat submitted to
the Council:
         (1)   The Mayor’s and Clerk’s certification. The Mayor and Clerk
certify Council’s approval of the final plat by resolution.
         (2)   An attorney’s certificate. An attorney’s legal opinion placing
the fee title, free from unbonded encumbrances, in the owner. The attorney
shall also identify the name or holder of any mortgage, lien, judgment, or
other encumbrances on the land being platted. No dedication of public way shall
be accepted by the City until the persons identified in the attorney’s
certificate to the City has either agreed to release any encumbrance on the
land to be dedicated, or the owner submits an irrevocable bond payable to the
City in an amount equal to twice the value of the encumbrance, to guarantee the
release of the encumbrance at the time the City chooses. Utility easements
shall not be construed to be encumbrances for the purpose of this section. In
the event the subdivision plat contains no land for public use other than
utility easements, the treasurer’s certificate listed in Section
170.15(5)(G)(5) need not include a statement on special assessments.
         (3)   A statement from mortgage holders. A statement from the mortgage
holders, if any, that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in
accordance with their desires, signed, and acknowledged before an officer
authorized to take the acknowledgement of deeds. In lieu of such consent, the
owner may provide an affidavit and bond as provided in Chapter 354 of the Code
of Iowa. When a mortgage holder consents to the subdivision, a release of
mortgage shall be recorded for any areas conveyed to the City or dedicated to
the public.
         (4)   The owner’s dedicatory certificate. A certificate by the owner
of the property and spouse, if any, that the subdivision as it appears on the
plat is with free consent, and is in accord with the desire of said owner and
spouse, dedicating the streets and other public ways shown on the plat,
agreeing to abide by the setbacks required in the City code at the time any
building permit is obtained, declaring the limitation on easements and
providing for any restrictive covenants needed or requested.
         (5)   The County Treasurer’s certificate. A certificate from the
County Treasurer that the land is free from certified taxes and that the
certified special assessments are secured by a bond in compliance with Chapter
354 of the Code of Iowa.
         (6)   One surveyor’s certificate, signed and sealed.
   6.   Final Approval. After approval of the final subdivision plat by the
Commission, the recommendation of approval and the final plat shall be
submitted to the Council for final approval and acceptance. If the Commission
does not approve the final plat of the subdivision, the Council may approve the
plat only by a three-fourths vote of the entire membership of the Council.
Council approval of the final plat shall be by resolution. If the Council
rejects the final plat, it shall state in the Council minutes, wherein said
final plat is objectionable.
170.16   VARIANCES.
Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that
strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter would result in
extraordinary hardship to the subdivider, because of unusual topography or
other conditions, the Council may vary, modify, or waive the requirements so
that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured provided,
however, that such variance, modification, or waiver will not have the effect
of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter. In no case shall any
variance or modification be more than minimum easing of the requirements as
necessary to eliminate the hardship. In so granting a variance, the Council may
impose such additional conditions as are necessary to secure substantially the
objectives of the requirements so varied, modified, or waived.
170.17   RECORDING OF PLATS.
No subdivision plat, re-subdivision plat, or street dedication within the City
or within two miles of the corporate limits of the City shall be filed for
record with the County Recorder until a final plat of such subdivision, re-
subdivision, or street dedication has been reviewed and approved in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. Upon the approval of the final plat by the
Council, it shall be the duty of the subdivider to immediately file such plat
with the County Auditor and County Recorder, as required by law. Such approval
shall be revocable after 30 days, unless such plat has been duly recorded and
evidence thereof filed with the Clerk within that period. Within 60 days
following approval of the final plat by the Council, the subdivider shall file
with the City two copies of the recorded final plat.
170.18   PENALTIES.
Any person who shall dispose of or offer for sale, except as conditioned on the
approvals required herein, any lot or lots within the area of jurisdiction of
this chapter, until the plat thereof has been approved by the Council and
recorded as required by law, shall forfeit and pay a fine not to exceed the
limits established in the Code of Iowa, for each lot or part of lot sold,
disposed of, or offered for sale. Nothing contained herein shall in any way
limit the City’s right to any other remedies available to the City for the
enforcement of this chapter.
170.19   BUILDING PERMITS DENIED.
No building permit shall be issued for construction on any lot, parcel, or
tract, where a subdivision is required by this chapter, unless and until a
final plat of such subdivision has been approved and recorded in accordance
with this chapter, and until the improvements are completed in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
170.20   CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
This chapter, or any provision of this chapter, may be changed or amended from
time to time by the Council provided, however, that such changes or amendments
shall not become effective until after study and report by the Commission and
after a public hearing has been held, public notice of which shall have been
published at least once, but not less than four nor more than 20 days before
the date of the hearing.
 
